Tuesday 7th August, 2001
Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I have received information that one of our hon. Members, Mathias Kasamba of Kakuuto, was involved in a motor accident on Saturday, but he is receiving due care in Kitovu Hospital. There is hope that he is going to make it.   

Last week, I travelled to Nairobi with five Members of Parliament drawn from various Committees of Parliament, to attend what is known as the Inter-Parliamentary Committee for East Africa. The purpose of this journey was to discuss the modalities of forming the East African Legislative Assembly and other related matters. 

Whereas our sister Republic of Tanzania has already elected the nine members to represent them in this Assembly, Uganda and Kenya have not done so. Because of the presidential and parliamentary elections here, the Sixth Parliament was not in position to elect the nine Members of Parliament. But now that we have set up all the relevant committees of Parliament to enable Parliament function, we should seriously think about this matter. In any case, there is a deadline; by 31st all partner States must have elected the nine Members of Parliament. 

Therefore, we need to make rules that will enable us to carry out this exercise, and at the same time enable the people who are interested in representing us in this Assembly to know what they must do. Currently, consultations are going on so that this exercise is done, and I believe the Rules Committee will be embarking on this job. But you should all be familiar with article 50 of the Treaty. We are the electorate, but article 50 has a point on a matter that we have to consider. In electing the nine Members, we have to consider various interests in the country, and especially in the House.  

As far as Tanzania is concerned, they distributed these nine seats, first, on the strength of the parties. The Assembly in Tanzania has parties, so the strength of parties determined how many seats each group would claim. They also had obvious interests like the gender interests. There was also the factor of Zanzibar. Zanzibar is part of mainland Tanzania, so the Zanzibar factor was also taken into account.

As far as the Republic of Kenya is concerned, from the discussion we had with them, the strength of parties in the House has determined the sharing of these seats and also the gender factor. Here in Uganda, we have a different situation which we have to think about. We have to make consultations so that when the debate opens, you have ideas as to how to do the needful in Uganda.

There has been concern that maybe other people are making rules. That is not true; there is no other body other than Parliament making rules. What is happening is that people who are interested in this matter are making recommendations, which they are entitled to do. You either take the recommendation or you do not, but at the end of the day, you will have to own whatever decision you make. That is the communication I wanted to make on this matter.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Arising from your communication from the Chair, I do not know which enabling law we shall be using in order to make our rules. Do I assume that the Treaty is good enough as a law for us to base any rules of procedure on electing our members to the Legislative Assembly?

THE SPEAKER: As you know, Uganda was the first partner State to ratify the Treaty, and therefore, we own the Treaty and the elections of members of the Legislative Assembly is based on it. As I have said, you can read the relevant chapter in the Treaty. We can competently make necessary rules to govern us when carrying out this particular exercise.

DR. NABWISO: Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that some of us do not have copies of the said Treaty, would it be possible for us to get copies of that Treaty?

THE SPEAKER: The needful will be done.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mine is a very small bit of clarification, Mr. Speaker. Noting that Parliament is the representative body of the Ugandan people who will finally be represented in Arusha, how will the ordinary people in Uganda participate in pronouncing themselves on some of the dimensions?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Treaty says that the National Assemblies of partner States have the responsibility of electing. I believe these National Assemblies, in particular the Parliament of Uganda, is comprised of people who are representing various constituencies, and they have the mandate as representatives, not even as delegates, to make their own consultations. I believe they will be facilitated to make consultations with their electorate and get their views, and then come and express them.  But at the end of the day it will be you. The people of Uganda will exercise their mandate through you. Therefore, there is no problem.

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: My worry, Mr. Speaker, stems from what I read from the newspapers, that Uganda has not got an official opposition, yet other countries have got official oppositions. Recently, when we had elections, some of us were branded multipartyists. How sure are we that that it is not going to be the way the candidates are going to be seconded? I do not know whether the President is going to participate. How can you assure us that most of the candidates who will emerge as victors are not going to be from one side?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am not blind to the fact that some Members belong to political parties and they say so. But the fact is, your representation - I am not saying you but any other person - is not representing a political party in this House, because what we have is the Movement Political System. In any case, that particular Article says, “as far as feasible”.  So, if it is not feasible, then it is irrelevant.

MR. NSHIMYE: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking further clarification because in your communication, you referred to the deadline as being 31st, but you did not mention the month.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, the month is October. As far as Tanzania is concerned, it completed its exercise on 15th June. In fact, it is causing a problem in that as far as Tanzania is concerned, these people are Members of the Assembly; so they cannot sit in the Assembly.  What do you do?  Some of them have resigned from their jobs. So, the Summit decided that by 31st October, all the States should have Members elected. I think that will be the date for commencing the tenure.

MRS. MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Sorry I am taking you back to a decision which was taken a long time ago. But I have a lot of reservation on Uganda’s participation in the East African Community, because I have read very recently that we have not paid over 500,000 dollars as our contribution to the Community.  I am wondering whether that lack of payment will not affect our selection. 

At the same time, I find that East African Community is one of the regional groupings that are aiming at enlarging our market; I also find that we are also very active in COMESA. 
Even when the President gave the national speech, he expressed our interest in joining a bigger market.  So, I do not know why we are concentrating on the East African Community, in fact, duplicating our efforts in COMESA - efforts that would be leading to the African Common Market. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, in the first place, there are two issues which I have detected from your contribution – one is defaulting in making contribution to the Community, and you say the source is a newspaper.  But I have to say that during this meeting, I interacted with His Excellency, the Secretary General of the Community, and he said, as far as Uganda’s stand is concerned, it is okay!  This is from the Secretary General of the Community. So, either you believe the papers or you believe the East African Community. So, as far as I am concerned, that is not an issue.

In as far as you’re saying that why do we waste time on this? I am afraid it is a policy. This policy was decided by the partner States through their lawful organs.  So, on the question of why we concentrate - we are concentrating because it is the position that the East African Community exists, and we are now part and parcel of it. In future we may see whether to revise. But I think let us give it time. You may see the benefits without prejudicing the benefits that may accrue from COMESA or other regional bodies.

I think we have finished with this matter. Now we, go to business, that is, to continue with the debate and we are going to use the same time we agreed on. We started with five minutes. But I have also to advise Members that, because we have five minutes, you restrict your contribution to a few points. You will have another opportunity, because we shall have another general debate on the Budget. So if you missed a point in this one, you could bring it when you are contributing to the other debate, which will come very soon; may be next week.

MR. AVISTUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa East, Kabale): Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome you back from your journey, which took you to Nairobi. I would also like to add to the voices of many speakers, congratulating you and your Deputy, belatedly though. 
I also congratulate our colleagues who were appointed to different positions, which was in line with the biblical saying, that, “many are called but few are chosen”.  

I stand here to support the motion moved by hon. Mwandha and the people of Ndorwa East requested me to make a few observations about the following:

One is on election violence which His Excellency the President started with; and I think this House needs to find out why there was violence in some places during our electioneering.  

I would like to point out, that some of the causes of violence were due to us the leaders. As leaders seeking support to come to Parliament, I think we were responsible for dividing our people and making them clash. In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, whenever I met my competitors at different times, we would stop and greet each other; and we happened to carry out our electioneering up to election time without any violence in the constituency. Some Members can pick a leaf from Ndorwa East, and I think with that, we can avoid future violence. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I think also lack of civic education may have contributed greatly to this violence, because the electorate at times did not know what exercise they were going into.  

The second point is on vote education, which I have also talked about briefly. There should be a Budget by Electoral Commission. I do not remember any of the people from my constituency telling me that they had had civic education about the electoral process. Was there not a Budget?  Is this House not entitled to know what the Electoral Commission used with the money meant for educating the people about the electoral process?  

Lack of civic education also was part of the reason for raising electoral costs, because people did not know what their expectations were. When they saw you looking for a vote, you became an immediate target, and I think hon. Members of Parliament here must have experienced that. At the end, the aspirations of the candidates and the expectations of the electorate became parallel and there was a conflict. 

Also, one Member talked about the change from group campaigning to individual campaigning. I think in future, we should review this, because if people are campaigning together, you avoid being targeted at the end of the campaigning exercise.

Thirdly, poverty eradication was well alluded to; but we need to do research why some areas, despite the fact that they had some opportunities to improve on the social status of the people, still remained poverty stricken. On this point, the President mainly referred to our brothers in the northern region where I have heard that cultural beliefs may also have some interference in the development process. But this needs to be investigated.

I end by thanking you for allowing me to make my first speech in Parliament and I promise to contribute effectively in future debates. Thank you.

MRS.MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I congratulate the President for the speech he made on 27th last month which enlightened us on very many issues concerning the people of Uganda and the operations of the Government. 

I would like to say something about poverty.  The President mentioned that poverty had risen in the northern region from 60 to 66 per cent. That is regrettable. We know the reasons why but we still have to say we are unhappy about it. But I would like to say that even where there is no insurgency, poverty has really stricken people. People do not have enough to eat, they do not have enough to wear; some do not have anything at all to put on their bodies. It seems there is no way of stopping poverty quickly enough from affecting the people. 

At this point though, I would like to thank the Government for having put up some programmes, which are intended to reduce poverty. But I still have this to say; there is Entandikwa in Uganda, more especially from the point of women and the youth. The Entandikwa may be around Shs.5 million per district but by the time this money goes down to the sub-county, it has come to Shs.120,000 for a group of women or youth. This is very little money; so little that even some of you hon. Members use it for – (Interruption)
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENTANDIKWA) (Ms. Akello Grace): Thank you Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I do not want to interrupt her debate but I just want to inform the House so that we are not totally misled. In case the colleague does not know, there are several types of Entandikwa by Government, and the one she is referring to, the Shs.5 million, is what came through the Ministry of Gender, Labour & Social Development as a special allocation to district women desks. Otherwise, the Government of Uganda has put up about Shs.10 billion in the general Entandikwa pool, and to-date, it has up to Shs.1.5 billion for the youth. 

Apart from the money in the Prime Minister’s Office for Entandikwa, there is money coming under the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. So the Entandikwa is not only the Shs.5 million that the hon. Member is talking about. But I do not want to disturb her debate. Thank you very much.

MRS.MAGOOLA: Thank you very much for that enlightenment.   But whatever that money is for, I am still saying that it is still too little to do any good job for the wanainchi. 

I was saying that Shs.120,000 cannot even be enough for someone’s one-day shopping. So for whatever reason, it is too little. I would like the amount of money being given to the women and youth councils to be increased to a substantial amount which can probably start a small project, and can sustain it to the point where the women can look after the project.

I wish also to comment on U.P.E. U.P.E is a ground programme. I like it because it has lessened the problem of paying school fees from the poor people to schools. They are now paying very little for food and uniform and so on.   It has also widened the scope of the literate, but the quality is still very low. Believe me or not, but I have been in the village where I have been heading a PTC and I pity the teachers who go there to teach. But I am still happy and grateful to the Ministry of Education because there is a programme to decrease the number to a ratio of 55 pupils per teacher. That is very good. 

On market prices, maize in Iganga district is at Shs.50. But when you add the market price and the electricity to be used by a farmer, you find that a farmer has got to sell a full bag of maize in order to mill one bag of maize. That is too expensive, and I think it is important that the programme that is being proposed to give electricity to rural areas should not be delayed, because these people have reached a point where they cannot eat a meal.  One may have harvested two bags, but he sells one bag in order to send the other bag to the mill. Thank you very much.

MR. RUKUNDO SERAPIO (Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion.  I thank the President for elaborating on most aspects of our economy. But there is a point which I think he did not address adequately. He addresses it on page 13 and on page 19, and that is the problem of looking for qualitative markets for our products.  

There is a lot of emphasis on production. We even went into production of honey, fish et cetera. But unless we get markets for our products, the price will be too low, as Members were saying, and even the cost of production will not be met. 

We have embassies which we do not utilize. If you look at the foreign embassies here, they are mainly looking for markets for their products, even some of the African countries. Egypt, for example, is putting up a 10 million dollar project mainly to give Ugandans a chance to import from Egypt. There are 10 million dollars for Ugandans who import from Iran. So, basically, they are looking for market for their industries. I urge our Government to look for markets for our products, especially agricultural-(Interruption)  

MRS. MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the House that probably the hon. speaker is lacking some information. Uganda looks for markets on a daily basis, but what is lacking are the products.  Uganda has nothing to sell abroad besides coffee. If you opened up a contract to supply to a certain business company, you would have to continue supplying, but there is hardly anything that we can supply on a daily basis except coffee; not even sugar. I can speak on behalf of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; all its embassies are looking for markets on a daily basis. Thank you very much.

MR. RUKUNDO:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member. They are looking for markets, but they have not done enough. Go to Nakasero in the morning and see how many of our pineapples there are, and ask at what price they are going. We need markets, and serious markets at that.  

In addition to markets, we need to assist the sectors of production which we think will be viable for our marketing in future. These are sectors like the fruit sector, the fish sector and the flowers sector. When they had problems, Government did not come in early enough to protect them, yet if you give them affirmative action, soon these will be the avenues for the inflows of the dollars that we are looking for.  

To have serious, meaningful and long-term development, we need long-term funds for investors to exploit. I am happy, because today I read that the Uganda Development Bank will soon open. I urge Government to capitalize Uganda Development Bank and to look for long-term lines of credit so that investors get cheaper money and are able to pay over a longer period. A serious industry needs a gestation period of probably three to four years. Someone needs money which he will borrow and pay over a period of 10 years. 

We also need harmonization of our research towards production and markets, and also a taxation policy which favours our local products and our exports. Otherwise, in Uganda we are flooded with exports from other countries.  Somebody called it ‘junk’. I am not saying that if they are not efficient we should just protect them, but there is a need for affirmative action for our industrialists. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. BABU FRANCIS (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I assume that the hon. Member on the Floor, among other things, is also a Member of the Cabinet. I also assume that this message from His Excellency the President was a collective effort on the part of the Cabinet. Is it necessary for him to continue praising what he wrote? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: When he attracted my eye, I called him the hon. Member for Kampala Central, our host. So, he is speaking for the people of Kampala Central.       

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very, Mr. Speaker, for your wise decision. Right from the onset, I want to take you to the last page of the State of the Nation Address, that is page 20. I thought I should quote from there, and from that point onwards, I will add a few things. 

On page 20, the Address goes on to say, “Mr. Speaker, Honourable Members, The destiny of Ugandans is truly joined. Whatever our views may be and however much they may differ on governance, the economy and other areas, we belong together. You have all worked hard to come to this House so that you can have the opportunity to develop this country and not to destroy it.  

You have come here because of your love for this country.  The job of leadership is often times a thankless one. You have raised the expectations of your constituents during the campaigns and now they expect you to deliver on your promises.”  

This area makes me think a little deeper about this august body being an important factor in the development of this nation. Everything we do and say here is looked at by all the people who sent us here, and sometimes they think about their future basing on what we say here. They imagine we are their only hope. Those who are poor, those who are well off, those who are rich, look to this House for protection and defence. 

Mr. Speaker, whenever you have more than two people, it is natural that there might be some intrigue and sometimes there are differences. We saw them during the elections. All of us in our constituencies had one or two problems. But this is the time to resolve them to ensure that those weaknesses do not occur again. The onus is on us to ensure that the next elections will be more peaceful than the ones we have just had, and I think we must now get solutions. We should not go on lamenting, calling each other names. The time has come for us to find solutions to the weaknesses in our democratic process. 

We have a problem in our democratic process; there are teething problems. We have just had a new Constitution. For the first time in the history of this country, we have just had elections of the President and of the Members of Parliament. 

We have constituted them into bodies that are going to run this country. We must now appreciate and consolidate the achievements. 

It is from that basis that I took this conclusion of the President to be more important so that we can ride above petty politics. We must make a difference. We must transform our nation. Our nation is looking at us, and for that, we must come up with new ideas.  

I looked at the imbalance of trade, the outflows of Africa and our country to the developed countries and the inflows. What are we going to do about it? The markets we are creating, is our problem not more of poverty than anything else? Or is it the poverty that is going to all our heads? Is what we have to share enough, and is that the reason we are having these problems? 

During elections, there were jargons like, ‘these people are going to eat’, ‘we are coming to Parliament to eat’.  Others were saying, ‘they have been feeding when they were in Parliament.’ We must change that. You are very important people. From the minute they call you an hon. Member, you must be honest; you must be honorable; you must change the attitude of our people; you must tell them the truth.  Standing here and telling them not to pay taxes is not the answer. You know very well that Government cannot move without taxes. Standing and pretending that you are different - we are all in one boat and this boat must float. How it floats is up to us. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for that submission.

MS.BINTU ABWOOLI (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the many voices that have congratulated you and your deputy upon the attainment of that high office.  

I support the President’s speech and I would like to make some observations on it. We are aware that the Electoral Commission faced some logistical problems, and they have continued since 1996 up to now. The Electoral Commission needs to be serious with its work. 
Whoever stands up talks about the National Voters’ Register, but I have not heard anybody commenting on the Women Voters’ Register. This was totally a mess. It happened in 1996 during the parliamentary election. The voters register was handwritten and there were a lot of mal-practice. Whoever wanted to add or scrap off a name did so. This year’s voters’ register was still handwritten, and I remember the hon. Members of the Sixth Parliament commenting on this issue. 

I shudder at the work the Electoral Commission is doing when I hear on radio that they are trying to update the register; I really wonder what they are doing. Everybody tampered with the register, the returning officers, the updating officers were actually the General Secretaries on different LC and Women Council levels, and these people had sides.  

The announcement actually came out after the candidates had registered; so you would wonder whether the person updating the register is doing it genuinely. There was no authenticity in these voters’ register. 

I call upon this House to come up with a strong policy that will try to monitor the Electoral Commission. I believe this was not even conducted by the returning officer; it came directly from the Electoral Commission. Even on the last day, the Electoral Commission made a statement on radio allowing voters who were not part and parcel of the Electoral College to elect. So, you would wonder who was electing. 

I feel that those members who were on the Electoral Colleges were the rightful voters to vote for the woman representative. But there were voters who were on the Electoral College, or on LCs, or even on the Women Councils, who went to vote and their names were not on the register. This is the time to be serious and monitor some of these commissions.  

I would like to thank the Government for the unreserved efforts in the struggle to eradicate poverty, and I commend the work the NGOs are doing. But the women of Masindi asked me to ask this August House that some of these NGOs engaged in credit facilities, the conditions that they put across to these women who go to borrow money, are not conducive.  A woman from Masindi district is requested to borrow the money, but when she borrows this money, she is asked to pay it back on a weekly basis. You wonder what a woman from Pakanyi can do to generate that money to keep on paying on weekly basis. They end up selling even the goats and the chicken in their homes to pay back the loans because they do not have capital. So, it is adding poverty to poverty.  

In conclusion, I would like to comment on the statement that the hon. Minister of Finance laid on Table concerning the upgrading of Kafu-Masindi road. It has been an overview and I am urging and requesting this August House, that please, when the hon. Minister of Finance comes up to present the Paper, let us support that request so that this money is allocated and the works on this road begin. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MS.NAMAYANJA ROSE (Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have seconded hon. Mwandha’s motion seeking to thank the President for the State of the Nation address, particularly in as far as the issue of reducing the costs of politics is concerned. 

As the hon. Member for Masindi has put it, the Electoral Commission is in a way responsible for increasing some of these costs. For instance, in the elections of the youth, and particularly Central region, the Electoral Commission did not facilitate the youth to the required level. The youth from Kalangala, Sembabule, Kiboga, Nakasongola were all given Shs.10,000 for transport to and fro. This rendered them very vulnerable, and it, in one way or the other, increased the costs.  

I also want to thank the President for the screening, harmonising and general update of the voters’ register. To add to my colleagues submissions, the registers for the Youth elections must be put into consideration, because we received these registers as we were reporting at the venue and there was no time for checking them. 

 On behalf of the youth of central region, I found the President’s State of the Nation address very wanting; nothing was mentioned in particular concerning youth programs.  
In his 2001 Election Manifesto, the President talked of cadre identification, development and placement as one of his key areas to address in the five year program, but nothing was said about it; we look forward to see what will happen.  

Secondly, the entrepreneurship is a very good scheme, but there are some irregularities.  In the first place, it addresses particularly those youth who have reached a certain level of education.  Many youth in Central region who live in the rural areas have never been to school; others dropped out of school and don’t qualify for the loan.  I therefore appeal to Government to ensure that the Entandikwa scheme targets the vulnerable youth that had no chance to go to school. 

 Another issue on this program is that in a district of 150 youths, 30 or 40 are targeted and there are many youth who trained. One of the qualifications for this Entandikwa scheme is that one must train to get the it; but there are youth who trained in 1999; there are youth who trained in 2000; and up to today have not received that money.  

I would like to end with the issue of sports in the President’s Manifesto. He promised to have a National Sports and Physical Education Plan, and a sports stadium in each district, but nothing is hinted on in the State of the Nation Address.  Sports is one of the activities that bring many youths together to benefit from other programs; and I believe the Sixth Parliament benefited from these sports programs in the neighboring countries.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):   Mr. Speaker, I stand here to join the rest to congratulate you upon being elevated to that post, and my colleagues for having braved it to come to this august House.  

I stand here to support the motion. The people of Fort Portal Municipality have sent me here to say that this State of the Nation Address was reasonably good; but I am going to confine mainly on health and education. 

 First of all, I would like to talk about health. Government has done a recommendable job in this field, but there is one major problem of maintenance.  I have moved to various districts and found that the old hospitals are not well maintained. 
You might ask, ‘how have you moved?’; I have been an RDC and I know what is happening.  I would like to confine myself to Buhinga Hospital in Fort Portal.  This Hospital is one of the oldest hospitals in Uganda, yet when you go there, it is almost in ruins.  It has no accommodation for the staff; it has no X-ray; it has no scanner; it has no incubator; the buildings are in ruins and many people do not want to go there.  They have a working force of 150 instead of 484. So you can see the problems we are facing; unless this Government emphasizes maintenance of the old hospitals, we are in problems. The people of Fort Portal Municipality have sent me to request the Government to come to the rescue of Buhinga Hospital in Kabarole District.

I would like to say something about immunization. The President in his Speech lamented about the low level of immunization that has fallen to 38 percent. I do also lament; but what is the cause of this?  One of the causes is that, people who are supposed to mobilize for immunization are not facilitated.  For example; an RDC gets 120,000/= for fuel for the whole month, and that is used for one week. So how can people be mobilized in the villages and the districts? That problem should be addressed seriously.  

Let me say something about UPE program. UPE has been a success story in Uganda, because we have moved from 2.5 to 6.8 million pupils in primary schools.  There is one major problem that, although we are teaching these pupils to learn how to read and write, is that education relevant?  We are talking about modernization of agriculture, how can you modernize agriculture without facilities of agriculture? I know that agriculture might be in the curriculum, but it is not being emphasized in primary schools.  I have visited many primary schools, but there is no garden. We have been singing of vocationalisation of education for many years, but has it taken effect?  Our pupils who come out of this UPE Program, will they have vocational skills? I am appealing to the Minister of Education to be programmatic and enforce the curriculum, so that the pupils in the primary schools can learn how to survive. 

What does education mean?  The word ‘education’ comes from a latin word ‘decare’ which means to bring up the pupil to fit in his or her own environment. 
Now, are the pupils we are training going to fit in their own environment? Are we not preparing a time bomb for our children? I thank you very much.

DR. NSABA BUTURO (Bufumbira East, Kisoro): Mr. Speaker, I would like to join those who have commended the President for his excellent speech. I do so from the point of view of a student of development economics. I found the President’s critique of the national economy quite rich in content. I must say that the analysis of the challenges, the performance of the economy, and the strategies put in place are commendable.  

I found the President’s remarks concerning foreign aid quite encouraging indeed. There is no country in history that has ever been developed on the basis of foreign aid.  In this connection, I want to suggest to this august House and to our leadership as a whole that urgent attention must be paid to those internal factors for which we have direct influence and that are a hindrance to our economic development. I have in mind corruption, lack of investment, and poor delivery of utility services. These are some of the areas that we are competent to address, whereas, of course, external factors like terms of trade are beyond our immediate control.  

One of the things that disturbs me is the lack of national debate regarding our national economy and the direction it should take. I have never come across a situation where Ugandans are sufficiently and deeply discussing our economy, whether in the media or anywhere else. It seems that this subject is a taboo to all of us as Ugandans. This is unacceptable, and I do call upon hon. Members to take the lead in engaging in discussions that will suggest solutions for our economic malaise.  

I call upon the media, our academicians, the scholars, the think tanks, and all those who are concerned about our country, to spend a lot of time discussing the future of, not only our economy, but even other matters of importance to our nation.

I do detect internal contradictions in our situation. I find that when the going is actually not good, we have nothing to complain about; and when the going is good, we have a lot to complain about. I want to amplify that by citing the case of the African Growth and Opportunities Act, which was recently put in place by the American Congress. Our neighbours have taken advantage of it, but we are not taking advantage of it.  

I come from Bufumbira East, and our people are really concerned about the state of the Kisoro/Kabale road.  Over the years, Government has promised to work on it, but we do not actually see any developments concerning that promise. In 1996, our people gave Government 98 percent of their support, this time they gave Government 96 percent. They decided to withdraw the two percent to just warn Government that it is high time Kabale/Kisoro road is given sufficient attention.

The challenge facing this august House and our country is how to free ourselves from the shackles of underdevelopment. I invite Members to sufficiently interest themselves in that question. I support the motion.

MS. SENINDE NANSUBUGA  (Woman Representative, Wakiso):  I would like to support the motion, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the President for such an elaborate and comprehensive speech.  However, I have got some few comments to make.  

I will first of all comment on UPE. Many of my colleagues have said something about UPE, but much as we must appreciate the achievements of the UPE programme, and I would like to thank the Minister concerned, because she has actually done a lot, the quality of education is not impressive in many parts of the country. It is not impressive for reasons that we must address as the peoples’ representatives.  

My observation is that much as the teachers are trained, and they have all the tactics and techniques of handling large classes, there are various problems as to why the quality of education is still very low. It seems we must put into consideration various issues. We must come up with a package of remedies, and one of them should be to look into the renumeration of teachers. If teachers were well paid, I believe they would do their work with all the effort they have.  

Secondly, the Ministry of Education should also look at the psychological perception towards the programmes of teachers. There are various ways they can do this, in order to make the teachers have a positive psychological perception.  

Thirdly, as a teacher trainer, I have observed that the quality of the students admitted in PTCs is very low. We are aware that students who are admitted in PTCs are admitted with about 6 credits, but according to what I have observed, this is very low. I think it is one of the reasons as to why the quality of education is low. Some of these teachers even fail to construct correct sentences when addressing pupils. I believe if the Ministry of Education could look into the quality of students being admitted, in the long run we shall have quality education.

I would also like to comment on fishing. The President talked about the fish industry. I hope you will all agree with me that a lot of fish comes from my constituency in the islands of Zinga and Busi. The people of Busi and Zinga suffer so much when the President is going out of the country or when he is returning. I know this is because of security purposes, but they do not allow them to cross from the islands to Entebbe, where they sell their fish. And after some time, fish being a perishable product, it all gets spoilt. At the end of it all, they stay poor.

I would like to appeal to the Ministry concerned to deal with this. At one time an expecting lady was almost dying on the waters because they had to cross over to go to the hospitals in Entebbe. This is not a good thing. I would like to appeal to the Ministry concerned to look into this.

Finally, I would like to comment on what the President said when he advised us to minimise the cost of politics. I thank the President for this observation, which in other words has exhibited politics as focusing on quantity other than quality. I appeal to our leaders at the top to be exemplary, because there is a high degree of corruption; and politics is becoming unnecessarily expensive.  

There is something very important I would like to end with, and that is about unity. The President talked about unity.  But what I observed is - I do not want to be misquoted. Sometimes you observe that when somebody is against a motion, he/she may be misunderstood as being anti- Government.  This is what I have observed. What I have observed is that this will be one of the problems that may cause disunity.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry.  I have really a very long list here, but what I am trying to do is, to spread the debate to various parts of the country.  Otherwise, if I follow the listing of the names, you may find that the debate is not balanced. That is why you see, when I looked this side, I gave the floor to three members, then I looked on this side. So, please, that is how I am operating.

DR. KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Sorry, hon. Atwooki.  I wanted to know whether, some of us who are not on the list will not be given a chance to contribute?

THE SPEAKER: You will certainly be given a chance. As I have said, this debate will end I think on Thursday. So we have plenty of time. If I do not give you an opportunity to contribute now, then when we start the debate on the Budget, I think the preference will be given to those who have not contributed. I know not all of you really can contribute between today and the other day; but I will record your names, and then definitely, I will start with you next week.  But I will try to accommodate as many of you as possible.

DR. KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to congratulate you for having been elected Speaker and congratulate your Deputy for scooping a big post. I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate my colleagues who were elevated and given additional responsibilities in the Cabinet. Congratulations.  

On supporting the motion, I have a few observations to make. I have been listening attentively since the debate started and I am convinced more than ever that, some process of reconciliation in this Parliament is necessary. I think it should be embarked on as soon as possible. Possibly the Office of the Speaker should take up the task. The way Members are expressing themselves, gives an indication that they have very open and fresh wounds, which would require to be healed. So, Mr. Speaker, whether it is your office or the other, or those who profess in the movement spirit, the office of NPC can also come in and possibly reconcile the Members.  In the 6th Parliament, it was not as glaring as it is today.  Possibly there was a bigger fight this time.  

I also want to salute the President for having scrapped cost sharing in health units; as a result, there has been an exodus for treatment. Many people have been going to health units for treatment, and as a result, drugs have been depleted. I do not know whether it is only in Bugangaizi where the health units do not have drugs - it is depleted.  I hope this time the Budget will provide big money to stock drugs in our health units, so that patients are not turned away, because there are no drugs. It will be a mockery for scrapping cost sharing and yet there are no drugs in health units.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the program of Government to construct health units at parish level should commence.  It is true sub-district hospitals have been constructed though in Bagangaizi it is not yet complete; we still have some structures to be put up. The health units at sub-counties are in place, but those at parishes, if they are not in this year’s Budget, I hope in the next year’s budget they should be included, so that health units at parishes are constructed, drugs stocked, so that people can get treatment. 

Several colleagues have voiced their concern on the performance of the Electoral Commission. I will approach it from another angle. You are aware that a ballot paper is a very important item in the electoral process. How the photograph appears determines whether you will get the vote or you will not. This time I do not know what happened.  The pictures on the ballot papers were very poor. And you see, a citizen is given a few minutes to take a decision, to tick or apply the thumb. When the pictures are not clear, you can miss the votes. I am sure I could have missed very many votes but I do not know why.  

In 1996, the pictures on the ballot papers were very clear unlike this time. I do not know the reason why the Electoral Commission tells us to put in colored photographs, and yet in the ballot paper they are black and white.  
Why don’t they tell us to bring black and white photos and we call it a day?  Why do we bring colored and then they put black and white on the ballot papers?  Is it for fun? I think the Committee that is responsible, when the Electoral Commission comes, this question should be put to them and we want a good answer.

I know we have an office of public relations in this Parliament. But I am never comfortable when the media bashes our image and nobody comes to our defense. I know one or two Members do react, but you know that is taken as if a Member is trying to defend himself or herself.  Should we really not have a serious organ of this Parliament, which should keep correcting the distorted information? Most of it is really distorted. Free vehicles, who wants free vehicles? The vehicles provided by Government, is that a free vehicle? So information should be passed on.  

Mr. Speaker, I was finishing; just one half point. I hope that this time, when this Parliament sets up a committee to investigate something, we should have a report and debate it because there are many reports which were not debated in the 6th Parliament. I do not know whether we have given them up or not. Some of them were very important and it is necessary that we debate them in this 7th Parliament. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS.SEKITOLEKO KABONESA (Youth Representative, Female): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you, your Deputy and my colleagues for having made it to this House.  

I support the motion but I would like to make a few comments. On page 2 of the President’s address to the nation, he appeals to the politicians and the nation at large to reduce the cost of politics. I would also like to emphasise that the Electoral Commission is not competent and serious enough because of political intrigue. Let me give an example of the youth elections where voters for the regional youth elections were given only Shs.10,000 for accommodation, transport and food and the whole strain was then carried down to the candidates. 

Therefore, I appeal to the Government that next time, especially when we are going to carry out the youth elections for the Eastern Region, the Electoral Commission should provide the voters with enough money or enough facilitation to cater for their stay during the elections. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.OKUMU REAGAN (Aswa County, Gulu): Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to support this motion, especially quoting what the President said: “Whatever views we may hold, however opposed they may be, I believe all of you have been elected to help make our country more peaceful, more united and more prosperous.” 

The President went on to say that, “The elections are over and the din and dust of elections should settle down now so that you get on with the job of building our nation. You should put the election behind you and seek reconciliation with whoever you need to reconcile with”. 

I took this statement as something very important but I was a little bit disappointed after the address. Instead of reconciling all of us, the President organised a dinner for the Movement Caucus and many Members of Parliament were left out. I think this was unfortunate because the President must live by example. (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Point of information; do you want it?

MR.OKUMU REAGAN: Mr. Speaker, I only have five minutes to make my contribution. The information will not leave me with enough time. I think I will reserve it for next time. 

On a stronger note, I urge the President to live by example and to start the process of reconciliation, especially with his arch-rival, Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye. Many of us sometimes get diverted when we see strong statements in the press. Sometimes we do not believe that it is the same President calling for reconciliation. It is very hard for others to follow when he is not doing the same.

I would have given a theme for the President’s address as democracy and national unity under which election violence, insecurity, and poverty would fall, and these are the areas I would like to briefly touch on. 

Without proper elections, democracy is going to take time to take root. Without national unity, poverty and insecurity will continue prevailing, more so, in the northern part of this country.  

For some of us, we had a very nasty experience. Even before we declared our intentions to contest, we were warned. I was strongly warned by Maj. Kakooza Mutale before I even declared the intentions to contest for the elections, but I went on and prepared for him, and I gave him a thorough beating in the election. 

It was very unfortunate. We had a nasty experience in Gulu. In some cases, some of us were blocked by soldiers from going to address rallies. Our supporters were beaten up and we kept on reporting these matters to the Police time and again, but nobody took action. For the sake of national unity and for the sake of reconciliation, I forgive all those fellows, especially, the UPDF who wronged me and my people, because very many people were beaten up and very many were admitted to the hospitals. I think this must stop. As we forgive, we are not going to forget. 

I take this opportunity to inform the representative of the UPDF that this involvement of the UPDF in beating up people must stop and must end with the last Parliamentary Elections. Otherwise, it will be extremely difficult to be tolerated. But I also ask; who was responsible for this violence and who was not responsible? Somebody must have been responsible for the violence and somebody must have been responsible for checking it, but nobody took action.  The police were very vulnerable; they could not do anything.  

We were blocked from going to other constituencies. I participated in making the election law; I was in this House in the 6th Parliament when it was made, but I was blocked from going to other constituencies to give sympathy to the candidates I supported there. The excuse was that the law does not allow me to travel to other constituencies and campaign for some candidates. I was surprised to see the President moving across the whole country campaigning. 

I take this note to say we have forgiven those who wronged us but it must stop.

On insecurity, I come from Gulu, the district which is bedeviled. I urge the Government to do a little bit more, together with the people of Gulu, the leaders of Gulu. I urge the Front Bench to be more visible in these areas, because, this is one of the ways we can resolve conflict through preventive approaches. 

When I was in the 6th Parliament, very few people on the Front Bench crossed the River Nile, but I thank those who crossed it to console our population. For example, Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, Minister Amanya Mushega, Minister of Health Dr. Crispus Kiyonga, the Rt. Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, who kept in touch with us most of the time, and a few others. 

I also urge the Government to do a little bit more on the amnesty. More money should be given to facilitate the amnesty in order to perform.

Finally, I urge Government to do a little more than lamenting about the poverty in northern Uganda, because as soon as you cross the Nile, even the tarmac roads look poor. When you cross the Nile, the tarmac is completely a different thing. That sends a very wrong signal to the visitors who visit this country. They land on a good tarmac road at Entebbe Airport. This tarmac road takes them up to Karuma. Immediately they cross over to the other side, it is a different world. 

A little bit more should be done for the people of northern Uganda, so that we consolidate this item of national unity and we use it to reconcile our differences. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MUKAMA FRANCIS (Kigulu North, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion which was tabled by hon. Mwandha, to thank His Excellency the President for his State of the Nation address.  

I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, and your Deputy, for attaining that good Chair. And I congratulate our colleagues who have managed to move from the Back Bench to the Front Bench. I wish them well at the Front Bench.  

The people of Kigulu North are very grateful because of the President’s speech. I told them what he talked about, and they also listened to the radio. There is one area which relates to the Electoral Commission; and that is the Voters’ Register. On that one, they are saying that they are tired of being called upon every time to review the Register. They hope that this time the Electoral Commission will finalise on a register which will enable them to continue with their various elections.  

The Electoral Commission has done so much to put in place logistics which go as far as the parishes, like photographing those who qualify to be on that register. That action alone should also involve other Government organs, especially Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Finance and the Population Secretariat so that at the end of it, they make a national register from where Ugandans can get identity cards. That idea should be revived at the opportune time.

His Excellency the President talked about the economy, but when I looked through the speech, I found little or nothing on tourism. Tourism should be one of the avenues that we have to consider to help us earn a lot. In that respect, I want to register my appreciation to the security organs that have worked for the last two years, to track down those who killed the tourists in Bwindi Impenetrable Forest. I read in the papers last week, that they have at least apprehended a suspect who can lead them to other suspects. That is a good effort. We thank them.  

I also want to thank His Excellency the President because he was concerned, and he did go to Bwindi. He climbed the mountain to track the gorillas and to give the tourists confidence to go there and enjoy the scenery and those rare animals.  

I also thank him for donating five hundred million shillings towards Bwindi Impenetrable Forest. I now call upon the hon. Minister and the Executive Director of Uganda Wildlife Authority to give to this august House a detailed and audited report on what they used that money for. 

I have a lot, but I will talk about – (Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr. Ayumu Akaki): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true that five hundred million shillings was indeed given to Uganda Wildlife Authority, but as you realise, five hundred million shillings is not a lot of money. It was earmarked for supporting the payment of salary because of the money lost as a result of that attack. Uganda Wildlife Authority is supposed to generate its own funds, but it was not possible because of that loss.

Secondly, part of the money went into training the rangers to boost the security in those protected areas. But if you do feel that there is a strong need to account for it in details, we are prepared to do that.  Thank you.

MR. MUKAMA: Mr. Speaker, I thank him for that information. Let him give us those details. (Applause)  

I am also interested in education as much as the President is. There is a current saga in Kampala International University. The parents do invest money for their children to go to that type of institution. We want to know about this saga. Let the hon. Minister concerned confirm whether these children who have been taken to these institutions can gain a good education and get credible qualifications. I say, ‘credible qualifications’, because you know that there are so many qualifications. I will be very pleased to know more about that saga, and to know that the parents can still take their children to such an institution. 

I thank you for having given me this opportunity. I will say more when we are debating on the Budget, if you will allow me, Sir.  

MR. KAWANGA JOHN: (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to you and your Deputy.  

The President’s speech contained a lot of analysis, but there were deficiencies. People have talked about corruption, and my friend has talked about the omission of tourism, but I think there was also an omission on the state of industries. The State does not indicate at what stage our industrialisation is. Are we in a position to export? Are we making import substitutions? Are the qualities of our products good enough to enable us compete? I think this is something that should be addressed. Besides that, I think we were all short of what to do with our marketing.

There was an analysis of production – the level of production is going down. But what are we doing about marketing our commodities? My colleague has mentioned about it. Why do we not look back to those days of the co-operative movement which used to handle production, marketing, quality control and also assisted our people to look at the international prices and assisted them in marketing their products profitably?  

But as we talk, the co-operative movement was completely killed. I come from a district which used to survive entirely on the organization of the co-operative movement. It was the one which had coffee processing factories in town.

MR. AKAKI:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member that, indeed the co-operative movement did hit a snag when liberalisation was introduced in this country. Because of the competition introduced into the system, it suffered for some time; but I want to assure him that the co-operative movement is now gaining ground steadily and it is going to play a leading role in the areas he has suggested. I thank him for giving way.

MR. KAWANGA: Thanks very much. That is a sign of hope. But I think I should add that, that is the area where Government should actually intervene actively. Unless we handle that area, we are going to be in a very big problem.

MR. BANYENZAKI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform this House regarding the co-operative movement that there is a substitution in form of micro-finance institutions, whereby even the plan for Modernization of Agriculture is provided for; whereby there are even financial extension workers who will play the role the co-operative movement used to play.

MR. KAWANGA: Unfortunately, the micro-finance institutions are not supported by any law.  We do not even know whether there will be any to fit within the framework of the existing Co-operative Societies Act; but I think that might be the beginning.

The other part I want to move to is education. There is mention in the speech about increasing the number of Government aided schools. 
I want to get a definition of what ‘Government aided schools’ are.  I know of Government aided schools in my place whereby only two or three teachers are paid by the Government; the rest are not paid by the Government. You may find three Government aided schools, and the only difference you see between them is the level of disrepair.  You do not know whether they are given any equipment; teachers are not catered for properly. So, we should know what constitutes the Government-aided school.

Secondly, this speech does not talk about tertiary institutions. This question of cost sharing affects the tertiary institutions in a very great way.  Many of them find difficulty to run, because they do not know how much they are supposed to get. We want to know from Government, what plans it has for tertiary institutions, particularly technical schools.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mrs. Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Member for giving way. May I inform you and the House that the Ministry of Education is coming up with a policy statement which will be discussed during the Budget time and all details will be given.  

As you would realize, almost every Member is raising up to comment on education; definitely, I do not think we have time to respond to all. But I want to assure you that the Policy Statement with comprehensive details is on its way. I thank you.

MR. KAWANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. I wish that speech would clarify the state of Uganda Technical Colleges. I know of a technical college in my place where the only approved teacher we have there is the Principal.  All the other teachers are not approved.  Most of them are not on Government sponsorship. That school is supposed to be giving diplomas, but the teachers who are teaching, the highest we have only have a higher diploma. Some of them also have ordinary diplomas like the people they are teaching.  

Many of the teachers there do not know whether they are supposed to get salaries from Government or not.  

So, I hope when the statement comes, all these kind of things will be cleared.

I want to talk about mass poverty.  The speech tends to talk of abject poverty; but actually Uganda is poor and Ugandans know what they mean.  What they actually mean is, money-less-ness, unemployment - so many children who come out of schools have no jobs.  Those are the kind of things we hope should be addressed. People go to hospitals where cost sharing is not supposed to be but there are no drugs. Pupils who are supposed to go to UPE schools, they have to make a contribution, but their parents cannot even raise this money to send their children to UPE schools.  I think we have to do something about this.

Finally, people have quoted that speech about patriotism and reconciliation.  I hope people will take in straight what has been said by the hon. Member from Wakiso. I have a feeling that unless we give encouragement to people to express their differing views without being considered to be unpatriotic, we are going to be in a problem.  We may run into the danger of sycophancy becoming patriotism.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. TUMWESIGYE (Sheema County North,Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to address this august House for the first time, in my nearly four decades of being on this planet.  

When the President was giving his speech, he talked about HIV/ AIDS in the country and indicated that the Government will contribute two million dollars to the global Trust Fund for HIV/AIDS.  I am happy that Uganda, usually a beggar, is able to meet this contribution. I wish to congratulate hon. Kiyonga, a Member of this august House, for his appointment to head this Fund at the United Nations.  

Personally, I have been involved in various HIV/AIDS interventions; sometimes giving people hope where there is no hope. It is a very great honour for Uganda to receive such an appointment at this time. I hope that this Fund will be in place hopefully within six months, so that the people with HIV/AIDS in Sheema North, and the indeed Uganda, will get free access to HIV treatment sooner rather than later.
The President talked of building 214 health centres in each sub district and about 868 health units at parish level.  This is not in line with the training of health workers we have in the paramedical services.  For example, each year we produce about 20 dispensers, dental officers, X-ray operators and orthopaedic assistants.  Now with 214 health sub districts, it would take us about 10 years to be able to fill these institutions with staff.  So I appeal to the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health to increasing the number of health workers.  

I understand when God was creating man, for those who believe in nature, when evolution was taking its place, they made sure the legs carry the abdomen, and the abdomen carry the head; so the head was left to have the brain.  More than half of the women and children in my constituency have to carry water; l would have been happy if the President talked about provision of adequate and safe water in our areas.  I have a large town, Kabwohe, that has no water supply.    

The President also talked about Information Communication Technology, and I realise that this can potentially bring in a lot of money in our country.  I started dreaming of having a silicon valley type of village in my constituency – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Dr. Tumwesigye, there is information from the Minister of State for Water

DR. TUMWESIGYE: Mr speaker, will you compensate my time?

THE SPEAKER: You will be compensated.

MRS. MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to congratulate the hon. Member for coming here.   I also want to inform him that his concern is actually being taken care of. As we speak now, every district, including the new ones, have been provided for with a condition grant that is managed solely by the district. So it is the district council that sits down and allocates where to put a borehole, a protected string and gravity flow scheme.  I therefore call upon the hon. Members to follow up what is sent to the district.  Otherwise the water programme in this country is the best.  Thank you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, the culture and etiquette of this House is that hon. Ministers sit on the Front Bench to be able to respond quickly to the questions.  I have noted that the hon. Minister of State for Defence, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, is sitting uncomfortably when there is space on the Front Bench.  Is it a habit that the Back Benchers can easily exchange, and sit on the Front Bench, ignoring the historical culture of this august house?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think she has taken that point to defend the Front Bench – (Laughter)

DR. TUMWESIGYE: Allow me to thank the hon. Minister of State in charge of Water for that information. I know that in Bushenyi District, they are to receive 800 million for the water development, and my town needs 700 million.  So I hope that money will be increased so that more work can be done.  

I was saying that after the President’s speech, I had this vision of having my constituency to be like a silicon valley in California.   But then I know that for ICT to take root, the pupils must touch the computers at an early stage.  Many secondary schools in my constituency do not have power, and I don’t know whether ICT will be able to penetrate areas without electricity. -(Interjection) 

The Minister of Energy and Minerals (Mrs. Syda Bbumba):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for giving way.  Bushenyi District is one of the luckiest districts, because it is one of the three districts that are going to benefit from the rural electrification programme in advanced stage. It is because of the initiative undertaken by the leadership of these districts of Rukungiri, Kabale, Bushenyi and Nebbi, who have joined the private sector in promoting rural electrification.  – (Interjection) – Mr. Speaker, can I be permitted to complete my information?

THE SPEAKER: Permitted.

MRS. BBUMBA: Mr. Speaker, in recognition of their drive to participate in the electrification of their areas, Government is coming up with a big subsidy to assist them to expand in the rural areas. 
So, I would like to request the hon. Member holding the Floor to link up with the rest of the leadership in Bushenyi and get information about the project.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. MUGERWA: Point of Order. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This point of order is addressed to the hon. Minister talking about electrification in the rural areas.   Yesterday, I was in my district Masaka, which is one of the richest districts in the country.  Industries are closing down; people cannot start their industries because of the cost of electricity.  In fact somebody talked to me and said we should not extend electricity to the rural areas; we should concentrate on the urban centres, because people will not be able to pay for it in the rural areas.  Please first subsidise the cost of electricity before sending it to the rural area, otherwise it is not going to work. In fact, Bukoto, one of the sub counties in Masaka, electricity poles were put there, but no electricity has been introduced.  Thank you very much Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The point was put, whether it was in order for the hon. Minister to talk about rural electrification. I think the Minister is in order because that is what she was requested for. And she is saying, yes, arrangements are being made to supply. Whether it is very expensive, that is another issue.

DR.TUMWESIGYE: Thank you very much for your information. I have two more points. One, the President talked about a comprehensive national population register. I also understand that the Electoral Commission is in the process of photographing voters. We also know that we need to have national identity cards, and we should have a population census possibly this year or thereafter. I therefore think that it would be good to think of integrated planning, like what hon. Nkuuhe talked about recently, where all these are catered for almost at the same time.  

Finally, the President talked much about our exports. He talked much about increasing our household income, and also about the coffee. Although I am not an agriculturist and an exporter, I understand that the market for coffee is now with parchment coffee. The other day, I also heard somebody from the USA talking about Nyasaland. 
I hope that as we think about processing to better quality for export, we also think about promoting and improving the standards of what we are exporting. 

I stayed in the United States for sometime, and every Sunday I would listen to the President of the United States giving a radio address to the nation. I realised that our President could not have talked about all the things we are raising in that state of nation address. Maybe since we are borrowing from some of those countries, it would not be a bad suggestion to have a weekly radio address in which the President could address an issue. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the motion with some criticisms here and there. In the first place, I would like to thank the President for giving us a brilliant speech. I appreciated it very much. But after perusing through the speech, I came to the word ‘poverty’ and I am glad that you have picked me, being one of the Members from the north who are thoroughly striken by poverty. 

I would like to comment on the following issues. One of the problems leading to poverty increasing to the higher levels in the northern region is the issue of treating the symptoms instead of the causes. Why do I say that? In his speech, the President talked very much about poverty, coffee, cotton, fees, but I was expecting him to react on the poverty in the North. I am worried that if proper measures are not taken, after three years, it will rise to 70 per cent or so.  

Our main problem is poor roads. In Arua district, an agreement of the construction of the Nebbi -Pakwach - Karuma road was signed on Sunday, 4th March 2001 at Annex Motel between Ministers, hon. Nasasira and Awuzu Andruale.  Last weekend, I felt so bad and travelled upcountry. There were no signs of the construction of the road and the agreement was that construction starts on August 1st, and today is 7th. Not even the machinery is in the field! I would like the Minister concerned to explain to us, because as hon. Minister for Entandikwa, he will be treating the symptoms, sending  Entandikwa -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (MR. Nasasira John): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. Here we are treating the causes when it comes to that road because we are upgrading it. 

It is true we signed the contract. I do not know when the hon. Member was there. The contractor SBI is already on site, the site agent is in Arua. As I talk, they are establishing a company in Arua, the surveyors who are setting out the road are on the road, and the contractor is mobilising machines. 

I want to assure the hon. Member that the project has started, although you have not seen the actual construction down. (Laughter). Even when we were coming to this Parliament, we must have started from our homes. When you wake up and you start coming to Parliament you will get here. We signed the contract, the contractor is on site, the order to commence work has been given, the surveyors are already setting out the road so that the we can know where to pass the machines. So this is not Byoya bya Nswa, hon. Member.  

MRS.AANIMU ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, hon. minister for informing me. I would not like to mislead the House because our contractor was Sharon. I very much wanted to find where he is stationed, but I failed to get him.  Hon. Minister, with this information you have given me, I would like to inform you also that the grading of Arua road is normally poor. We are getting fed up of Mukalazi. He is makes sub-standard grading. I do not know whether you are noting that. 

The problem of the road is very crucial and we, the people of the North, would like the Arua – Nebbi road to start because this is the month for the contractor to start the work. I do not know why he is not on site. I have been there; maybe the Minister is trying to imagine. But according to real critical observation, he is not yet on site. 

As we sit in this House, we should take this issue very critically because our business community takes two to five days on Karuma – Pakwach - Arua road, and you can imagine what happens on this road. On top of that, we have insecurity. We are supposed to be accompanied, we are supposed to move in a convoy. 

I expected the President to rectify the position of Arua, Nebbi people on how the business will commence in the near future. Otherwise, if we just grumble over the issue, our poverty will remain and it will increase after some years to come.  

I would like to draw our attention to the issue of electricity. We very well know that Uganda is a developing country and we depend on agricultural products as an export, but for us in Arua, we depend on tobacco. The question is; if we really want to improve the status of the people of Arua, the first issue we should tackle is power. 

I am very grateful that the Minister concerned talked of rural electrification and mentioned Nebbi as part and parcel of the benefiting areas. But to my surprise, the Nyagak power scheme is not taking off.  We have Olewa; when are we starting these things in sight? Are we going to just talk about these things here and when elections come, it is when we will go for contracts to please the community?  I would like the Minister to clarify more on that. 
 
As stated by one of the Members from Arua, towards the eve of elections, the poles were assembled, but now the poles are getting wasted. There is no more development taking place. I would like her to clarify more on that. 

The other point I would like to push forward is the issue of the Amnesty Commission - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Minister wants to give you information.

MRS. ANGUPALE: You will give me some minutes after the information, so that I complete.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the information.

MRS. ANGUPALE: Thank you.

MRS. BBUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member for Arua District, that the electrification of this country is not done for purposes of elections. As we speak now, we have started on the construction, under what we call, ‘The West Nile Rural Electrification’. 
We have started the construction of lines from Arua through Arube, Bodo, and we intend to join that line to the Nyagak project.

The Nyagak project has taken a bit of time, because as you know, it is not only the people of this country who are poverty stricken, but also Government has to fundraise from outside, to be able to put up these projects.  Raising money for the Nyagak project has taken a bit of time, but I would like to give comfort to the people in the West Nile region, that we are in the final stages of evaluating the bids for construction of the Nyagak project. 

We are going to have the Private Sector construct that hydro station; and it will be combined with an 80-Km line running from Nebbi up to Arua.  Olewa at the moment is cost ineffective; we shall not work on it immediately. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. ANGUPALE: I thank you very much for that information; hoping that the power line will proceed from Bodo and where you have mentioned it.  Hon. Minister, I am confident that you will improve on that, just as I have reminded you.  

The next point was on the Amnesty Commission.  It was on page 17. The President raised an issue that, “I appeal to the rebels to take advantage of the Amnesty Act.”  Yes, it was formed to persuade the rebels so that they can get settled home. I congratulate him for that work. You will find that the persuading aspect is very active but the resettlement package, particularly into the context of Arua, is non-functional. It is trying to disorganize the people who are coming home. The people involved are making them to parade from their home to the office. It is now eight months; nothing is done to those people. I want the Minister, the person concerned, to explain the status of the resettlement, so that we can go home and tell the people what is taking place. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform his Excellency through you, that we, the people of Arua, would not like to minimize the presence of the President Moi; the promise was made in front of him and whenever they are raising the issue of the road, his name is always brought. 

We would like him to fulfil that promise by constructing our road, so that we are all comfortable. I am confident when reminded he will always do it.  Thank you very much.

PROF. LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Mr. Speaker, this being my first time to formally make a speech on the Floor of this House, allow me to congratulate you and all those who have occupied various positions of responsibility in this country, either through elections, or through our approval.  

Let me also to recognize the efforts of the people of Agago who, considering purely merit, elected me to represent them in this August House.  The President’s speech offers various windows of opportunity that we can utilize, to further the cause of development in this country. 

Let me talk about two or three things.  First of all, everyone has expressed concern that the President talked about events related to the last elections.  The people of Agago would like to put on record their deepest displeasure at the fact that, individuals went as far as taking lives of Ugandans in order to be elected. Our people would like to note the fact that, some of the worst election malpractice and violence were from areas that are traditionally Movement areas. 

For example, from the very home area of the former National Political Commissar, people died. The people of Agago participated in this election against the background where certain individuals were considered multi-party candidates, but there was no violence. So, we would like the country to consider the fact that this contrast brings into question the very historical premise upon which the Movement was established.  It becomes imperative to go beyond correcting the mistakes of the last election to consider some of the very fundamental democratic issues that this situation brings out.  

Secondly, let me consider the issue of Northern Uganda, particularly my area, Acholi region. Insecurity has been there for a very long time, and our people have been battered and they are tired. They desire peace, and they must recognize the effort being made by the religious leaders of our area to bring about peace.  

It would be sad to explain the poverty situation in Northern Uganda basing purely on the issue of peace, because certain areas in Northern Uganda have had peace for quite some time, especially if you leave out the Acholi region entirely. 

Let me note the fact that many times when the President considers interventions to address the issue of poverty in Northern Uganda, we become very selfish. I would like to note, for example, that when the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Program (NURP) was brought by the President, he had a restricted area in mind, but our own Ugandans stretched the definition of Northern Uganda to include places as far as Pallisa and beyond. It is not only the issue of NURP, only two years ago, the President, after so many cries from the people of Acholi that their cattle be compensated, came up with the idea of restocking. But it is really sad to note that re-stocking is being done in areas that never lost livestock. (Interruption)   

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Professor for giving way. It is important that when you are a Professor, you research on what you say, because these hon. Members will want to believe what you say. The truth about re-stocking is that there is no re-stocking taking place in any area of Uganda that did not suffer loss of livestock. 

I was personally in charge of the program to decide what areas of the country should benefit. It is incorrect, and I repeat, incorrect to say that there is any area of Uganda which is participating in restocking and never suffered depletion of stock. What the hon. Member should worry about is the fact that there is too much abuse by those areas with the restocking programme. In fact, we are going to review how this project should be continued. 

I want to affirm to this House that restocking only takes place in those areas, no matter what part of Uganda. It is a mistake for the hon. Member to think that livestock loss took place in only certain geographical areas. It is not correct!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, don’t you think it would be of help to Members if you gave details? You may not have details with you here, but if you have them, you can give them.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you. These are impromptu interventions, but if Members so wish, a statement regarding this will be prepared. I thank you.

MR. MALINGA J: I would like to inform the Minister that Karamoja is being re-stocked indirectly, so cattle have not been lost in Karamoja. Re-stocking is taking place in Kapelebyong, and the Karimojong take the cattle without intervention from Government.

MR. OMWONY OJWOK: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As the out going Minister of State in charge of Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme directly holding the portfolio that was supervising the restocking project, I would like to give some information to the House.

One, the restocking project was specifically designed in order to cater for those areas which actually lost animals out of two specific problems. One area was armed conflict, which some people call rebellion. This was in the case of Teso, parts of Lango, Acholi, and parts of West Nile.  
 
Secondly, there is restocking as a result of what I would describe as armed pastoralism. That is when pastoralists carry out their activities using modern weapons, and they take advantage of these modern weapons to hijack and loot the livestock of other areas. This is the case with the whole belt comprising of Kitgum District, Pader, Lira, Katakwi, Kumi, Sironko and Kapchorwa.  

On the question of restocking of Karamoja, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the first incidents of de-stocking, that is the stealing of cattle, actually started inside Karamoja itself. The armed pastoralists started by looting animals from fellow Karimojong, and it is on that basis that in this present phase, the restocking is also covering specific areas of Karamoja where this occurred, such as Lamwor County, which I represent.

It is very important that this country and our representatives get to know that not every single Karimojong is a raider. There are areas of Karamoja which were completely de-stocked. Lamwor county is one of them, Kalenga sub-county in Dodoth, and some of the areas bordering the other districts. 

Of course, the question of destocking by the Karimojong is really a question of insecurity and criminal activity, and Government is addressing them separately. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Please, hon. Latigo, wind up.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr. Speaker, I suffered extensive interruptions in my contribution. Nevertheless, I wish to let my hon. colleague know that the reference to ‘Professor’ in his contribution was totally uncalled for. If he understood the premise upon which I made that statement, I was referring to the fact that, each time the President thought of addressing the issue of poverty, in my area, the issue becomes expanded to the extent that what he wants as a control intervention becomes diluted.

It is a fact that, there is restocking that is taking place in my area. I come from Agago and my sub-county of Parabor was given 20 heads of cattle; but that cannot address the poverty problem that we are facing.  

The point I wanted to make is very simple; if you want to address the poverty problems in the North, you must recognise two things. One, rather than looking at the increase from 60 to 66 percent, look at the fact that, the difference between the national average and the poverty level in the North is actually 31 percent. This is almost twice the level, which is the national average.
 
Therefore, it means that to arrive at 31 percent, while you have more than 60 percent, there must be some other region with far less than 31 percent. It will require patriotism and deliberate direction of funds to the North, if we are to address the issue of poverty in this area. That will only be possible if the last part of the President’s speech, which was generally referred to, is addressed by all of us. 

We really have to be nationalistic, patriotic, and selfless. We have to recognise that the problems in the North can only be addressed by us contributing resources and deliberately focusing on that.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We have been concentrating on the mainland; why do we not go to the Islands?  Member for Kalangala District.

MRS.KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the President for His address. In Kalangala, we were one of the lucky districts that never experienced election violence. So, I will not comment on that.  (Interruption)- Maybe the people did not know what to expect or what not to expect.   

I was very happy to note that fish -(Interruption) 

MR. MAO:  Mr. Speaker, thank you and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. There is a notorious plan known as the Kalangala Action Plan, which was the mustered seed of all the violence that related to the elections. I wonder whether the hon. Member is aware that the district, which she says was peaceful, was the nursery bed of this violence?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. KAVUMA: The statement was, it did not happen in Kalangala - Period.  I was very happy to note that fish was mentioned and well recognised by all of us. But I would like to say that, fish production needs to be boosted through improving water transport and the security of the fishermen.  Most of the people from Kalangala who come to me, are telling me about insecurity on the waters. The engines and boats are stolen and their fish is also being stolen. The security for the fish and improvements in that area, would work very well. 

Unfortunately, as I speak, the only ferry we have has no fuel. So, even fish that has not been stolen cannot be transported.

Education was mentioned as top on the priority list. This makes me feel very happy indeed. As I promised the people in Kalangala - because they are forgotten in the area of education - that education will be top. So, if it is top, it is very encouraging. What was mentioned about education - and I thought was missing and I felt it needs to be emphasised- was the education of the girl child.  

HIV was mentioned in health, and we already know something is being done about HIV. 
We are implementing issues on HIV and AIDs. I know the Ministry concerned will say, “Yeah, we are doing something about girls education”. What I would have liked to see in the President’s speech is something highlighted about girls education, because it is very important.  After all, it is the wisest investment any nation can ever make. I really doubt whether we will go very far if we do not emphasise this area.   

We have issues hanging from the last Parliament as well: land issues, domestic violence and quite a number of things that are actually based more on the women. These would go along way if the girls got enough education, to be able to argue for themselves, argue their point and put it across.  

I looked at an area where I felt the women gender was actually missing. I noticed that recently, His Excellency the President honoured us with the Vice President. I am told she is out of the country on treatment. The most unfortunate thing is that her department is the only without a supporting Minister. At the end of the day, we may say the department is not performing. That worries me a bit.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi):  Mr. Speaker, this time I have not stood to complain about time. I have realised it looks like, it is a cancer in this House. I believe that in the future -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  We are talking about the speech.

MR. EPATAIT:  Yes, I am reacting to the speech.  First, I would like to convey greetings to the august House from Ngora County. For the speech, there are a number of things that I shared with my electorate, one of which has already been talked about; and that is the issue of poverty growth rates in certain places and poverty reduction rates countrywide.  

The thing is that, we have noted with concern the high rate of poverty growth in the North; and the President rightly pointed out insecurity, as one of the causes of the escalating poverty in the North.The poverty growth is not only limited to the North, but also in Teso, especially in Katakwi; and if something is not done to address the problems of insecurity, the whole population will be swallowed up in poverty.  Mr. Speaker, while the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) is getting good results as evidenced by the reduction of the national figures on poverty eradication, it seems to be turning out as a poverty enhancement action plan, if nothing is done on the insecurity in the North and East. 

On education, we are extremely happy with the achievements registered with UPE.  We are also happy that the Government is reconsidering venturing into Universal Secondary Education (USE). The President mentioned that more effort would be tailored towards provision of scholastic materials for universal secondary schools.  One thing I would like to bring to the attention of this House is that, in Kumi District, I have been requested to ask why most of the Government aided schools in the district continue to receive a ridiculous 20 shillings per student as a capitation grant, and yet the figure was reversed to 65 shillings per student per day in 1997?  

The issue of provision of water for livestock was also mentioned, and the fear the people of Ngora have expressed is that, much as the intention of getting water for livestock is provided for by way of digging valley dams, the valley dam projects has for a long time in history been abused.  In fact, we would rather go in for smaller valley dams, which are cost effective and sustainable, because the maintenance of these valley dams has been a challenge. Once a valley dam is sunk, there is no follow up by way of identification; and within two years after the construction of the valley dam, members start asking, “Where is the dam?”  It is lack of a deliberate maintenance plan or budgetary provisions for the maintenance of the valley dams that the construction needs to be revisited.  

On the issue of environment, the speech was a little silent on it, and one of the things that is being expressed among the people of Ngora County is that fertility in Uganda is getting compromised.  The fertility of the land is getting lowered due to extensive usage of the land biodegradable packaging materials (kaveeras).  If Government does not come up with a policy to check the usage of this land biodegradable product, in the next 20 years or so, we shall stop being proud of the fertile soil. Those are some of the sentiments drawn from the speech of the President.  I thank you.

MRS. BYAMUKAMA  (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a few points to make.  I am speaking on behalf of the people of Mwenge South to appreciate the information given by the President. I have four points.  Number one is on the election violence.  I survived the election violence, and I must speak about it.  But more important, I would like to highlight the point which was made by hon. Hope Mwesigye, Member of Parliament for Kabale District, on violence in public domain.  There was violence in the private domain where women are victims.  And on this note, I propose that we should make a specific law on the domestic violence, because public enforcement officers cater for the public domain. I therefore, call upon Parliament to support a law on domestic violence to protect the women and men who may be victims.

My second point is on poverty.  I have got to talk about poverty, because this was the biggest cry as I campaigned in Mwenge South.  People are very poor and sell votes for 500/- shillings.  I noted with a lot of interest that the President mentioned about the British using “Kiboko” to make the Africans grow coffee.  I would call this a stick.  I propose that we give priority in service provision to those areas that produce what gives us dollars.  In the case of Terego County where they produce tobacco, they should have more roads and facilities as an incentive to the people.

My third point is on good governance and democracy. I note that in his address, the President kept on mentioning that “ours is a young democracy.”  I don’t agree with him.  I also notice that he made a statement that, “The checks and balances are vital to democratic governance should not stifle governance.”  This is on page three.  This particular point intrigued me, because I thought that the checks and balances do facilitate good governance.  But nevertheless, he went on to say that all arms of government should work together in order to facilitate good governance; and I noted that we have three arms of Government.  We have the Judiciary, we have the Executive, and we have the Legislature.  I propose that all these arms of Government should be equally facilitated. When it comes to allocation of cars to the Judiciary, you will not hear the journalists writing about it; when you hear that the Executive have bought Pajeros, you will not hear a cry, but when Members of Parliament ask to be facilitated, you hear a wild cry. (Applause).  As you will note from the President’s address, he noted that Members of Parliament are responsible for immunization, mobilization and development. 
I, therefore, propose that when we make a request, it should be treated with due respect, because when there’s a check and balance we have not stifled governance. For example, when Ministerial nominations came to the Appointments Committee, we did not take more than a week to approve them. So since we oil the machine, we should also be oiled to do the work. 

I am concerned about good governance and separation of powers at lower levels. –(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker, please protect me. -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MRS. BYAMUKAMA: I am concerned about lack of separation of powers at lower Government levels.  When you look at our Local Council system, it acts as a court at that level.  It also acts as the legislature, it makes by-laws, it acts as an executive; so at this level, there is no separation of powers.  This is going to bleed bad governance. Therefore the Local Governments Act and the Judicial Powers Statute should be reviewed so that each of these arms of government are separated for good governance.

My fourth point is on the Constitution review.  I note that the Constitution review is top down initiative.  Most of us don’t know the contents –(Interruption)

MR. KAKOOZA: In Rakai there is a problem cropping up in the district. The funds are misappropriated and there is no good allocation of resources; the reason being that there are no Chief Accounting Officers. 

MRS. BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for that point of information. My fourth point is on the Constitution review, and I have noted that it is a top down initiative and most of us don’t know the contents of the Constitution. I am afraid that what was a people’s document may turn into a group’s document, because I am sure that not even a quarter of us have gone before the Constitution Review Commission.  I therefore propose that Members should be able to get some basics on what the Constitution provides, so that they can constructively review the Constitution. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a humble request.  

There are some documents, which were mentioned in Presidents speech, and I think they would give us an insight the President speech.  These documents are the Medium Competitive Strategy for the Private Sector (MTCS,) and the Millennium Action Plan Map.  Can we get these copies?  I would be delighted if we get copies of these documents so that we understand the President’s views. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono) Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand here to bring greetings from Nakifuma and to congratulate the hon. Members in the House for having attained this position.  This is the first time I am talking, and it is unfortunate I have got a short time within which to deliver my points, but since this is not the last time, I will just make a few comments.  

To begin with, the people of Nakifuma have asked me to thank the President for the wonderful address to the nation that touched on Agriculture.  They also asked me to sympathize with those areas that experienced electoral violence.  The address of the President was full of vision and challenges to both the politicians and the technocrats.  

Maybe, I should talk about the few things that touch the people of Nakifuma.  They were happy about the concern of the President about Agriculture. The President pointed out rightly that we produce more, but we get less.  In Nakifuma, the price of coffee is 100 shillings per four cups, that is 100 shillings per kilo to buy a kilo of sugar; you sell 60 cups of coffee - that is raw coffee; but somewhere, the President says we should produce more, and you are wondering what will happen. What assurance is there that when we produce more the coffee will not cost less?

In the speech, it was realized that exporters are going to be facilitated, but for them, the only type of facilitation they get is in form of loans that are expected to mature within two weeks; and there is nothing they can grow within two weeks.  So they would like to get what we can call crop finance to be able to transport their crops to the market.

I would like to comment about the statistics in the President’s Address. One of them was on Education. They are happy that UPE education has improved from 2.5 million to 6.8million. When you check in the Statistical Abstract produced by the Ministry of Education, you will see that the total enrolment is in the ratio of 3: 1. When you add those in government and private schools, you wonder where the 2.5 is obtained. The President pointed out rightly that the 6.8 is for all the school-going children.  That is age between 6 and 12.  When you give 6.8 million, it is not clear whether you are achieving the Universal Primary Education or not.

Another issue was on the ratio of doctors to patients.  We have one doctor to eighteen thousand patients.   The population of twenty-two million to change from that ratio to 1:10 in four years; that means producing two hundred and fifty doctors per year; and I do not know where we are going to get these doctors.  Either we have a stock or we are going to import, or they are going to increase on the enrolment in Makerere. In that case we shall have two hundred and fifty students every year for Medicine; that is one out of ten students doing Medicine at Makerere.  So, some of these figures should be checked before they are given to the President.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

MS. BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative,Apac):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion, and I would like to commend the President for a speech well made.  I would like to react to the President’s comment on the media and the middle class.  The President said that when The New Vision and The Monitor were busy de-campaigning him, they did not know that only the educated people and not his supporters in rural areas read these papers. This shows how unreliable the President is to the middle class.  The President has been singing about building the middle class to educate the peasants, be the driving force to development and eradicate poverty in the country.  It is unfortunate that the President is undermining the middle class and yet the middle class can help in the transition of democracy.  

The Media:  It is unfortunate that the President has always said he knows the role the media plays in the democratic process of this county and makes such statements to the media.  Secondly, the President talks about – (Interruption).

Prof. Kagonyera:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, in his speech, the President said the media was making erroneous statements about him and he was happy that the majority of the people of Uganda are not victims of those statements.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to confuse – (Laughter) - the President’s statement that the media was misinforming the people with his staunch support for freedom of the press in this country that has been materially exemplified, not only in the electronic media, but in all other forms of information media?  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, this debate is about the President’s speech.  Each Member has an interest in this speech; but my understanding of her contribution is that she thinks the President doesn’t mind about the middle class since his main voters are the rural people.  

MS AMONGI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that excellent clarification.  Let me talk about the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture and Poverty Eradication Action Plan.  

The President said that to reduce mass poverty in the country, the government is going to use the most vibrant strategy of PMA and PEAP that will directly be implemented under decentralisation.   But the President didn’t tell us how decentralisation is functioning.   I am on the Local Government Accounts Committee, and I have been vibrantly working with the enormous decentralisation process. If we need poverty to be reduced through decentralisation, there is need to strengthen the decentralisation process.  The sub-counties don’t have enough capacity, because their money is going to the district; there is a lot of corruption under all these programmes decentralised at the districts. The President did not tell us how the government is planning to stop corruption in the decentralised system in order to ensure this policy benefits the decentralised district.  

Finally, I want to speak about poverty in Northern Uganda.  This is really a point that I want hon. Members to support the people from Northern Uganda on.  

Under NURP, the President points out that poverty has been increasing in Northern Uganda for the last three years.  He talks of NURP as a strategy for alleviating poverty in Northern Uganda.  If NURP has existed and functioned in Northern Uganda, but poverty continues to increase in Northern Uganda, then we should be asking; is NURP the right strategy for alleviating poverty?  Or what has NURP been doing to alleviate poverty?  I support NURP as a subsidiary or a supplement to government policy in Northern Uganda, but the strategy being used by NURP is not prioritising issues in Northern Uganda.  

I commissioned a research by the Research Desk of this Parliament, and I have a report which says that the NURP allocation to agriculture was only 6.2 billion under NURP 1. This is compared to the allocation to telecommunications of 13.3 million dollars. Between telecommunications and agriculture, which one should be a priority for alleviating poverty? 

I think the policies under NURP are not addressing poverty in Northern Uganda. The Minister in charge of Northern Uganda should ensure that the policies under NURP should address priorities in Northern Uganda if we want poverty in Northern Uganda to reduce.  Thank you very much.

MR. AEL ARK (Dodoth County, Kotido): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion. While supporting the motion, just like many of my colleagues have talked about some of the issues raised in the President’s speech, I would like to talk about education.

We are very grateful for the UPE programme. It has specifically addressed quite a number of problems in the country, but for the Karimojong, it has been a big problem. I would like to speak more on secondary education and university education. I should think that Government should come up with a deliberate policy to address the issue of education for the Karimojong.  

Over the years, no attention has been given to Karamoja.  You will recall that at the time of the imperialists, there were signposts in Katakwi District read that ‘Do not enter Karamoja; this is a human zoo’. As if that was not enough, during the Obote regime they said, “we cannot wait for Karamoja to develop”. Now, during the NRM Government, there has not been deliberate attention given to the Karimojong. (Interruption)

MR. MALINGA JOHNSON: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Speaker that Government has paid much attention to Karamoja. That is why we have Karamoja Development Association. We have a whole Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs. What the hon. Member should concentrate on is removing insecurity in Karamoja, and the programmes will flow.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In Karamoja, we have a programme known as APEC. APEC is a programme which is specifically tailored to meet educational needs in Karamoja. Through APEC, the pupils are taught within their manyattas at a convenient time, when the girls have cleaned the kraal and the boys have brought back the cows. In addition, the World Food Programme has offered food to the young people who attend school in Karamoja region. I was there to launch this programme. It is going to last for five years. So, when the hon. Member says that nothing has been done for Karamoja, it is not true.  I just wanted to give him that information.

MS. ALASO ASIANUT: I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister. I am trying to pursue the issue of regional imbalances in education. May I, therefore, get clarification as to how far Government has gone in giving us the quota system for entrance to the University on Government sponsorship? We are really oppressed! It may not be a Karamoja issue alone, it is also a Teso issue, and it may be an Mbale issue also. I am aware that when it comes to competition for admission to the University on Government sponsorship, these regions fare so poorly because of the poverty and the variance. 

I do not know whether it is also a policy that there should be no coaching. In Kampala, coaching goes on; in Teso, coaching is forbidden. Here in UPE schools, students have lunch, but there, we are not allowed to charge any money for lunch, therefore, causing this variance. Could the Minister give me some clarification as to whether we are moving towards the quota system for education?  
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me deal with the issue raised by the Member for Soroti District. Earlier, during the debate, the Minister told us that there will be a comprehensive policy statement on all these things. The matter was raised by hon. Kawanga. He was talking about technical education and tertiary education. We agreed that we need this comprehensive statement which we shall consider in detail, and then I think that issue will be addressed.

MR. AEL: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The information I have for the Minister for Primary Education is that I have no problem with primary education, neither have I a problem with APEC. My problem is with secondary education and thereafter. This is what I was addressing.  

The other hon. Member was trying to raise issues concerning Karamoja Development Agency. The Minister responsible for Karamoja is still around, and I think he will explain himself.  

The issue I am trying to emphasize and cultivate on education is, after A’level, you find that some Karimojong children cannot afford to go to the universities or to tertiary institutions. They resort to becoming cattle rustlers, and this is a major issue that all of us in this House should understand. It is not only the main warrior who is doing this. 

Government provides funds for the people who are supposed to protect, the anti-theft unit, and yet this money is, time and again, being embezzled by those concerned. So, that is not really a priority area. To me, it would be very important to use this money to educate a Karimojong or rather get scholarships for the Karimojong children, who will go for university education. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the current speaker on the Floor that it is not only school drop-outs who participate in cattle rustling. The issue of saying that after dropping out of school, people will turn out to be cattle rustlers is not true. Thank you.

MR. AMURIAT: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, much as he understands this secondary education problem as being in Karamoja alone, it is also in other parts of the country. 
In Teso, we have not resorted to raiding as an excuse for not having secondary education. Thank you.

MR.AEL ARK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the most important thing for the House to do is to address the issue of Karamoja. Until all of us realise the problems that are pertinent inside Karamoja, we cannot look at the problems of the neighbours, because this is the major cause of the problems of our neighbours. I realise that many of our neighbours’ problems are caused within our system. Unless all of us come together to address the internal problems of Karamoja, these problems may persist.  

I wish to comment on the issue of roads. My constituency, Dodoth, has one of the poorest road systems. The culverts are broken. You may have read in the newspapers that a reporter of The Monitor newspaper was one time killed by a river. That was in Dodoth, and this one has not been given attention. I wish the Minister responsible for Works could address this issue. Moreover, this road leads to Kidepo National Park, one of the parks that brings in revenue to this country. I think it would be useful for us to attend to some of these problems.  

Kotido district is one of the oldest districts in this country, but up to today it has no electricity, no communication systems, not even UTL, and yet you have very new districts which have received these facilities. I think we should address the issue regionally and ensure that some of these areas are attended to.  

I will now talk about poverty. There is abject poverty in Dodoth, poverty where nobody has something in the granary. The area is prone to hunger all the time and we have had problems over there. I wish to say that attention must be paid to the district poverty fund. That is what my colleagues from Lira talked about. The officers at the districts, at the sub-county, and at the parishes have not been facilitated to address these issues, and yet from the President’s speech, we were told that the MPs should be looking into matters like immunisation and poverty eradication. But nobody is facilitating the MPs to address these issues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I beg to join my colleagues to congratulate you and your Deputy, and indeed, all the Cabinet Members for having attained high offices. Let me to thank the President for the good speech. I would like to make the following comments.  

I am very glad about the Members’ contribution on the Electoral Commission and its failures. But I wish to add that there was a lot of voter buying, and this is a problem nation-wide. When the voters are bought, the problem extends after voting. Members of Parliament do not go back home to mobilise their people, because they feel the voting was like buying a shirt from a shop, and that causes under-development. I urge all the Members to go back home and educate our people against voter buying, so that next time, they are not bought and end up being under-developed (Interruption).

MS.AKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I am so sad because having worked so hard throughout the 6th Parliament, and having gone to my constituency and mobilised, as a good Ugandan and a good Christian, and convinced my people to vote for me, and which they did overwhelmingly, is the hon. Member in order to impute that all of us in this House actually bought votes? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member for Katakwi is saying that as far as she is concerned, she mobilised and people voted for her overwhelmingly. The point made by the Member for Bunyaruguru is about the places where he was, and therefore, I have no reason to doubt his assessment of the situation. 

MRS.MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this point as a serious one, so that our people do not blame us. In fact, the President mentioned that voter buying was one of the major problems in the elections, and I think the more we buy, the more we reduce the importance and quality of the House. We really need to look at this. I think he is talking about what went on during the elections. All of us know that there was voter buying and we should face it as a reality so that we find a solution to it.

THE SPEAKER: I think the view, as I gather from what has just been expressed, is that the hon. –(Interjection)– Please let me rule on this. They are challenging the competence of the hon. Member for Bunyaruguru to know what happened in the entire country when he was busy concentrating on electioneering. They do not disagree with what happened to his area, but they are saying this cannot be a conclusion on all the 240 constituencies including the women constituencies. I think that is the only disagreement, and he is free to express his assessment of the situation in the places he visited. He might have visited other constituencies, I do not know, but I think it was in his constituency and he is entitled to make that conclusion.

MR.TWAREBIREHO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the good guidance and ruling. But I must express my disappointment at the Members’ reaction as if they do not know that voter buying takes place in this country. 

The people of Bunyaruguru were very happy when they heard His Excellency’s state of the nation address, especially on agriculture. Although the people of Bunyaruguru grow a lot of coffee and cotton, there is a major problem. Half of Bunyaruguru borders with a national park and a game reserve from where Government gets a lot of money. Every season, elephants destroy their crops and sometimes even lives are lost. But to their dismay, there is no compensation made to the people who have lost their dear ones, or for the crops that have been destroyed. It is the suggestion of the people of Bunyaruguru that Government sets up a fund to compensate the people who lose their dear ones and property, when the animals, from which Government gets a lot of money, destroy them.

Another thing Bunyaruguru County is endowed with, are lakes. In fact, people were very happy when they heard His Excellency talk about fish farming. I am here to inform this august House that Bunyaruguru has got about 45 crater lakes. When fish farming is being talked about, we should now talk about restocking those lakes, because they are completely depleted. People are willing to cooperate with Government and accept to stop fishing from those lakes for a good period.

The people of Bunyaruguru are also concerned about balanced development. Members have been talking about balanced development on national level, but this one also goes to the lower level, that is, at the district. There is a lot of imbalance in the development of the district counties. For example, Bunyaruguru still lags behind on roads. We do not have any feeder roads, and most places do not have good water, and yet there are programmes at the district. I urge Members of this House, and indeed the Government, to regularly supervise the projects that are being carried out at the lower level of Government. 

In Bunyaruguru County, we have a health centre. We are lucky now because we have a medical doctor, but we do not have the drugs. Most importantly, the theatre was constructed for a full year; it is in place, but there is no equipment. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr. Wabudeya Beatrice): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I wish to react to your concern about lack of drugs. First of all, when we stopped cost sharing, the attendance at all the health units went up, and naturally the demand for more supplies in form of drugs and other equipment. We have now made arrangements in this financial year to increase on the drug allocation as well as provide money under the primary healthcare funds. This is for the health sub-districts to purchase extra drugs that they may need.  

I also wish also to respond to the issue of completed theatres that have not been equipped. I want to reassure all of you that all the theatres are going to be equipped this financial year. So, please, rest assured that your concerns will be addressed. Thank you.

MR. TWAREBIREHO: Mr. Speaker, I am happy with the hon. Minister’s information and assurance that our theatre is going to be equipped.

Last but not least, let me air my views on what most Members have been talking about, the development of the North. I had the fortune of going to the North. I worked there for about seven years, and indeed we all agree that there is a lot of poverty. 
I have been to Karamoja, I have been to Teso, I have been to Gulu, Kitgum and Lira, and I have been to the whole of the West Nile region, so I know what I am talking about.  

I urge Government to really work on this problem of poverty that is ruining that part of our country. I pray that all of us will unite to bring development equitably to this nation. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. KAWOYA ANIFA:(Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to congratulate you and all hon. Members of this august House for having attained high offices. I wish to congratulate hon. Members who made it to this 7th Parliament despite all that we went through. Allow me to also thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

I wish to say something about the electoral process. I have heard my colleagues say that there was a lot of violence, and their concern was buying of votes. I agree with the hon. Members. We have not come here to shy away from the fact that there was buying of votes or election violence. However, I do not agree with some Members who assume that this violence was just orchestrated in their own areas.   All of us, in one way or another, were affected by this violence. It was not a personal issue, it was not a group issue, nor was it Government instituted. But there were some areas where we heard that some personalities or some sections incited the community to cause violence. It is up to this House to really come out and put an end to this incitement of the public.  

I agree with hon. Norah Byamukama’s and hon. Hope Mwesigye’s contributions to this House about violence.   Most of the women suffered. Our male counterparts caused trouble for us, for whatever reasons. Wherever we wanted to vote, we did not have the freedom of choice. At times we would find that there was violence inflicted on women, but we are very quiet, we are talking about violence which affected all of us. (Interruption)  

MR. BANYENZAKI: I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in my constituency, the whole Minister in the President’s Office moved around all sub-counties informing the voters to vote for one of the contestants. 
And he said that he was going to be given a ministerial post. Wasn’t that Government orchestrated?

THE SPEAKER: Your information is going to cause unease.  It will cause uneasiness in the sense that the President’s Office has many Ministers. Why not be categoric, if that was the case? Who is this Minister?

MR. BANYENZAKI: The Minister Ruhakana Rugunda.

MR. MALINGA: I would like to inform the Member that, apart from the few cases where election violence was not cited, it was everywhere. One observation made by the public on this election violence was that, it was due to the individual campaigns of the Members. It is therefore,the cry of the public that if this House could re-instate candidates’ meetings, it will in one way or another reduce election violence in this country.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am not contributing to this debate; but I could give you information that led to the passing of the individual campaigns.  Actually, there was view that if you had joint campaigns in the constituencies during the 7th Parliament campaigns, some people would stab each other. 

Therefore, when they were debating for removing the joint campaigns, they said, “let each one go and find votes on his/her own”. You need not attend a campaign rally to get votes; some move from house to house. But if there is a joint campaign meeting, you are forced to go and attend it; you cannot have any other meeting separate from this joint campaign meeting. 

I am just giving you the background that these matters were addressed, and when you look at the violence that was in some places during these elections, if those people were together, the situation would have been worse. In any case, it is open, you are free to bring a motion to amend or the Executive can bring an amendment so that we amend and revisit. This matter is not closed. Parliament is just starting and this is one of the things we can revisit and see whether we restore the joint campaign meetings.

MRS. KAWOYA BANGIRANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that good information. I would not want to add on much, but my colleague has said that a Minister in the President’s office went and de-campaigned him. I am sure he did it on his own; he was not sent.  

There were omissions, commissions and irregularities within the electoral process and are still a concern for all citizens of voting age. It is up to all of us here and the leaders at all levels, to come out and join hands to ensure that violence should not prevail.

We would like to see a democratic electoral process, an impartial electoral process and leadership within the Electoral Commission. We would like to see all candidates treated equally. We would like to see the Army and the Police coming in to protect all of us during the elections. We would like to see that there are checklists put in place by the Electoral Commission before election time.  This will allow us, who have got certain issues to raise them in time before the elections take place. As most of us had some problems, there was no limited time because we did not have checklists. What are our freedoms? What do we expect out of a fair and free election? 

I want to say once again that, vote buying is not only undemocratic, it is also an evil. It reduces both parties who participate, because when we talk about vote buying, who is buying who?  Who is receiving from whom?  So, it is for all of us.  As one hon. colleague has said, we should at least ensure that we educate our people, because I am seeing here a situation where in the near future, you will find that those people who will come to this August House, will only be those with a very big granary.  

Some of us whose income resources by that time, maybe 2006, would have remained at the same par or if not less - since there are so many problems, we are talking about our welfare, which indeed I support. We cannot continue when we are not well facilitated and you do not find a difference between us and other people. We are leaders, we should live by example and we should live as good leaders.  

Having said that, in America, I understand they say, if you have no money you have no voice; you have no voice you have no business in politics. But I do not think that we have reached that level in our democratic process. I would assume that it will be all of us to put in place some strict measures, which will make all of us compete for leadership positions in a clean way and be good representatives of the people, for the good governance of our country.

I want to say something on the economy. The President came out and I wish to thank him. I appreciate the will, the vision by Government to restructure the economy, in order to bring about balanced development. But when we talk about balanced development, you hear some areas saying no, the equitability of the economy is not the same. Hence, I wish to agree with the President that the poverty situation in the Northern region is really very pathetic. Some of us are being asked - I heard a colleague asking, ‘have you been there?’  I have traveled in most of these districts.

When you look at the situation in the North, it needs our combined efforts. There are programmes, which are in place for the Northern region; but is the Government reviewing the policy on monitoring, evaluation and planning or these programmes are just there, they are not pro-people, they do not have an impact on the people?  The people of the North feel that they do not belong, that they have been left out. 

If the Government can go ahead with the new breed of leaders - I understand and I stand to be corrected that some leaders from the North also at times, do not welcome these programmes. We would appeal to them to work together with the Government. We would appeal to them to work together with us, to ensure that our sisters and brothers in the Northern region -(Interruption).

MR. MAO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The rules of this House bar any Member from imputing improper motives on other Members. I rise to ask whether it is in order for her to suggest, without substantiating, that some leaders in Northern Uganda do not want the ‘goodies’ from the Central Government without giving names?

THE SPEAKER: I take into account that the hon. Member is aware that she should not impute improper motive on the Members. I think the leaders you are talking of, exclude the Members of this august House.

MRS. KAWOYA BANGIRANA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I said ‘I am meant to understand’.  I am not saying it is conclusive, and I even said that I stand to be corrected.  I am glad I have been corrected; that it is not the position. 

I want to talk about the livestock.  I am just winding up.  The livestock sector is of much importance to the economy and to all of us. The re-stocking programme should be emphasized. My people in Sembabule District have got a problem of drought, lack of water and pasture. Once it is addressed, much of our problems and of this sector will be taken into account.  

Finally, I wish to thank the Government for having extended water and electricity to my district. My people are very happy. However, they asked me to tell the Ministry concerned that they would appreciate further if they do not  stop at seeing the mapping and the electric poles but to see the actual electricity and water. I thank you for this and I thank the hon. Members for listening.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I assure you that I have got your indication of contributing. I assure all those who have given me their names that tomorrow I will just call those whom I have not called today; if you are absent, that will be different. But I think I will follow this list as it is so that everybody gets an opportunity to make his contribution. 

Meanwhile, I call upon the hon. Member for Mayuge district.

MS.ISANGA NAKADAMA (Woman Representative Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have the pleasure to add my voice to those who have congratulated you upon your election to the high office, not forgetting your Deputy.  

I thank the President for the State of the Nation address he made on 27th July, but I have a few comments to make. On page 15, he said “Since 1986, the Movement has worked hard to improve the health of the population through preventive and curative measures.” But I think this has been done only in towns. More attention should be paid to rural areas. In Mayuge district, when you go to the islands and fall sick from there, you will just die because you have to walk several miles to get to a health centre. 

Many women in the rural areas of Mayuge district have lost their lives due to lack of health units and health workers; they suffer a lot during pregnancy. (Dr Wabudeya rose_).  

THE SPEAKER: I am going to give opportunity to Ministers in their portfolios to respond on Thursday. But make your point.

DR.WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Member for Mayuge for giving way. I want to give her general information that Mayuge Islands make up units which qualify to get health centres. This time, not only are we going to give you a health centre for the island, but also provide water transport so that there is easy communication between the islands in Mayuge and the mainland. I hope that will help solve the problem. Thank you.

MS.ISANGA NAKADAMA: Thank you very much. If that is done, it will be good.  

On education, the President promised Universal Primary Education by increasing teachers and classrooms, but I think he forgot the disabled children. In my area, the disabled or those ones who are mentally disturbed have been forgotten. They are not catered for. I think the Minister of Education should look into that matter so that these children are also catered for in order to make them good citizens of Uganda. Thank you very much.

MRS.SENINDE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to move a motion for the adjournment of the House.

THE SPEAKER: It appears that the hon. Member is saying we are a bit tired; why do we not adjourn? It seems it is a consensus; I do not have to put a question. But before I adjourn the House, tomorrow I will start with the hon. Member from Kamwenge. 

So far, 27 Members have contributed today, but I want to take this opportunity to remind Members of the Business and Welfare Committee of a meeting to take place tomorrow at 11.00a.m. on the Third Floor in the Members Lounge. Please attend. 

As you know, the Membership of this Committee includes all the Chairpersons of our Committees, plus the 15 we elected here. Please, make it a point to attend because there are important matters to discuss at this meeting.

MR.MAATE ROGERS: Mr. Speaker, you have said that tomorrow we shall continue with the list you have there, does it include the names of those who requested to speak on Thursday last week?

THE SPEAKER: And they did not?

MR.MAATE: They did not.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will use my staff to compile an exhaustive list so that those who were not able to do so last Thursday do so tomorrow and Thursday.

MR.SSEBAGGALA: Mr. Speaker, some of us are not on the list.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you are not, you are free to come and register. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30p.m.

(Parliament rose at 6.24p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 8th August 2001 at 2.30p.m.)

