Wednesday 1st August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday we held elections for the Chairpersons and the Deputy Chairpersons of the Standing Committees of this House, and I wish to announce the results as follows: 

The Public Accounts Committee: 	
Hon. Dr. Okullo Epak – Chairperson 
Hon. Jack Sabiiti  - Deputy Chairperson
							
The Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises:  
Hon. Zackery Olum – Chairperson, 
Hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu – Deputy Chairperson 

The Committee on Rules Privileges and Discipline: 
Hon. Ben Wacha – Chairperson 
Hon. Hope Mwesigye – Deputy Chairperson.

Committee on Government Assurances: 
Hon. Bernadette Bigirwa – Chairperson 
Hon. Tom Kayongo – Deputy Chairperson.

Committee on the National Economy: 
Hon. Nandala M. Nathan – Chairperson
Hon. Kabakumba Matsiko – Deputy chairperson.
Budget Committee: 
Hon. Beatrice Kiraso – Chairperson 
Hon. James Eliazah Mwandha – Deputy Chairperson.

Committee on Local Government Accounts:
Hon. J.W.L. Kinobe – Chairperson
Hon. Ofwono Apollo Yeri  - Deputy Chairperson.

Congratulations to all those Members, and I wish them well in this onerous task of steering the Standing Committees of this House.

MS. NAMAYANJA : Thank you very much Madam Speaker and hon. Members. As you recall, yesterday I was nominated to represent Luwero District and the Youth on the Appointments Committee. I wish to bring it to your attention that we agreed amongst ourselves that the Member representing the youth in Western Region, hon. Basajjabalaba Nassar should represent the youth’s interests in the Appointments Committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the necessary adjustments will be made. I put the question that hon. Basajjabalaba be elected to the Appointments Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The necessary adjustments will be made.

MOTION FOR A DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY, 
THE PRESIDENT ON THE 27TH JULY 2001 

MR. JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move the motion that: “Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government Policy contained in the address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Friday, 27th July 2001.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

CAPT. BABU: Seconded.

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am greatly privileged to move this motion of giving thanks to His Excellency the President for his Address on the State of the Nation.  

Let me use this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency the President on his landslide victory in the March 2001 Presidential Elections.  The people of Uganda spoke loudly that he should have his last term of office so that he can move Uganda on the road to development and prosperity.

I congratulate him upon winning the election petition that followed the presidential elections. The petition was very important in the development of constitutional governance.  It showed that the petitioner had confidence in the country’s court system rather than going to the bush to cause violence. Our judges and lawyers got experience out of this petition and not to mention the legal fees the lawyers earned. The proceedings of the court reported in the press provided a lot of civic education to the population.

Let me also thank the President for his wise nomination of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. As you know, both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker were unanimously elected by this House, unlike the case when we were electing the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker to the 6th Parliament.  
This therefore, Madam Speaker, is a clear indication of the confidence –(Interjection).

MR. ERESU: Madam Speaker, I would like the Mover of the motion to clarify to me how the President was responsible for the nomination of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of this House.

MR. MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I want simply to mention that this House had confidence in the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker to elect them unanimously.  I further congratulate the Cabinet on appointment to the various ministerial posts. All Ugandans are very eager to see that this Cabinet actually delivers; and I am sure that many of them are looking at each of these men and women to see whom of these will be the successor to the President. Madam Speaker, the biggest challenge we have today is really to manage change – the change that is important in the succession to the presidency of this Country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish to congratulate all Members of Parliament for their election to this House. Coming to Parliament can be regarded as a privilege, but I must say it is also a challenge. We promised a lot and we raised expectations and we must work very hard to live up to the expectations of those who elected us.  

I now wish to specifically, address some of the issues raised in the Address. As you know, our Constitution requires the President to give an address on the state of the nation at least once a year. I must thank him for giving such a clear and precise exposition of Government policy as contained in the Address.

In his Address, like many Ugandans, the President was very much concerned about the election violence and the use of bad language in the parliamentary elections. He was also concerned about the weaknesses that were identified within the organization and management of the electoral process, by the Electoral Commission.

I am sure all of us would also wish to condemn acts of violence during the parliamentary elections. One does not need to kill, in order to go to Parliament. I hope Members will come up with possible solutions to this problem, before it develops into a culture.

With regard to the weaknesses in the Electoral Commission, I am sure some of them are being addressed however, you may recall that during the campaigns, there were Press reports which blamed the Parliament for delaying passing the relevant laws, which contributed to the problems faced by the Electoral Commission in conducting the elections. I must say that the delay in passing the laws originated not from Parliament as such, but from the Minister of Constitutional Affairs who did not bring the Bills in time. I hope this will not be repeated in future!

There were also reports of foul play in tendering for electoral materials by the Electoral Commission. I hope that these incidents were fully investigated and offenders will be brought to book. I hope also that there will be reforms in the Electoral Commission and that appointment of people will be carried out in such a way that we get men and women with high moral standards.

The President was also concerned about the high cost of elections; including the malpractice of vote-buying and other forms of inducement of voters. There were indications that this malpractice existed but one wonders where all the money came from which candidates are said to have used to induce voters!

Election campaigns, Madam Speaker, are now over, what remains now is to bring about reconciliation among those who competed for Constituencies and those who campaigned for different candidates.  This is important for stability and prosperity of Uganda.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Mwandha for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is related to the concern that hon. Mwandha is raising over the amount of money, big sums of money, which were used during the elections. Could the Member holding the Floor explain to us why he is not equally concerned about the big amount of money that was equally used by His Excellency the President?   Where did he get that money?

MR. MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is aware that we in Parliament did vote money for the presidential candidates. Apart from that, I do not expect that he would expect me to know where other monies, other than the money voted by Parliament, came from - but Madam Speaker, I wish to seek your indulgence and the indulgence of Members, to permit me to make my short presentation and obviously, at a later stage I will have the opportunity to respond to any of the queries hon. Members may wish to make.  

I therefore wish to concede, Madam Speaker, that it is important today for the stability of Uganda, to enter into reconciliation so that we forget the past and look forward and try to work for a stable and prosperous country. 

I must commend Government for taking measures to maintain a strong economy as reported in the President’s Address.  The growth in foreign investments is indicative of the confidence foreign investors have in the stability of our country, and the continued effective and sound management of the economy. The biggest economic challenge facing us today, however, is to reduce poverty at the household level so that our people can enjoy a higher quality of life. Although poverty levels, as reported in the President’s address have gone down during the three years, these levels are still too high and Government must not relax in finding ways of reducing poverty. 

The rise of poverty in northern Uganda as reported in the Address is worrying, and more must be done to reduce and target, particularly the poverty-stricken areas of the north and the east. Although poverty reduction programmes are getting a bigger share of the budget than ever before, Government should take measures to ensure that these programmes have a trickle down effect to the people at the grassroots. That is when these programmes will have an impact on the population generally.

I support the President’s proposal for intervention by Government in such areas as coffee processing, increased cotton and tea production and processing.  This will give value to our main exports and improve on terms of trade.  

With regard to livestock and fish, there are certain bottlenecks, which need to be addressed. It is ironical that some parts of Uganda have to pour away milk while children in other parts of Uganda suffer from malnutrition.  
I wish to commend Government for the UPE programme.  UPE is one of the most successful programmes of Government, although there are still some weaknesses to be addressed.  As a representative of people with disabilities, I can testify that the UPE programme has enabled many children with disabilities to access education, which was not the case before.  I wish, however, to request the Minister to address the problems relating to the education of children with visual and hearing impairments.  

The proposal to introduce Universal Secondary Education and the “Vocationalisation” of education are welcome.  Government should, however, give reasonable support to private institutions of Higher Learning, especially universities because this is where the people who will leave Universal Secondary Education will have to be admitted.

The improvements in the health care facilities are appreciated but Government should investigate the causes in the drop in immunization coverage because this does not augur well that, after we had achieved high levels of immunization, we have now gone down. I think the Minister should investigate this and keep this House informed.

The figures for the prevalence of HIV/AIDS of 6.2 per cent – (Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister on the Front Bench and the hon. Ogola in order to start holding private discussions without your authority, Madam, when a serious motion is on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the hon. Member was consulting the Minister about this very important matter that is being raised by hon. Mwandha.  

MR. MWANDHA:  As I was saying, Madam Speaker, the figure of the prevalence of HIV/AIDS of 6.2 per cent is too good to be true. I am aware that surveillance is being carried out in urban areas such as Kampala, Jinja and other towns but today, the major problem of infection has moved to the rural areas; and I think it is important that surveillance should include areas which are not urban so that we can get true figures of the situation.  
In his address, the President talked about the insurgency in the north and west. I think this is one of the most difficult challenges that we have faced within the recent years. But it is comforting to learn from the Address of the President and the successes of the UPDF that they have scored against the rebels. Government should now intensify diplomatic efforts to fairness of this problem so that we achieve total peace in the affected areas.  

We Members of this House should record our appreciation of the work done by the Officers and Men of the UPDF in protecting our territorial integrity, especially in the DRC.  The Government should adhere to the Lusaka Accord so that we finally withdraw completely from the DRC, and Government should concentrate on “proffessionalising” the army, which is a major undertaking by the President during this term of office.

With regard to regional co-operation, I commend the President for the role he has played in the establishment of the East African Community, and in transforming the OAU into an African Union. I also congratulate one of our former colleagues, hon. Amanya Mushega, upon his appointment as Secretary General of this East African Community.  I hope we shall be able to collect a good team of men and women to go to the East African Assembly, who will make sure that we freely benefit from the participation in the community.  You may recall that in the last Community, I think Uganda had a raw deal. So I hope on this occasion we shall achieve maximum benefit.  

I am sure I would be speaking on behalf of the Members of this House in saying that we all look forward to working with the Executive arm of Government as amicably as possible. We shall adopt an attitude of co-operation rather than confrontation. But I hope the Executive arm of Government will do nothing to provoke this House to adopt a confrontational attitude. 

In the past, the President used to comment on corruption in his addresses to the nation.  On this occasion, he has not addressed the subject and yet Uganda has been featuring negatively in matters of corruption.  I wish to appeal to Government to continue fighting corruption.  
I must at the same time commend Government for instituting judicial commissions into corruption in the Police and procurements in the Ministry of Defence.  However, recent Press reports of malpractice in procurement in the Ministry of Defence are worrying and I would propose that the concerned people should investigate these incidents and bring the offenders to Court.  

As a representative of the people with disabilities, which is part of the people who are marginalised in society, I wish to commend the President for his promotion of affirmative action in favour of women, the youth, the workers and we the disabled persons. This policy has enabled us to have a voice and decision making in many matters, which affect us. We only request Government to come up with a policy on disability like it has done in respect to women, the youth and the children.  

Finally, I wish to thank Government for the support it is giving to Parliament. When I came to this House in 1989, this building was not safe to work in. There was no running water; water was brought in drums and placed in the toilets for use and to clean the toilets after use.  Power was intermittent; we could get a blackout in the middle of a sitting. There were no catering facilities of any kind and we were advised not to use the Third Floor at all because it was unsafe.  We had only two microphones in this House and for a Member to address the House, he had to come forward and use one of the two microphones. But, of course, as of now, we have a Parliament one can be proud of, with nearly all modern facilities installed. Government even agreed to surrender part of the Parliament House to enable Parliament to have the necessary space.  

I want also to thank the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the Clerk –(Interruption)

CAPT.GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I want to inform hon. Mwandha that the success he has enlisted for the face lifting of Parliament was because of a vibrant Commission of which I was member -(Laughter).

MR.MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I think the improvements in this House cannot be the work of one person or just a few people. 
But I want also to recognise the contributions made by all the Speakers, Deputy Speakers since 1989, and the Clerk and his staff who contributed to these improvements.  The Commissioners of the Sixth Parliament also did a lot to secure improvements in the House to make it safe and comfortable. They also worked hard to improve our terms of service and welfare. With these comments, I wish to move. Thank you for listening to me, Madam Speaker and hon. Members.

MS.KIRASO BIRUNGI (Women Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I would like to second the motion moved by hon. James Mwandha, and in doing so, I will restrict myself to His Excellency’s address specifically on matters concerning the economy. But before I talk about the economic achievements, allow me to say very briefly that the violence and bad language and so on, which the President talked about, did not start with the parliamentary campaigns or elections. It is a very sad thing, but it is also true that we have all been in Uganda. 

Violence, bad language, bad blood between supporters of different candidates was actually a spill-over from the presidential elections. The violence and bad language cannot in any way be attributed to the logistical problems being faced by the Electoral Commission. I do not think the two are related at all! Candidates and voters alike in Uganda have, for a long time, had to put up with inadequacies and inefficiencies of the Electoral Commission. But for those inadequacies to be seen as if they can transform themselves into violence, which we saw in the last elections, I think it is a matter that we need to look at a bit more critically. It is not fair for us, as leaders in this country, to gloss over some of these issues. The root cause of the problem should be identified so that a lasting and permanent solution can be found. Otherwise, as we go on getting more and more democratic and holding more elections, they will get more and more bloody as people desperately struggle for power. 

I hope the electoral process in Uganda will improve. His Excellency says it has improved, indeed it has. We hope it will continue improving for the better.


On the economy, His Excellency went to a great detail to list the economic achievements arising out of the sound macro economic policies which this country has embraced over the years. I have a few fears, especially at the micro economic level where this country still faces a lot of challenges to create a conducive atmosphere for the private sector to thrive. With less and less Government participation through policies like privatisation, decentralisation and liberalisation of our economy, we hope for a more organised private sector driven economy. But I do not think enough is being put in place to make the private sector do better than it is doing. We need a lot of planning. 

I urged the last Parliament and I will continue to do so in this Parliament, for us to put in place a National Planning Authority, which is provided for in our Constitution. We need an independent, effective Authority to deal with the planning in this country. The effect of the unfair terms of trade for developing countries is still very heavy on our economy. And as long as we do not put emphasis on deliberate infrastructure development and provision of necessary utilities, a stronger, more sound, stable and predictable financial sector, meaningful fiscal and monetary policies, I have fears that investment rate in Uganda may remain low. The development of skills and creation of employment shall remain but only a dream. 

I, however, have hope that with His Excellency’s 66 very able Ministers offering the appropriate political supervision, there should be no excuse for this country not to implement the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) because it is at the centre of everything. In the PEAP there are cross cutting issues which touch each sector and section of the economy. The function of co-ordination, which I believe now lies with the Minister in charge of Planning, is extremely crucial.  

The percentage of 35 out of 100 people living below the absolute poverty line is still a bit on the high side; and in some quarters, the absolute poverty line is called a dollar a day. So if we have 35 out of 100 people living below that poverty line, it is something that we need to attend to.  
In conclusion, increased expenditure on areas that directly benefit the poor and the Programme for Modernisation of Agriculture are both very welcome ideas. If they are well implemented, the standards of living of most of Ugandans will improve and the cost will definitely go down. 

Some of these policies and programmes have sometimes remained on paper and in figures and do not transform in real terms on the ground. One of the outstanding factors has been the misuse of Government funds, which we normally call corruption. With more funds going to the lower Government levels, as much should be done to build absorptive capacity at those levels, and we should do a lot to increase accountability.  

I would like to urge you colleagues to get interested and follow up on monies being disbursed to our lower local government levels to ensure that the population that this money is intended for does actually benefit.  

I understand I am time bound but in one second, let me congratulate the Ministry of Health for the fight, not against aids alone, but also against many other diseases. I also ask them to investigate the fall in the level of immunisation because coverage had gone high, we had all got involved as Parliamentarians and other stakeholders, but I was very disappointed when I heard that the level had gone down. Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to say a few things relating to this debate. This is the opportunity for Members to touch on general matters of Government policy and matters concerning their constituencies. The debate will go on up to Wednesday next week. So, those who are not ready today need not rush. You can get time to prepare yourselves. The debate will continue until next week because we would like as many Members as possible to contribute. But also taking into account that many Members may want to make their maiden speeches, I will be allotting seven minutes to each presentation. At the sixth minute the bell will be rung to give you notice that you should wind up. After that, there will be no more notice; we shall switch the microphone to somebody else. I am not yet familiar with all your names so could you please mention your names and constituencies when you get up to speak.  
The other matter is that when you have contributed substantively on this debate, you may not do so again except by way of information or clarification. Those who are not able to contribute to this particular debate will have an opportunity again during the Budget debate, which will also be of a general nature. So, those who miss this one will still have an opportunity. I now call upon hon. Alice Alaso to make her presentation.

MS. ALASO ALICE (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make a contribution to this State of the Nation Address, which has probably been regarded, the most sober, the most precise and the most impressive. 

I want to express a reservation that was portrayed in the State of the Nation Address that hinges around the security issue. What I saw of the State of the Nation Address was a presentation by the President, of something similar to his action plan, and also a commitment to his manifesto during the presidential campaign.  During the presidential campaign, the President told the people of Teso that he would disarm the Karimojong. Unfortunately, a day after the elections or so, the Karimojong raided and have never gone back since.  

The President rightly informed us that it is the duty of the state to protect and to provide security for its citizens. What, however, disturbs me is that all through the State of the Nation Address, nothing was mentioned about disarmament! I kept wondering whether the President knew that in the last two months the state of the displaced people in Teso in the camps has reached lamentable levels. 

Up to 80,000 people live in the camps in Katakwi district as we talk now. The situation is pathetic in terms of sanitation, feeding, shelter and all that you can think about. What beats my understanding is whether it is possible anyway to implement the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), UPE, and fighting AIDS in such a situation. A situation where 80,000 Ugandans are not benefiting at all; where they are driven away from their homes without a sense of security and no sustainable solution; where nobody else seems to know or even to try to make a commitment of when they will go back home!  
I would like to state here that it seemed to me that either there is a lack of commitment on the part of Government or on the part of the President himself, to fulfil the promises he made to the people of Teso during his campaign. And also, there is a lack of commitment by the State to provide the necessary security. By keeping silent, I feel that nobody is committed and it is not part of Government policy to ensure that these people are protected and that a lasting solution is found.  

I would, therefore, like to appeal to His Excellency the President to bring about a situation that will work out modalities for a sustainable solution, the disarmament of the Karimajong, and the provision - (Interruption) 

MR.AMURIAT OBOI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform Members that, although there seems to be a security presence in the areas neighbouring Karamoja, raids continue unabated. Women are being raped; cases of cattle being driven away in the direction of Karamoja are very prominent. 

Just over the weekend, the county headquarters in Kapelebyong was attacked. I have a fear that if this continues without restriction, the place might be overrun.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS. ALASO: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, I just want to wind up. I was in the process of appealing to his Excellency the President to make a commitment to the people of Teso. Since it is the business of the state to ensure security for all its citizens, he should provide an approach that will sustain peace and security, and also ensure that at the end of the day, the people of Teso benefit from these plans that we have for the nation like the rest of the Ugandans. Thank you very much.

MAJ. KAZOORA JOHN (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am back to Parliament, elected popularly by the people of Kashari. And their election was based on my conduct on the Floor of this House and also service-delivery in my constituency. Therefore, I want to tell certain quarters that I am not on a military parade. I am an honorable Member of Parliament, elected popularly by my people in Kashari, and not with 40 or 90 votes, but over 26,000 votes. 
I would also like to inform those very quarters that they should be aware of the Powers and Privileges of Members of Parliament Act, 1964. I imagine they have got the message and -(Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Madam Speaker, we are debating the President’s Address. I read and internalized it very well overnight. May I get clarification from hon. Kazoora where in that Address that is being talked about, as he said, to be parading and all that he is talking about?  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, if hon. Kiraso had only been a little bit patient, I was just giving a preamble and I am certainly coming to that - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kazoora, I hope you do not make a very lengthy preamble. It might eat into your time.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I have made my point. But she should have also got your message because you said this is a time we debate generally and touch on any matter.  

However, I would like to say that the President’s speech has come late, a month after we have been here. And we also have a Budget that we must pass by a certain time. It is the President’s speech that begins Parliament. So, when we do not keep the time, the public should not condemn us and say that we did not do our work. This is the time when the speech has been given to us.  

On the first page in the President’s speech, after a short, dry sentence of congratulating us, he goes straight on and mentions violence. I would also like to re-echo what hon. Kiraso said. In Ankole we say, “when the head of a family walks while bending, the children imitate him.” We also say, “when you steal when you are holding a child on the back, you are telling this child to do the same.” 

Where is this violence coming from? Why has the Kalangala Action Plan not been explained? What were its instructions? Why has the issue of Kakooza Mutale not been explained? What force was he leading in Mbarara, in Kashari? And this army that was deployed all over the country, who is its Commander-in-Chief? 
Why was the Army beating people, and what action has been taken? Where is this violence coming from? What is the source of this violence?   

I want the people of Kashari to hear this. They were nonplussed to hear that of all people, a man they take as a terrorist, in the names of Kakooza Mutale, was mentioned on a Cabinet list. Whether he withdrew or not, it is immaterial. (Interruption).

MR. MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what hon. Kazoora is saying, we have heard of cases where some of those who were not even among the candidates were moving around with guns and there many soldiers intimidating people who were candidates. I had a case in my constituency, Mawokota North, where somebody by the names of Zimula Mugwanya used to move around with soldiers. We reported this matter to the Police. This is similar to what hon. Kazoora is talking about when he mentions the Kalangala Task Force. 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, to allow healthy debate, if I keep allowing these points of information, then my time should be taken into consideration. Otherwise, I will stop them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to you. Will you accept hon. Awori’s supplementary point?

MAJ. KAZOORA: As long as my time is taken care of.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we will only give you one minute extra.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you colleague on the Floor. I would like to inform my hon. colleague that in my constituency, Samia-Bugwe North, Major Kakooza Mutale came with his normal battalion. I stood my ground and chased him out of the district (Laughter).

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I do not want hon. Members to think that I am emotional or I am bitter, but if we are to build this nation, we should also learn from where we are coming from. During the Idi Amin days, we had people like ‘kill me quick’, ‘no parking’ and ‘colonel suicide’. We had all those but I am seeing them now in NRM in the names of Kakooza and others I do not want to mention, but whom you know.
MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Kazoora in order to start alleging that Kakooza Mutale is somebody bordering on being a criminal, when we know that the gentleman honourably removed his name from the list -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, can you protect me please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: If the hon. Member has a very strong reason that he felt he had to give to the President about Kakooza Mutale and he has not given it, is he in order to stand here to start taking the time of this Parliament and hammer on something which is not worth it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member is discussing the question of violence, which was talked about by the President.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I am only surprised that the hon. Member is the only one living in Jerusalem and does not know what is going on. 

The Constitution is very clear; the NRM came here and nobody told them to review the Constitution, but they did it and the Constitution was promulgated. We must live by that. The Constitution talks about the right to stand for any position in the country and the right to express your support. Why should certain people suffer simply because they stood for an election or simply because I supported a candidate of my choice? That cannot be democracy! Take it or leave it, but it is bad!  

I, John Kazoora, representing Kashari, say that the worst shame is to get the whole chairman of the Movement and the President almost becoming a campaign manager for candidates!  That, to me and to my people, was a very big let down, and more so in the constituencies where he showed open support and he was defeated. It was bad! If it is individual merit, let it be, otherwise it should not look like a duck, walk like a duck, quack like a duck and be something else! 

This presidential speech is supposed to give us the timetable on what Government thinks are the priorities. This is what I am used to. Because of what we intend to do as Government, at the end of the presidential speech, we must have priorities. I did not see these ones. I hope it will not cause us a problem. Because of this problem of supporting candidates, you heard His Excellency say, “I do not mind if you vote somebody who sleeps in Parliament but wakes up to vote the Movement” as if we are being attacked by political sleeping sickness which I saw at the Mulungushi International Club, and indeed the pictures said what they did!  

On bribing voters and wining and dinning with them, which is also in that speech, as I said, we take examples. There are many times the President has called the Movement caucus to wine and dine, for support or votes. If that stops, then we shall also take the example.  

Lastly, the people connected with State House; a certain Major General - I can even name him outside Parliament, and a powerful woman connected to State House, where did they get the billions or millions of shillings that they used in Mbarara Municipality, in Kashari and in Bukanga? Where was that money coming from? And why aren’t the authorities really concerned in investigating this kind of business?  

Since time is over, I will have time in the subsequent debates. But on the question of immunization which the hon. Member talked about, and the President’s concern was that it went down, he has categorically said that he wants a big Cabinet for political supervision. Where were these supervisors?  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up, hon. Member.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

DR. NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I am very grateful for this opportunity to address this House.  Kagoma Constituency is one of the constituencies that voted overwhelmingly for the President of Uganda. We gave him 39,383 votes.  

I want to focus on three points. I have noticed in Article 125 of the Constitution that this country is supposed to have a National Planning Authority. 

I am not very sure whether it is in existence. If it is not in existence, that is where the problem of planning for this country begins. 
If there is no planning authority then the question that follows is, who is planning for this country?  

I may be a bit old fashioned, but during the 60s and 70s, all over Africa there used to be documents that were called Integrated National Development Plans. In the case of Uganda, I am not sure whether the President’s manifesto is the development plan for this country, or whether the sector development plans, which I have read like PMA, constitute the National Development Plan. 

It is important for us to pull these things together to really understand which direction we are moving in. In short, I am suggesting that it is high time we got a national integrated development plan that may guide future planning in this country for the next five years. This is just a suggestion. 

I am generally acquainted with the Asian Tiger Economies, and I think that there is need for us to really find out why these countries have developed so fast and we have not developed quickly. By 1952, Ghana was ahead of the two Koreas in terms of development. Uganda was ahead in 1962 but we cannot manufacture razor blades or safety pins.  Planning in my view should go hand in hand with an ideological position.  What is the ideology for development in this country?

In a book entitled “The Movement’s long struggle for the Liberation of Uganda” this is what he says: “You asked me what I thought has been the main problem of the NRM system?”  And he answers: “The main problem has been lack of ideological development. For some reasons, the Secretariat has not been able to attend to the problem of ideological development.  All of you people are potential cadres but being a political leader is not the same as being a cadre.” The question is, are we political leaders or cadres?

The President complained about the RDCs, MPs and CAOs for not being active in the immunization campaigns. I think the problem is that some RDCs have been involved in manufacturing rumours about various political leaders and this has contributed to violence in some constituencies. 
I hope hon. Gilbert Bukenya will handle them firmly so that they don’t disturb us. 

The last contribution I am worried about is the state of equitable development –(Interruption). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up!
 
DR. NABWISO:   The state is supposed to take measures to bring about balanced development in rural and urban areas.  It is my submission that this matter be tackled seriously.  For example, the whole of the Eastern Region doesn’t have a state university. If you look at the way the State University - the number of secondary schools and primary schools are distributed, it shows that some areas are not well served.   In my own constituency, we have one Government secondary school. In short, I am saying we should have a statement from the Prime Minister on how the equitable distribution of resources is being addressed.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

DR. SSEMPANGI KEFA (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, hon. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion. It is very encouraging that the President presented a considerable speech to this nation. I have chaired the National Council for Children and the issues of children concern me very much.  

There has been an issue of immunization and I was happy to see the President raising his voice when he came to this point.  We have in place the Uganda National Plan of Action for Children and in this area, the performance for Uganda has been high. In 1990 at the UN Convention for children, Uganda performed highly in the area of education. 

It is true Immunization hit around 80 percent, then it went down to 28 percent. One of the causes is that the frontline workers and the extension workers in the Ministry of Health and Gender who were close to the people were reduced to the districts. It would be profitable to raise the number of extension workers and have them facilitated.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr. Wabudeya):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much hon. Ssempangi.  
First of all, I want to appreciate the concern of the Head of State on the declining coverage for routine immunization.  I wish to state that the coverage for routine immunization for the six killer diseases has gone down. I want to inform members that the Ministry of Health has already taken steps to make sure that routine immunization for the six killer diseases is addressed. We have carried out a number of studies and discussions with the -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I appeal to the Members of the Cabinet to allow the member to make her contributions and then they can respond substantively at the end of the debate.

DR. WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me say something about the numbers of staff that the hon. Member was making reference to, then I will reserve the rest of the response to a later time.  It is true that when we decentralized, a number of group employees were laid off, including the cadres handling the frontline exercise of immunization. We have made a provision under the Primary Health Care Funds to provide the necessary frontline manpower for the immunization exercise. So hon. Kefa Ssempangi, your worry has been addressed.  Thank you.

DR. SSEMPANGI:  Thank you hon. Minister for that information.  Madam Speaker, another area has been the forceful media.  One time we had Radio West de-campaigning immunization.  Unfortunately there was no action taken against this radio.

MR. BYABAGAMBI:  Point of information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No!  Are you taking it on behalf of the Media Council? 

MR. BYABAGAMBI:  Order. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order already.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to allege that it is Radio West which was de-campaigning the vaccination program when in fact it was another radio? (Interjection) - I am not going to listen. Is he in order?
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kagonyera, can you inform the House which radio actually decampaigned the Vaccination program (Laughter)?

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think hon. Ssempangi was raising a fact that there was a radio that de-campaigned immunization.  But the issue is that it was not Radio West, it was Great Africa Radio. 

MR. WADRI:  Clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let hon. Ssempangi proceed.  The point is, there was a radio that did de-campaign immunization in this country.  So hon. Ssempangi is right.

DR. SSEMPANGI: I thank you for your protection Madam Speaker. Some of us are old in -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just make your presentation.

DR. SSEMPANGI:  Madam Speaker, this is my first speech, and in those days, a maiden speech was not interrupted (Laughter).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

DR. SSEMPANGI:  Madam Speaker, we need to control the information that comes from the media and goes out to the general public. The negative perception our people have when it comes to HIV/AIDS and immunization is associated with the death of some of the infants. In this country, it is on record that Uganda has 38 percent of our children being stunted. To be stunted is not only a matter of nutrition, but also lack of early stimulation of the brain.  The speech of the President seems to be very quiet on the issue of early childhood development.  UPE is okay, but when these children are stunted, it increases the number of dropouts - (Interjection). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Ssempangi, if you are going to continue taking information, I will cut off your time.  Please continue. 

MR. WADRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the hon. Member of Parliament that much as remarkable registration has been noted in UPE, many children out there are not provided for under this program.  You will remember that a week ago, ministries of Internal Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development hatched a plan to round up a formidable number of street children. But there is no deliberate program or strategy undertaken by Ministry of Education to enlist street children for the UPE program.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssempangi please wind up.

DR. SSEMPANGI:  Yes, I am winding up.  My concern was on early childhood.  Those are children between the ages of zero and six years. I want to appeal to Government, and especially the Ministry of Education -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, let us have order please.  Can you please stop carrying out consultations?

DR. SSEMPANGI:  We should establish more nursery schools in rural areas to cater for our children who are in danger of being stunted. Thank you very much.

MR. BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you Madam Speaker. I scored 84 percent, the second highest number of votes in this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, allow the Member to make his presentation.

MR. BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, my point is on page number 4 of the President’s Speech.  There is where he noted that the competitiveness of the private sector is undermined by poor delivery of utility services and poor transport.  I will not read everything but my point is on the weaknesses in tax administration and corruption.  Madam Speaker, here it would have read: “high taxes and favorable taxes and corruption.” 

I have been working in the private sector for a long time and I own a consortium of factories. I want to inform members that one of my factories is being closed because of the high taxes. How shall we compete with the goods that are being imported from outside when government is not protecting the local manufacturers? I manufacture disposable syringes in this country, no wonder the immunisation rate has gone down because I closed that factory.  

The taxes on imported disposable syringes are zero, VAT zero rated, Import Duty zero and Import License Commission zero. When it comes to the raw materials for the disposable syringes manufactured locally, Import Duty is 7 percent, VAT 17 percent, Import License Commission 2 percent, and the packaging material attracts excise duty, of 10 percent.  I wrote a heap of letters to the Ministry of Finance, and Commissioner General Uganda Revenue Authority and got tired. I closed the factory and sent off fifty workers, and twenty of them were from my constituency. Those are lost votes. I am shifting this factory to Malawi where the tax policies are favourable. I hope the Minister concerned is hearing what I am saying –(Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that he is a Member of Parliament, there is a chance that his factory can be re-opened when the Committee of Finance discusses the Finance Bill, and all those issues are re-examined. 
 
MR. KUTESA: I thank you, hon. Byabagambi for giving way. I would like to inform him that before he undertakes the relocation of his industry to Malawi, he gets informed that there is no taxation on all raw materials in this Budget.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byabagambi, be specific.

MR. BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, hon. Members, for the information given. But I have to tell you that I started writing in 1994, now this is 2001! I do not know how many letters I wrote seven years ago. I am surprised that the Government has only come to know the importance of such a factory at this late hour!

I don’t want to talk a lot but I have to say that, it is not only me who is affected, there are many factories outside there, which are closing down because of high taxation, smuggling and corruption. The Tax Officials don’t interpret the Bills of Finance they give us and they take the laws into their hands. By the time you move from a PRO, to a Commissioner General, you take five to ten days. Madam Speaker, you know what it means in terms of money and time.  

I agree with the President that the points he noted down undermine the competitiveness of the private sector. I propose that government should look into the high taxes imposed on local manufacturers, which is important for a private sector. Some protectionism is also necessary on our infant industries.  Thank you Madam Speaker.

MRS. LYDIA BALEMEZI (Women Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you and those other Members who have been elevated to high offices in this country.  I wish to commend the people of Uganda for the wise choice they made in electing His Excellency the President of this country. I thank him for his address to the nation at the Official Opening of the 7th Parliament.

Allow me to comment on the President’s address.  As many people have said, it was a well thought out address that most of us, especially the people of Mukono, are eagerly waiting to see put in action.

On page 5 of His Excellency’s Speech, the President talked of the increase in poverty in the northern region from 60 to 66 percent. I hope that when Government starts putting its implementation on the ground, they will start with those areas that are hit by poverty. I mean implementing the PMA programs - (Interjection)- I think I am well informed because I read the whole report. 

Poverty Eradication has been a great problem in most of these regions and I fear when I read that the President has already put 100 million dollars on re-stocking in the northern region. Time and again we are informed of cattle rustling in the same region.  I wonder whether it won’t be fit for Government to turn from cattle re-stocking to agricultural production so that in the North we start thinking of giving them seeds for planting. These are crops, which we grow, much as –(Interruption) - we talk about coffee with pride and comfort, cotton growing is dying out steadily.  Cotton farmers find a lot of problems in selling it and as a result, they turn their efforts to small agricultural crops, which are not profit making.  

Some of these historical crops used to give our people high income in cotton production. So with the dying out of cotton especially in Mukono and Kayunga in Bugerere side, not to mention the eastern region, l would like to see government addressing the cotton-growing problem. Our people who used to depend on cotton are now becoming poor because they have no cash crop to depend on.  I will therefore, wish to appeal to government to look into the possibility of attracting investors to invest in cotton growing and ginning and if possible weaving.  

The way our people used to respond positively on government programmes especially in agriculture was through Parish and Village Chiefs.  But as you are aware, the LCs, are somehow handicapped they cannot force the community to grow cotton. So I would like to appeal to government that we remunerate a little bit better these Parish Chiefs and Village Chiefs so that they can do their work effectively. 

On Health, the President talked of immunisation and what has been put in the constituencies and sub-counties is the construction clinics with theatres. I think it is high time our Ministry of Health looked into a National Malaria Immunisation Programme.  As much as they bring these mosquito nets, the mosquitoes do not only bite us when we are in bed but even here in Parliament. So we should have a National Malaria Immunisation Programme to eradicate malaria.

Finally, I would like to appeal to the President as he spearheaded the HIV/AIDS campaign to see that people become aware of its spread. He should look into this problem which is coming up and many people hate to talk about it.   This is rape and defilement between fathers and daughters, fathers and daughters-in-law.  It is there, we hear about it but government has not come up with a policy or a law to curb it.  So I would urge government to clear the law on this because it is starting to become rampant.
As I conclude, the top-down approach that we are having in most of our Ministries is failing us.  Our technocrats demand a lot of allowances, which finish all the money that we budget for here.  So I would wish to see that we start using these local councils –Parish Chiefs and Village Chiefs to have most of the government programmes implemented right from the villages.  I thank you.

MR. AWORI SIRYOYI: (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise to oppose the motion. I also like to take this opportunity to congratulate my former rival the President for using all the tactics and resources at his disposal to deny us the possibilities of occupying State House. -(Laughter)-. Obviously I would have been much more pleased to be the one making the speech to the nation. -(Laughter)-.  However, on a serious note, I was taken aback with the speech to the nation.  It is a ceremonial occasion and a serious message to the nation but it looked like His Excellency the President was addressing a Press Conference.  He kept deviating from the main text, which we did not have the privilege of having in advance. However, I come back to main text of his speech:

The statistics and economics in which he based his text were fraud. His Excellency the President gave us statistics on HIV spread that it has gone down from a certain figure to 6.8.  No, there is no such a report in the world.  Maybe His Excellency the President was talking about the rate of infection.  That I would agree with him.  However, I still challenge his source.  Has he tested everybody in this country for the past five years to confirm that it there has been a decrease?  Or those people are dead or cured?

I would like to take information only from one source and he is not here with us.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Cabinet in this Parliament represents that source. 

THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Awori for giving way.  First of all, the only information I want to give hon. Awori and the House is standard information. 

There are established scientific methods of sampling population and those methods were used in establishing the statistics that the President used in his State of the Nation speech. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR. AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his information. Now, I can see why the President misled us!   Madam Speaker, I would like to go to more serious issues portrayed to us as information from State House. 

This House and the previous House have been concerned with security of this country. I was very disturbed by what the President said in his speech that: “We intercepted the troops of LRA in Sudan”.  On what basis did we go to Sudan to intercept the LRA?  We have got regulations here governing the deployment of troops!  If it was a matter of what we call, “hot pursuit”, that is taken care of under international law.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of information.

MR. AWORI: I will not take information.  Madam Speaker, I would like to take information from my colleague but that time will be subtracted from my allotment.   That is why I would like to continue. 

Madam Speaker, that bothers me a lot!  At one time in this House, we were told by His Excellency the President that we went to Congo for the same purpose and since then, Congo has cost us not less than half a billion shillings a day. Yet from time to time, we learn that there has been this assault, that incident by LRA or by ADF.  Which means, our money has been going down the drain! (Interruptions)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, aware that I am hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine representing UPDF; aware that the defence of the country is a costly venture which does not only cost money, but costs lives; concerned that hon. Awori holding the Floor, is not a strategist to the level recognized by this country in defence; knowing that hon. Awori was a former rebel, who was forgiven at a great cost in terms of time, money and effort; considering the fact that the defence of Ugandans is in the hands of the President and all the machinery that he has at his disposal for the defence of the people, is the hon. Member in order, first, to say that Ugandans have no right to defend themselves against enemies wherever they are; two, to say that money went down the drain for defending the interest of this country?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I did not hear him say that Ugandans have no right to go where they want. And I believe that in calculating what has gone down the drain, he is using his experience while in rebellion to calculate that money -(Laughter).

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Awori to clarify to me whether he is aware that hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine was once an Army Commander of the UPDF, in which Army we have seen the purchase of junk helicopters, junk tanks, under-sized uniforms, rotten food, with all those strategists; is hon. Awori aware of that? (Laughter).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, this is an honorable House where we have different ranks of soldiers, different hon. Members – small and big – in their different responsibilities –(Interjection)- I am saying, ranks.  There are small ones and big ones; it is a fact!  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order please!  Let us have some order please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Major General.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you.  Is it in order for hon. Member, Maj. Kazoora, to raise matters of recent history in connection with the Army and refer them to the time when I was Army Commander; when he was and he is still a serving officer of the Army, when he is not known for having ever raised those matters before an appropriate forum?  Is he in order to raise them now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order.  Please, proceed hon. Awori!

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know how I am going to do this but I was asked for clarification on certain specific matters. I do not know whether your ruling applies to his reply or to hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine’s.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, it applies to both. Hon. Kazoora already provided his own answers. Proceed with the presentation.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Now I can address very clearly the issues raised by my hon. colleague here. Yes, it is true I was once a rebel; so was he for five years -(Laughter). I may not have attained any ranks; he obtained the ranks, no problem. My concern here is that, public resources have been wasted, lives of Ugandans have been disposed of like tissue.

MR. BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few minutes ago, hon. Awori said that he does not know where His Excellency the President got the statistics of HIV and whatever method – that he does not understand the method the President used. I want hon. Awori to clarify to me the method he used or the source of his information that, half a billion shillings is being used per day.

MR.AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is quite obvious that with empirical studies, there are certain lines established.  You can determine the rate of infection but you cannot determine the rate of decrease in the numbers of HIV affected people. They are either dead or they have been cured and neither has happened in this case.

I do not want to be taken back. Number one, I would like to go back to the security and capital of this country. The economy is going down and I am worried about that. Secondly, there are certain issues which must be addressed by the President. He should tell us where he is taking us. We have a serious issue of globalisation. He never addressed it correctly or in a manner that I would consider transparent. He never told us; are we getting into globalisation or not? What are the stages we have taken to prepare us to get into globalisation? I wanted to hear that but instead he was talking about coffee. Who does not know about coffee? We know the problems of coffee, but you cannot sell your instant coffee in the world market when there are all these cartels! You have to penetrate the cartels of coffee before you can get in.
There is another issue of corruption. The President never mentioned it at all. As I speak now, and as he was speaking in the Conference Centre, we do not know who owns our Nile Conference Centre at the moment. It was sold to a group of people who never paid up. Have we got our shares back? Can they tell us who owns that hotel? Do we own it, or is it the Arabs or a consortium of people? These are the issues I expected him to tell us. We gave shares to a consortium of people including a Tunisian company. To date, those people have not paid up; they are gone! Who owns it? Where is the money we put in? Who took it? They came here, pocketed the money and took off. 

Westmont came here in a consortium of certain people allegedly investing in UCB. They took off with an average.  So many people were collecting commissions: “So and so’s wife”, “so and so’s son”, “so and so’s in-law”, “so and so’s brother”. The same thing happened with the Conference Centre.  

I have been pointing out the flawed procurement system in the Ministry of Defence for the last six years. Year in, year out, I cry that people are stealing our money, allegedly for buying weapons for us when they are pocketing the money for themselves! Last week they again delivered junk trucks, as if the junk aircrafts and junk tanks were not enough. We have to pay for rotten food from South Africa. Who ate it? Who ordered for it? Who paid for it? These are the issues we want to know about from the President. 

According to the Auditor General, we are losing not less than Shs.500 million. Nobody can account for it. How many people have we prosecuted for corruption, including his immediate family? We want to know.

MR.ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Erute North, Lira): Thank Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity, being the first time I am addressing this august House, to congratulate you and the Speaker for attaining the positions which you hold, and everybody else – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you please use your microphone. Move closer to it.

MR.ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the President’s concern about poverty in Northern Uganda but my major concern is that I do not know whether we are aware that the cause of the poverty in the North has been one factor, and that is, insecurity. Much has been said and much has been done. Much has been discussed about security and insecurity in this country, but alas, my people in the North will never benefit from the resources we are supposed to benefit from!  

I come from a constituency which is a little bit unfortunate to border Apac, Gulu and former Kigtum which is now Pader district. It is unfortunate also that it is in sectors. One sub-county is in the south of Lira municipality and two others are about 30 miles away from each other. Unfortunately again because the two sub counties are protruding into Acholi land, they give a good chance for the rebels crossing from Gulu to Pader district to use it as a bridge. And for 15 years now, my people have been sleeping in the bush. We did not take trouble to go to the camps because we found it unnecessary since the people of Acholi were suffering a lot in the camps. So we decided to take to the bushes at night and during the rains and then come back in morning to try to fight against poverty, which unfortunately has defeated us.  

It is true that if we want to address poverty in northern Uganda, and possibly in Eastern Uganda, security matters should be taken very seriously. My people and I believe that if the responsible authority like the UPDF have failed, let everybody in the north be given the gun and then we seal up the border with the Sudan to see how these rebels will come into Uganda because so far, there is no alternative.  This war which has caused us a lot of suffering, has benefited very many people in the – (Interruption)

MR.OTTO: Historically, I happen to border him. I am from Aruu county, in Pader district. Just to hint on the insecurity bit, I was in the constituency about five days ago at the peak of Rwomushana’s affairs with the voters. I want to inform the Member that much as the rebels are the cause of insecurity, another kind of insecurity has arisen from such kind of district leaders like the RDC. 

For example in Pajule sub-county, we have one mamba to guard the population, but because of the way the RDC has been behaving, the mamba has now turned to guard the RDC, leaving the voters vulnerable to insecurity. Now, who causes insecurity? I am just updating your version of insecurity. The situation on the ground has changed a bit with the Rwomushana scandal. Thank you.

MR.ANGIRO: Much as the information is true, I think the insecurity in the north of late is a concern because our brothers from Karamoja have proved a threat to us again. As a result, many of our people have sometimes found it unnecessary to rear cattle because they still believe that the animals may be taken away any time like in the past. This is again a concern, which, if this House does not address seriously, poverty in the north will be a means of living for others.  

We have evidence that at the moment we do not benefit from what we have produced. My people are hard working.  If you want beans, maize, sim-sim, organic cotton, come to my constituency. It has put Uganda on the world map for organic cotton and sim-sim. But alas, my people have not benefited from their sweat! This is because the market issue has never been addressed properly. I do not know where we are heading. At the moment we are told mechanisms have been put in place to ensure that our produce will be bought. But immediately after production, no attention is paid to the price. It is therefore, a demand and supply problem. So, I do not know whether we are going to alleviate the situation in the north. 

We are going to embark on cotton production, and I believe that in offices, allowances or incentives are always given. But you imagine, from the time a farmer plants cotton to when he harvests and sells it, there is no other source of money! Are we going to put in place some money that the farmers can benefit from? We can initiate commercial programmes so that within the time frame, they are at least getting some money from some sources. Unless we do that, we are not going to succeed in these programmes which the President has put in place. 

Even other Ministries like Health, we have been talking about the hazard of AIDS. 
Other families are now without aid. How are they going to manage yet only children are left in the house with no proper programmes to ensure that these households are assisted? 

We are now too poor to manage education at higher level because there is no money in the hands of the farmers. In the past, children of every Ugandan used to enjoy the benefit of going to HSC and the university without paying. But now, what is happening? Is that trend going to continue?  I think if this trend continues, we are heading for yet another break-up like in Sudan. We may therefore declare in future that the northern Uganda can become another country within Uganda so that the world attention is focused to the forum of this poor and poverty-stricken area. Thank you.

DR.NKUUHE JOHNSON (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate my colleagues for having survived the wrath of the electorate, and you, Madam Speaker, and your colleague and Members of the Front Bench, especially, hon. Okumu Ringa (Laughter).  Because where the Front Bench has gained we have also gained because he was consuming a lot of time. 

I would like to congratulate the President on his re-election and for this speech, and also to thank the bureaucrats who wrote the speech. It is a good speech, and I like the way it was read to us. 

If we put the speech in context, I think we were slightly better because every time you open a newspaper, turn on a radio or the Internet, it is always bad news about Uganda. It is as if we are on trial! I know the stories about Transparency International moving us from 8th to 3rd position among the corrupt countries. We were trying to sink that in and then this Congo probe started and then the time bomb of the court case on UCB. So, we can only pray for our country that we overcome all this and we come out stronger because as a Movement supporter, I hate the culture of silence.   Because, every time you keep quiet, it means things are okay. I think we should be brave enough; we should not wait for the opposition to occupy the high moral ground. I think it is our duty, for us in the Movement, to ensure that when things are wrong we put them right (Interruption).
MR.AWORI: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I am seeking clarification from him. He referred to the opposition gaining high moral ground. Who is the opposition?

DR.NKUUHE: I am on record for having said that. It is my belief that the big support of the Movement should be an opportunity to point out things that are right, and when they are wrong, you also point them out. For me to say moral high ground, I do not think hon. Aggrey Awori says anything good about the Government, so that is what I was saying. We might turn hon. Aggrey Awori into a hero if we prove that all the things he has been saying are right, then we will make him occupy the moral high ground. I do not think that should happen. But anyway, let me continue with my speech. I encourage my colleagues to speak up but to give constructive criticism so that we develop our young democracy. 

I am going to concentrate my contribution on two paragraphs of page 12 because I want to give others an opportunity.  The middle says “fruits”, but actually I am not going to talk about fruits. For the first time, I was very happy that the President talked about the tools that can make the country move forward. A modern country these days has to operate like one, and modern countries operate in certain ways.  

Malaysia is a country that has a vision to turn into a developed country by the year 2020. They have Vision 2020.  We copied that and we have Vision 2025. But if you compare what Malaysia did and what we have done, you can see why somebody was asking why they are ahead of us and we are not catching up. The reason is simple. They had a vision, they put an institution to implement the vision and they put in resources to actualize the vision. What did we do with our plan, to our Vision 2025?  If you read about the Malaysia Vision 2020, it is so clear.  I read it five years ago but I can still remember it. I have read our Vision 2025 so many times but I still cannot internalize it because it is so complicated. That is true; it does not tell you what exactly you are supposed to do! 

In those other countries where the Vision is very clear and very simple, they pick what they call ‘flagship industries’, certain sectors that they then support.  
They say, “we are going to support this sector; it will drive us out of poverty.” That is the way they do it. Malaysia did it, Mauritius is doing it, Ireland, although it is a European country, was also a poor country and it has taken the same approach.  

I am hoping that the SMART Partnership conference that is going to take place here, from the 18th - 20th will be used to share knowledge on how to really develop real smart partnerships based on knowledge.  The reason I liked these two paragraphs was that, the Government is determined to strengthen information and communication technology.  Government is aware of the potential for exports of ICT; it has looked at India and so on. 

He gives an example of people doing work here for American companies - actually they are Canadian companies - so that you have accountants doing the work, they send it over the Internet or by fax or what have you, so that the work is processed in America and they take advantage of that.  That is called “distance working” or “Tele-working”. But there are many other benefits of this technology: education, agriculture and government information.  Our people need to know the information, but what are the challenges?  If we are to achieve all that, we need to be very systematic.  

One, we need a policy: an information, communication, technology policy (ICT policy). Two, we need an institution to implement that policy. Three, we need Government to be open and to have all this information to give to businesses and to be very transparent. Ladies and Gentlemen the policy is being written. I had the opportunity to look at some of these suggestions and I am sure when it comes here, we shall support a lot of these recommendations because we have a chance. 

We understand the technology in this Parliament.  A lot of Members here, I am so glad, understand the benefit of technology, but we would like to spread this to as many people as possible because we have to compete. It is the reality. The world is globalized, and if you are to compete and win, you really have to take this modern technology.  
So, I would like to thank the Government for having seen the light, and I hope the Prime Minister or somebody will be given the responsibility to lead this because if you give ideas and you do not ask somebody to be in charge, then these ideas die. And we need vision. These things need vision because computers in Uganda are there, there are very many but why are you not using them?  
The vision has to be right! We have the people but we are disorganized. Once we organize ourselves, I can tell you the Malaysians of this world, we have a chance to catch up with them. But if we do not, if we think we are going to remove poverty through agriculture, I have to pray for you. And if I had a fax connection to heaven, I would really pray very hard.

Poverty is eradicated through knowledge, agriculture, job creation for youths, open Government, fighting corruption. That way we are making a right start. I hope that when the ICT policy comes for parliamentary support, we shall give it the support and an agency that can see this policy through so that Uganda can modernize and progress. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR. SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the President’s speech, he was very much concerned about HIV but there is a fear that there are other diseases that go unnoticed. Madam Speaker, my constituency is only 14 kilometers from Kampala here - Bweyogerere, Kireka and Mpererwe - but City Council is depositing rubbish in my area at a very high rate. When it rains the garbage goes into drinking water and as I speak to you now, we have an outbreak of dysentery. 

We have tried everything, all avenues, to see how we can stop City Council from throwing garbage at this place of ours, but we have not got any help. City Council claims that they are the owners of the land, so they have the mandate to throw rubbish.  Madam Speaker, if there is a chance for this honorable House to visit the place, all sorts of bad things are thrown in this area, like condoms, and expired sweets; our children in the constituency are busy playing with these. It is really a very serious situation that needs urgent address.  I beg to sit down.

MR. SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, having read through the President’s speech, I can say it is impressive. The challenge here is for the President and the Executive to put these good ideas into reality. I would like to address myself to some issues raised here. I have noted that the President also noted that the Electoral Commission is doing a clean up of the voters’ register.  I would like to recommend that we reactivate the idea of the national identity cards so that we can avoid multiple or double voting.  I think this can also help us in that line.  

Addressing myself to the program of Universal Primary Education, I see the President noted that there is an increase in enrolment; but the challenge before us is how to sustain these numbers, without having many drop-outs or drop-ins.  There are those who you think are in class but they are drop-ins and drop-outs. This is a big challenge to us.  

When I go to the issue of 40,000 extra teachers, this is a good idea but the schools up-country are in an appalling situation. So, my view is that as we think about increasing the number of teachers, the Ministry of Education should properly look at balancing the teachers such that rural schools or upcountry schools can benefit out of the increase of more teachers. Sometimes I am filled with invisible tears when I go to a school in my constituency and there is only one person on the payroll; but we are increasing more teachers. Therefore, I would like to suggest that as we look at improving the Universal Primary Education, let us look at a program of hardship allowance to teachers in such areas and let there be a deliberate move to make sure that teachers do not only concentrate in Kampala. 

On the issue of increasing productivity, particularly he mentioned the issue of coffee. I think this is a good point but as it was mentioned in his speech that Government could make strategic intervention, one of the areas to strategically intervene in is regulating coffee prices.  Otherwise, my farmers down in the villages are suffering a big deal at the hands of the businessmen.  Therefore, as we look at areas of intervention, we should look at coffee prices, otherwise, we may think of increasing when people are cutting down the coffee plantations.  Thank you very much.
MR. WADRI (Terego County Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself once again to the issue of the escalation of poverty in northern Uganda. Madam Speaker, on Friday after I had a chance of listening to His Excellency’s Speech, I had the privilege of travelling home, to explain the highlights of the President’s Speech to my electorate –(Interjection)- yes, I came back on Monday. I was in Terego over the weekend.  The issue that was clearly raised to me as their representative was the issue of inequity in national distribution of development.
 
For us when we are talking of under-development in the north, there are many factors for - the causes of poverty, yet Government has put in place programs such as, PEP, PMA with various strategies to address and alleviate the problem of poverty among the most needy people.  Nevertheless, when you go down on the ground, you will release that one of the major avenues through which poverty can be alleviated is through development of infrastructure, so that people can be able to market their produce. 

At this point, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that, Terego County is the largest producer of tobacco in this country. Government does realize reasonable amount of revenue from BAT, but Government has never bothered to see how farmers and traders struggle to transport this raw material from Arua to Kampala.  Even at this time, if you had a chance of travelling between Karuma and Arua, you will hardly believe that, that part of the country is part of Uganda, after all these years. 

Time and again we are told we are going to start working on Packwach / Arua or Karuma / Arua road, when is that going to be in place? Even during the presidential election, the people of Arua were taken for a ride. No wonder the results of the presidential election were a clear manifestation of the protest vote of the people of that part of the country.  When the Presidential election was at its peak, around 10 miles along the road of Arua /Pakwach was posted with electric poles, to give the people the impression that Government was serious and Arua was going to get electric services. When the 12th of March came and passed, that was the end, nobody has raised any concern about it, the poles are there hanging. 
It is comparable to a situation; if you want to dress smartly, do you start with buying socks or you first buy a pair of shoes before you go to buying socks? So, from where was Government going to tap the electricity? Up to now there is no clear explanation to the electorate. 

So, it makes the people of northern Uganda, and particularly the people of Arua, to believe that there are gross inequity in as far as the development agenda for this country is concern. 

I am here, Madam Speaker, also to echo the concern over UPE. When you look at UPE, one of the major strategies in UPE is that of alleviating poverty, through capacity building and accessing skills to our children. If you go to Terego, much as people are talking about the remarkable success UPE has made, in 1995 before UPE came into being, Terego county which has got 49 Government aided primary schools was able to push 169 pupils from primary 7 in grade 1; but if you compare that with the results of last year, 2000, Terego county only managed to produce 36 pupils in grade 1. 

So, where is the success we are talking about; where is the quality of education that we are talking about when we are talking about the successes that we have registered under UPE? When you go to some of those places - there is one primary school bordering between Terego and Madi County. It is known as Kaigo primary school. It is fully a Government aided primary school but there is not even a single building. Children are learning under trees. When it rains like it is rainy season now, the school is closed.

So, the issue is, when we are talking about successes, let us also bother to see other parts of this country which are crying. I have heard the hon. Minister saying that you use the money; is that the same thing that has been used for people of Rubabo?  I think the people of Rubabo have benefited from the money from the central confers. Equally so, my people of Terego are entitled as taxpayers, to benefit from this program -(Interruption).

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I do not know whether the hon. Member is aware of the fact that, in this country whether it is money for construction of school buildings or money for any other thing, every district get its own share. And we have decentralized Government. It is the Local Government of the area that is 100 percent responsible for making sure that the money is used properly.  

Madam Speaker, therefore, is the hon. Member in order to allege that there are certain parts of this country which do not benefit from budgetary provisions, when in fact Government policy is clear and the facts are available for the hon. Member to know, how much money his district gets in every aspect of development? Is the hon. Member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri Kassiano, if you can convince this House that certain money was specifically voted for Rubabo to the exclusion of your constituency, please Table it but if you do not, you are out of order.

MR. WADRI KASSIANO: Madam Speaker, I am very aware of the fact that under decentralisation the centre disburses resources to the districts. The point that I was raising was that of inequity in the amount that is disbursed from the centre to the districts.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs. Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The speaker on the Floor is really out of order –(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, just give him the information about the disbursement from your Ministry.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE: Sorry, Madam Speaker.  The information I would like to give to the speaker on the Floor is that, for UPE a kid or a pupil in Kotido, in Kisoro, in Terego in primary one is sponsored at a rate of Shs. 5,000, equity everywhere. Then that one in primary 5 or primary 7 in Kampala, in Mpigi, in Kamuli, in Terego is sponsored at Shs. 8,100. There is no way that a pupil in Rubabo and a pupil in Terego are sponsored at different rates. 
Is he in order to allege and to really confuse this House about a successful project like UPE? Is he in order, Madam?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member is a new Member of this House. He has not yet had the opportunity to attend a Social Services Committee to see how the distribution is made. I am sure when he does, he will appreciate the situation better. Please proceed.

MR. WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that very motherly consideration in your ruling.  

Having said that, I still want to underscore the issue that I have raised. Yes, there may be the issue of the 5,000 shillings per pupil in every school, but there is need for us to account for the disparity. If a pupil in Luwero is given shs. 5000 and a pupil in Terego, or Arua or northern Uganda is given 5000, I am saying that there are other considerations which do not allow these different regions to operate at par! I think that is the issue the Government or the Ministry responsible should be addressing. I am not challenging the issue as to whether children here are given more or whether those in the north are cheated. I am only saying that there is a remarkable difference, which Government needs to address.  

I also wish to address myself to the issue of The programme for Modernization of Agriculture as one of the strategies for poverty eradication. There is a group of people who play a very important role; these are people whom I will call ‘social doctors’ or ‘social workers’. They are the ones who interface with households. I am not so sure how fully involved these people have been, or whether they have been brought on board. Whether it is a programme of health services, whether it is mobilisation of school enrolment, these are the people whose services we need. How effectively are we utilizing them? How well equipped are they? Have we made specific attempts to recruit them because of the important role that they have played? Those are some of the issues.

Lastly, but not least, there was the issue of election violence. In some constituencies, the Resident District Commissioners and the district internal security organs played a very important role. They were very active; canvassing votes left and right. I do not know whether the NRM Secretariat and the Minister responsible for the Presidency are aware that such kinds of anomalies were going on – (Interjections) He was not there, but the office was there. I am talking about the office and not the person who is there right now.  What plans have we got in place, since we are soon going to local council elections? There are also by-elections and elections for districts like Kaberamaido and others. Have we put in place mechanisms to ensure that RDCs restrict themselves to political mobilisation rather than interfere in the free will of people wanting to elect their own leaders? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR. ERESU ELYANU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have two issues to bring up on the President’s State of the Nation Address. More importantly, I would like to open up by saying that on page 2, His Excellency the President talked about the cost of elections. In summary, he said the cost of elections is becoming dangerous for our politics, and at the end of the day it will undermine our democracy. 

I agree, however, the question of the cost of elections arises from the demand of the population, because the services that they expect Government to provide do not reach them. At the time when elections are being held or when campaigns are in process, the people think that it is the time for them to receive such services: They want medical care, and our hospitals do not have those facilities; they want transport and our roads in Kaberamaido, for example, are now maintained by cattle, because there are no road graders. 

If Government were caring about the services that they provide, then the demands that the people have on the candidates when they are looking for votes would now not be an issue. So, the cost of elections would come down.  I do not see any other reason as to why people say, because you are standing, they want you to provide medicine to a particular clinic or hospital!  

During the Presidential campaigns, cost sharing was scrapped. On account of that, medical drugs in hospitals have disappeared. 
May I know what Government has in plan to resuscitate the supply of medicine to our hospitals and health centres?  

In the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President talked about the economy. He stated that there has been economic growth in this country. I suppose one of the parameters of judging economic growth is the question of employment. This matter has not been addressed. What is the level of unemployment in this country? What is the rate of unemployment in this country? What is the level of employment in this country? What is the rate of employment in this country? 

We are talking about foreign capital being brought to be invested in this country, ostensibly to increase the level of employment, apart from other things. But I do not see visible signs that the investment that is coming from abroad is actually generating employment in this country! The evidence is that we have so many people who have been trained, so many people who are now ready for employment, but they are actually not working and not being employed -(Interruption).

DR. NKUUHE: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I would like to inform him about those sectors that came and have got a lot of profit margins, like the telecommunications sector. The Ugandans employed by companies like MTN and Celtel, and who are doing the same work as the expatriates, are getting less than one eighth of what those others from outside are getting. So, not only is it unemployment and employment, but underpayment. We really have a lot of those inequalities.  

MR. ERESU: Madam Speaker, we can now see a systematic discrimination against a Ugandan by those foreign investors in his own country, for the very reason that the Ugandan does not have capital of his own to invest. Our capacity to perform in terms of labour is being conned at the detriment of our people. Their productive capacity is being exhausted every day, until they will be thrown out as scrap, without benefiting. 

I would like to say something about investments. I was so perturbed when hon. Byabagambi said that he had closed the syringe industry, and he gave his reasons. But he dealt only on one aspect of the question. He only talked about the problem of taxes, but I suppose hon. Byabagambi will agree with me if I said that he probably also borrowed money from the bank to start up that syringe industry. 
I think one of the reasons that made hon. Byabagambi close his syringe industry, apart from the taxes, is the rate of interest. The rate of interest on the loans that are advanced to Ugandans in this country is prohibitive for Ugandans who want to invest in this country.  

This country tends to turn its face to foreign investments. When these people invest here, the only benefit we gain from such investments is the physical appearance of the equipment or whatever kind of investment is in this country. The profit is expatriated out of this country. In other words, these people come and invest here and carry away the profit.  

I suppose one engine that propels a capitalistic economy like ours is the profit margin, which is re-invested into the country. May I know whether there are such situations when Government will, as time goes on, ensure that there is a percentage of that profit that must remain within the country to be invested in order to increase the level of economy growth and maximise the utility and the market in the country?  

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, there is a very serious matter in this country. It is the question of our social development. Others have tackled it by saying that their children are not being catered for in schools. I want to point out that for any country to develop, it must have a culture of its own. It must have its own traditions kept.  I do not know whether the Ministry of Culture and Social Development has a plan in mind to shape the culture of our children. 

Culture actually determines our consumption, culture determines our way of behaviour; like it is in India.  They have maintained their culture. The British colonialists went there and India could not bend. That is why India has its own tradition, and it shapes her economic values. Do we have such a situation? The Ministry should not only confine itself to gender balance, gender balance, gender balance! It must also create avenues whereby we have our own identity, which we must defend and stand by, so that we have our own set of values. I thank you.

PROF. BANZAANA KABWEGYERE: (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I am rising for the first time, I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating all those who have assumed high offices as Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the Cabinet, and all of us who went through the mill of the election.  

I will concentrate on three points. The first point is on elections. I do not think it was an accident that the President chose to make it his first and second paragraph in his speech. For those of us who have participated in elections since the 60s, either as observers, as young students in school, or as actual participants like I did participate in 1980, the rise of violence in this country during elections is something to be frightened about.  

Since 1986, we have had elections and during those times, candidates stood and supporters lined behind them. There was no violence then. There was amity. There was even a clause that said that if you did not get overall majority, the two highest candidates would be the ones to be considered in the second round. So, people would disorganize the lines and they would again choose the person they wanted for the area.  

I did a lot of research on this, and I published a book on it. In fact, I argue somewhere in that book that perhaps we were better off with lining up than the secret ballot. Even with the secret ballot, nearly everybody in the village knows who has voted for whom, even now. So, the issue of secrecy is actually still very foreign to us.  There are pressures that insist that we must have secret ballot. But this violence has now come up, and I want to provide an explanation. It may be inadequate, but I have been thinking about it. 

I saw violence in 1980, and I had to run and hide in Kabale, thanks to Bishop Barnabas who gave me sanctuary. I would strongly hate a return to people running away from their constituencies. I am focusing on one point. I said it is not enough, but let us look at it.  

The last Parliament, in my opinion, made an error in passing a law, which allowed individual candidates to hold their own rallies. In the 1996 elections, all candidates came together. We were all there, and we addressed the people. 
Not only did the elections become expensive this time because everyone had to arrange for his or her own rallies, but it divided the population.  

In my constituency we were four. It meant that instead of the 22 rallies we would have had, one in each of the 22 parishes, we held 88 rallies because each one held his own. 22 multiplied by four is 88. That on its own interfered with the economic activity of the population. And the results of that error, in my opinion, have shown in failure of those who were borrowing money to pay back certain debts. I have noticed this in my constituency.  

Because individuals were on their own, they could say anything and people could afford to be violent. They would interfere with other people, whereas, if all of us were at the same rally, talking one after the other, accusations would be less. I hope that this mistake will not be made again. I hope it will be corrected. This is important because this violence also tended to involve the army. The moment you have three, four or five candidates and sections of the army are aligned along those candidates, then we have destroyed the army; we have destroyed order, and the results are obviously dangerous. I believe that by giving this matter the first priority in his speech, the President meant that it was really a serious matter, and I hope this House will address it.

The other point I want to talk about is the convoys. I had a convoy, we all had these convoys, and on nomination day, the more vehicles you had the more power you seemed to show. But at the same time, we multiplied the cost of the elections. We withdrew money from development projects and invested it in consumption. And when forces of consumption prevail over forces of investment and production, you have no economy. Members here must re-examine the methods that we used during the elections. We may be the very ones perpetuating the conditions of violence and therefore, the destruction of democratic growth.

I would like to talk about the role of Uganda in the region. I want Members, who may not know, to know that Uganda chairs the Peace Initiative On Burundi. After the genocide in Rwanda and after other forces like the UN and OAU failed to intervene, it was felt that the potential for violence and genocide in Burundi was so high, especially after the coup. Therefore, we felt that the region should make an effort to prevent this kind of situation ever occurring. 
Uganda has been the chair for the last three years, and I would like to inform the hon. Members that the role Uganda has played through our President has been tremendous. The problem in Burundi is intractable. Some of us talk about our problems and we think we really have problems, but the problems in Burundi certainly go beyond. They have a much higher coefficient than the ones we have here, and our role is very significant. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS. NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to actually debate on something of importance, so fellow colleagues, please bear with all the mistakes I may make.  

I wish to thank His Excellency for his State of the Nation Address. It was really good, and he emphasized the need for voter education. To my surprise, he stressed so much on the history of voting. He noted that voters needed to be educated on the history.  

On page 2, he notes as follows: “there is not enough voter education, so people do not know where we came from.”  To me, that means that he needs people to be educated on where we came from, regarding the voting process. My worry is that voters need to be taught about the roles and responsibilities of Members of Parliament. When you go to our constituencies, our constituents do now know our responsibilities. If I am wrong, you correct me. I am in this House now because the main issue against the former Member of Parliament of my constituency is that he did not perform for his constituency. He gave the reason that he had some work to do for the country and it hindered him from being in the constituency most of the time. He was there sometimes, but not all the time, because he had some other work to do for the country -(Interjections). I want, fellow hon. Members, to get this clearly.  

That is why I request the Government to put in place a team to go round the whole country, giving voter education, but also strictly stressing and educating our voters on the roles and responsibilities of Members of Parliament. This was in the President’s speech. The last sentence on page 2 says, “You should remember that you work for the whole country and not only for your respective constituencies”. 
The President said that, but our constituents, our voters do not know this. They feel that we strictly have to be in our constituencies and not serve the country.  

Therefore, I would like to appeal to Government to put in place a serious and very competent team to strictly educate our voters on the roles and responsibilities of the Members of Parliament. Thank you very much.

MR. HOOD KATURAMU (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western Region): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues who have thanked His Excellency the President for his elaborate address to the nation. 

I wish to appreciate the efforts His Excellency the President has made in consolidating peace and tranquillity in this country, particularly in his effort to end wars and insurgency in this country. A few years ago, the Government of Uganda was not at all talking well with the Government of Sudan and vice versa, but I was pleased when I read in the Papers yesterday that the Government of Uganda has already appointed a Charge de Affairs to go to Khartoum. I believe this is the right action in a positive direction to strengthen peace with the Government of Sudan, so that we can be able to end costly wars that have indeed drained our economy.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we note that the war in the North in particular has brought many traumatized children who are fatherless and who are motherless. I believe this is a great challenge to the government, and all those concerned.  But such an issue could be addressed as an aftermath effect of the war in the North.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will the Members who are in the lobbies please, not distract the proceedings of the House!  Proceed hon. Katuramu.

MR. KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, today we have many Ugandans who have lost their limbs as a result of landmines in the North and they need attention on the medical point of view and rehabilitation.  So, Madam Speaker, the question of war in this Country is a serious one and I appreciate, indeed as I said, the President who on Page 6 has truly said in his address to the nation that “Continuous efforts are being made to bring rebel activities to an end in the North, including our recent and positive discussions with the government of Sudan.”  I appreciate these efforts and encourage government, the President and the Executive to move in that positive direction.  

I wish also to make a comment on AIDS/HIV, prevalence in Uganda.  Indeed the reduction in the prevalence of AIDS/HIV in this country has not occurred by accident.  It was indeed a deliberate policy of openness by government, but we accept that AIDS and HIV are in our midst, and we should therefore accept the challenges of facing it squarely.  As Uganda was doing that, some countries were denying that AIDS was knocking on the doors of their countries.  Indeed the consequences have not been good on their part.

However, the point of concern that I am raising is on page 16.  Madam Speaker, in the second paragraph, it says, “We have achieved this feat through a policy of openness, of giving AIDS a face and removed the stigma hitherto associated with those living with the virus and the disease.”

Uganda has made its contribution.  Therefore, its share in the United Nations should be fully acknowledged and recognized.  When I read the fourth paragraph, it says that the United Nations Summit on AIDS has set a global fund to fight AIDS, and that Uganda, poor as we are, we are obliged to pay 2 million US dollars.  Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I feel that with the contribution that the government of Uganda has made in the fight against AIDS, not only on this continent but the world at large, there could be some consideration.  In other words, I would propagate for the affirmative action in this aspect that, Uganda would pay a lower figure because its contribution has been very tremendous compared to other countries who have not been open to accept the prevalence of this scourge.  I beg Madam Speaker and hon. Members, that the figure of 2 million dollars could be reduced to a moderate one to recognize our contribution in the fight against AIDS.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR. HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by commending this really good, factual, scientific and high quality State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President.  It was really, to us who believe in figures and data, a very good report.

I would like also, Madam Speaker, to state on behalf of Lamwo County that, we are fully behind His Excellency the President on the matter of peace in our region.  I believe even all my colleagues who come from northern region have the same view of this.  We shall definitely work to mobilize our constituents to make this initiative be realized.  
My understanding of the whole speech by His Excellency the President with respect to the economic development of this country is that, the efforts are targeting economic empowerment of our population, both rural and urban.  If we take the example like, at the moment as things stand in Northern Uganda, only 34 per cent are managing to consume 3,000 calories.  That is considered the measurement of poverty level.  Those consuming below that are considered below poverty line.

If we talk of Kitgum, particularly Lamwo County, actually virtually everybody in this House, if you reach Lamwo County, you will be a very fat man.  I would say not more than five per cent consume 3,000 calories because of the problems that they have gone through and the poverty to which they are driven.

Definitely, from the contributions made in this House, hon. Dr. Nabwiso mentioned that there is no planning, or if there is, none of us is very conversant with the planning in this country.  Dr. Nkuuhe’s contribution was that vision 2025 here is not clear enough, and therefore cannot guide on the economic development.  He cited the case of one of those ones in the Asians countries that their vision 2020 was so clear.

Now this has given the Ministry of Finance and Planning, a task to plan for this country, or make their plans understood, and these plans must be debated in this House so that we can approve the guidelines for our economic development as a nation.

Definitely I appreciate the efforts they made so far, but I do not think they have gone far enough to come out with plans that are understood by everybody; the Legislators, the Executive and the various economic sector players in this country. 
In His Excellency the President’s presentation on the nation, I am really encouraged by the program on agriculture. For most of us whose constituencies are rural based, this program is quite elaborate, quite satisfactory and it will require the planner to really undertake and put this into a plan of action. 

I would like, Madam Speaker, to also talk briefly about education.  In Lamwo, for the last 15 years of insurgency, children, whose education was interrupted, when they were five years old, today are 20 years old. Girls and boys, whose education was interrupted for the last 15 years, have now become mothers and fathers, because there was nothing like education to speak about. 

I would wish to suggest to the Ministry of Education that, the UPE program in our constituencies, and indeed in our districts where there has been insurgency for this long period, should be extended to include an element of adult education. Those young men and women who are now between the age of say, 18 up to 30, who missed education should be allowed to go under the UPE program, and have afternoon classes, so that they go back to the classes where they left and we get them to get the relevant education required for this country.

I would like to comment briefly on the statement made by a Member of Parliament from Kawempe, about the dumping of garbage by KCC – (Interruption).

MS.G. AKELLO: Madam Speaker, thank you and I thank my colleague for giving way.  I just wanted him to know that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development runs a program called Functional Adult Literacy, and this covers the whole country. Since he is worried and we are all worried about our people who have not gone through the system of education because of war, I would encourage him to go back, when he goes to mobilize his constituents and alert them to the fact that there is such a program, and they can start with their community development officer and ask for resources to be supported. 
 
MR. ONEK: Thank you for that information. However, I do not think the community development program covers all the  areas; it is confined to community development centers.  
Now, on KCC dumping of garbage, I would like to let the Member know that I am the chairman of Natural Resources, where environment is part of our concern. Let him bring the matter to us; we shall address it and then advise the House accordingly.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members it is just about 5:30 p.m.  I think it is an appropriate time to end today’s proceedings.  Accordingly, I adjourn the House to 2 O’clock tomorrow afternoon.  The House stands adjourned.

(The House rose at 5:30p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2nd August, 2001 at 2.30 p.m.)

