Thursday, 7 August 2008

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s meeting and I would like you to join me in welcoming two groups of children. In the public gallery we have pupils from Alliance Primary School, Luzira, Nakawa Constituency, Kampala. There they are. You are very welcome! (Applause)

I would also like you to join me in welcoming pupils from Wobulenzi Bright Academy, Katikamu North in Luweero District and their teachers. You are welcome. They have all come to observe the proceedings of the House. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2008

2.56
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2008” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded? It has been seconded. Do you have the certificate of financial implications?

DR SURUMA: The certificate is included.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. It will be committed to the relevant committee. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

2.57
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. If it has the certificate of financial implications, it is committed to the relevant committee. 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, it does have.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

2.57
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be read for the first time. And the certificate of financial implication is included.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. It is committed to the relevant committee. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

2.57
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. The certificate of financial implication is included.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is committed to the relevant committee. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

2.58
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? Does it have the certificate of financial implications? 

DR SURUMA: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. It is committed to the relevant committee.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Is he here? Is there anyone standing in for the Minister of Lands? Okay, next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.59
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table, the Public Finance and Accountability (Contingencies Fund) Regulations, 2008. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will be committed to the relevant committee. However, I wanted to inform the chairperson and the Members of that committee that these regulations do have a timeline. You are supposed to report back to Parliament within 21 days either approving the regulations, rejecting them or annulling them. So, they will not be treated like any other business. So, please take note; 21 days is the outside limit on those regulations.

3.00
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, when I look at the Order Paper, there are other Bills to be presented on the Floor of Parliament. I do not know whether you have adjusted the Order Paper, because according to the Order Paper I have, there are other issues still pending. And I see that we have jumped to item No.5 and leaving item No.4.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One matter which has not been presented is the one from the Ministry of Housing. The other one relating to taxes and duties, I think, came here by accident. It was not supposed to be in this House. That is why I omitted it. I know we issued an earlier Order Paper but it is not necessary at this stage and that is why it was not read. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.01
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Information paper to Parliament on crop failure and food crisis in the North and north eastern parts of Uganda. The purpose of this information paper is to furnish Parliament with information regarding the food crisis in the North and north eastern parts of Uganda and my ministry’s intervention to mitigate effects of the famine.

Honourable members of Parliament, you may recall that between July and December, the North and north eastern parts of Uganda received heavy rains that led to flooding in homesteads and gardens. As a result, people were displaced and property, crops and animals were affected and destroyed. The sub-regions affected most included Teso, the Elgon region, Karamoja and parts of Lango, Acholi and West Nile. 

The Office of the Prime Minister in partnership with the line ministries, development and humanitarian partners responded with food and non-food items, medical services, clean water and planting materials among others, to address the emergency situation that had arisen. Indeed, these interventions saved life and fewer people than would have been the case.

Colleagues will note that the floods came at harvesting time and as a result crops in gardens were swept away, root tubers and stems for planting materials were lost due to water logging and the situation made it impossible to dry the harvested food stuff. The region lost up to 90 percent of the crops and this created immediate and future food insecurity in the region.

It is also important to note that the above disaster affected the already vulnerable communities that had experienced insecurity, displacement, cattle rustling and chronic draught for two decades.

The statement of the problem 

The planting season which usually starts in March in those parts was not blessed with rains in most parts of the region. Where some rains were received, planting started soon after, but in April 2007 the drought set in. From this report and findings of the technical assessment done, it is indicated that crops have dried up. I am talking of 2008, not 2007. The plants have dried up and those planting materials that were distributed to promote food security in the region have gone to waste.

The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Integrated Phase Classification and Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWSNET) outlook for the second season reported Karamoja’s food security situation as worsening. Acute malnutrition in Moroto and Nakapiripirit was reported at 18 percent in April and more than nine percent of the children under five suffered severe acute malnutrition in a screening exercise in June 2008. Admissions in the major therapeutic feeding centre at Matany Hospital rose from 32 cases in the month of May to 78 cases in the month of June. As you can see, a big jump of up to 144 percent increase, though some of the rise may be attributed to improved screening.

Food prices have gone up in the region and the entire country and this seems to be a global trend. Items are now twice the price they were costing last year and most of the food items are brought in from the neighbouring districts that are relatively food secure. Households are having one poor meal a day and malnutrition as well as water related illnesses like Marasmus, Diarrhoea, Kwashiorkor, TB, et cetera are on the increase. In Karamoja, the situation is pathetic and needs urgent attention.

In addition, livestock production that usually complements crop production is also affected. There is no pasture and no water for the animals at the moment or a shortage of it. Besides several livestock diseases have taken advantage of the weak animals. East Cost Fever, Foot and Mouth diseases, Anaplasmosis et cetera have invaded the area. This leaves the community with nothing to fall back to for survival. As a result, communities have resorted to risky and environmentally unfriendly cropping mechanisms like charcoal burning, sell of firewood, migration, begging, bricklaying and destroying the already fragile environment.

Delayed rains in the region resulted into poor growing season in 2008, as I have already said. They are indications that the region will remain food-deficient until next harvest assuming we are lucky to plant by July/August next year. 

In total, roughly 3.5 million Ugandans are at risk of starvation in the sub-regions of Teso, Karamoja, parts of Lango, Acholi and West Nile as well as the cattle corridor. Although the World Food Programme is still complementing Government efforts in provision of food relief, they cannot reach out to all the risky areas and they are also experiencing shortages in their food pipeline. The World Food Programme representative, the new one, was in my office the other day and we were talking about the problems that they are facing.

As a result, the World Food Programme is only able to meet 70 percent of the recommended dietary allowance of worst off populations. The target of the government is to ensure that survival of the moderately affected with provision of 50 percent of the RDA. 

The interventions so far

At an inter–ministerial committee meeting that was called on 17 July this year, by hon. Adolf Mwesige, on crop failure and looming food crisis in eastern Uganda as per the previous Cabinet request or rather directive, it was noted that the Office of the Prime Minister had foreseen this crisis much earlier and had made a request of Ugshs 9.2 billion to address the situation in time. Cabinet approved the release of this money. Shs 3.0 billion was released last financial year.

Subsequently, because of the technicalities of financial years, the second amount amounting to Shs 6.7 billion was to be released in this financial year. But His Excellency the President intervened and on 5 May 2008 wrote directing the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to process the release of the balance of this money towards the relief activities in the areas affected as enumerated in the paper: Teso, Lango, West Nile and parts of Acholi.  A copy of His Excellency’s letter is attached for your note.

At that meeting, it was observed that Government should not wait for anticipated disasters to recur before it responds to them. Disaster preparedness is now our biggest agenda. Global warming and climate change are the reality and instead of reacting to their effects, there is need to put into place preparedness and mitigation measures and stop relying on nature for production. Uganda receives rains in excess and if these rains could be harvested and utilised during the season coupled with improved farming technology, the country would be able to overcome the food crisis it is faced with currently and this would minimise on the effects and vulnerability levels of the people of Uganda to climate change.  

To this end, ministries of Water, Lands, Environment and Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries were able to elaborate on their future plans in respect of measures calculated to address these issues. The focus by the Ministry of Water will be availability of water for production at all times and for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries it will be improved technology and mechanisation of agriculture.
  
World Food Programme has so far distributed 19,245 metric tons of food from February to date. It has indicated a requirement of 43,067 metric tons of food to feed the population from August to December this year amounting to US$38.7 million which is required.  

The Office of the Prime Minister has so far distributed 17,400 bags to areas where World Food Programme has not been able to reach. I am sure some of the Members here know that food has been going to their areas.

At the meeting of Cabinet yesterday - this is what is not in your document; my people were not sure that what went in Cabinet should be revealed so far. But I had to intervene and since I am talking to Parliament I have the lee way to inform you of what we decided yesterday in Cabinet. Yesterday Government authorised the release of Shs 6.75 billion as an immediate intervention to purchase food relief and related services to avert the effects of this drought. This will be complimented by the contribution of World Food Programme and other humanitarian agencies.  

From now on, the emphasis will be put on disaster preparedness because it is now clear that floods are followed by drought and then floods in a cyclical manner. We should watch out for signs in case this drought is followed again by floods. In fact, it looks the signs are to that effect because it seems the rains that are coming seem to be coming with violence. In this case, we should not be taken unawares like we were last year.

I am, therefore, calling upon leaders from these areas to be on the watch out so that we can warn our people to avoid the flood-prone areas in time to avert catastrophe. People in areas which experience landslides should take precaution as the landslides are highly predictable so that people can evacuate from these areas before disaster befalls. The durable materials distributed during the flood period last year like tarpaulins and so on should be preserved so that we do not start from zero as was the case last year. 

Preparedness at all levels is the best protector against disaster. Let us all be partners in confronting global warming challenges as they affect our country and are likely to be with us for a long time to come. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will allow debate for only 30 minutes on this matter and every Member contributing will have five minutes.

3.16
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent. Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This morning, a tragedy has hit primary school children in my constituency in Kalangala. Three children who were waiting for their exams in an examination room have been struck dead by lightening and six others have been rushed to Kyamuswa sub district health centre for treatment. In addition, over 40 houses have been lifted up by heavy storms in the early morning rains today in Ntuuwa landing site in Kyamuswa Constituency.  

It is unfortunate that the form of settlement these people establish is make shift structures and they are in dire need for immediate assistance. I rise on this matter to ask the Minister in Charge of Disaster Preparedness to take note. Some of the relatives of these people are watching on TV to see whether the minister would have an immediate response or would pledge when he would come to help these people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.18
MS AMONGI LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, I wish to thank the minister for the statement.  I want to add to the problems stated and warn that in addition to the problems that were caused because of last season’s drought and floods, right now in my constituency and Lango sub region we are undergoing a lot of rain which comes with hailstones. Even as we sit here and talk, the little that there is, is being destroyed by hailstorm and I have already made a report to the Office of the Prime Minister.

It is good that Government has come out to recognise that global warming climate change is a reality that we have to deal with. But I find it unfortunate that today we are here talking about drought in Karamoja which we have been doing for very many years and yet we are very proud that we are the source of the R. Nile. I find it ridiculous that all that water in the Nile is effectively used in Sudan, in Egypt and we are here singing and crying because we have chosen to depend on the mercies and the vagaries of the weather. It is not a question of being careful or careless but we have no excuse after so many years of singing about the same thing.

So many years ago, this very Parliament, I am sure, was debating the question of Karamoja and the need to have irrigation. But if we have had a change of heart and we have agreed that God is not going to be merciful to us forever and we have to depend on God, then we have agreed that finally we are going to use effectively what God so graciously gave Uganda, then I can only be happy and wait to see the day that becomes a reality.

I want to inform Government that it is high time they came up with some measures to control food that we have in Northern Uganda. It is very good that we are neighbouring Sudan and we have market there but what is happening in Northern Uganda is ridiculous. Right now we are harvesting ground nuts but people are buying fresh ground nuts as being harvested from the gardens. Everything is going to Sudan and the little beans we have are going to Sudan. Tomorrow, the little money that the peasants have got will not be able to buy whatever food there is because the prices will be ten times high and we are just sitting and watching helplessly waiting to ask WFP to give us more food. I am not a believer in WFP because I have lived in an area that has depended on WFP for all these years and I see that the food that is given through WFP is so little and can never be sufficient.

MS OBURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is in addition to what she is talking about; food which is being ferried to the neighbouring states. In Tororo, we have got what we can call a depot for millet and by December, we shall have no food in Tororo and something has to be done to stop that because there is an influx of Kenyans coming to buy food from the gardens on the Ugandan side and there is a lot of food being sold just like that. I do not know what we are going to do about this.

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I just want to take this opportunity to warn Government of another kind of disaster because I see the minister concentrating on food and the physical disasters but we have other kinds of disaster in Northern Uganda. I want to bring the attention of Government to a study that was done in 2001 and it was a baseline survey conducted under the support to health sector strategic plan programme by a gentleman called Seren Bas Jensen who is a senior mental health advisor and World Health Organisation consultant. 

This survey indicated a higher level of mental health problems including depression, post traumatic stress, disorder, alcohol, abuse and suicide. It was done in the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader in 2001. Now, we have a population that is highly traumatised and I do not know what measures Government has since 2001 taken to ensure that my traumatised population of Northern Uganda has got support to combat this very deadly disaster they are having. What are we waiting for? We have reports of army men shooting indiscriminately everyday and then the army puts the people on court martial and probably kills them in turn. 

These people are patients; they are extremely sick. The result of that war is now telling. What is happening is the result of the extreme trauma we have gone through. What measures has Government put in place to address the extreme trauma which the people of Northern Uganda are suffering from? And for me that is a disaster. Mr Minister, do not look at the disaster of floods only; look at the disaster which has been brought by the war to the people I represent. I thank you. 

3.26
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I thank the minister for this report from which I noted a number of challenges in as far as the distribution list of the interventions of Government is concerned. 

On page 3, Mr Minister, you did report rightly that Kumi District as a whole was greatly affected with floods. I hope you are also aware that those floods majorly affected all the four sub-counties in Ngora County. But for the whole of Ngora, only 200 bags of maize floor and 60 bags of beans were supplied and that was in May. It was a one off supply. As we speak now, the chairperson of the district disaster management committee has already written indicating that we are faced with a big challenge generally as a district and most crops including the planting materials that were supplied have withered. For as long as the distributions are as skewed as you have reported here, we do not know to whom we shall run. 

We therefore would like to appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister to consider responding to the calls from the district disaster management committee for a timely intervention and equity. Ngora sub-county alone has 40,000 people but check the distribution! 

On page 2, on item number four which talks about livestock diseases and pasture, I would like to inform the House that these floods did not only wash off crops. Most animals got affected. Immediately after the floods which came along with so many snails - and for your information snails are intermediate hosts for a certain disease called liver fluke, among others. Many animals got exposed to heavy liver fluke infestation and so many farmers have lost their stock. As we speak, many animals are dying. 

I would like to suggest that instead of concentrating on crops as a colleague has just alluded to, there is need for affirmative action by Government in the form of mass de-worming. It is not only the tick borne diseases that the floods came up with because the ticks flourished and proliferated with the heavy floods. Mass de-worming of all livestock should be reconsidered.

Madam Speaker, on this note, I would like to urge the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and the Office of the Prime Minister to take stock of what has been done and where. If you look at your table of distributions and the interventions taken, you will agree with me that the interventions are greatly skewed and are more or less down playing problems in certain areas. Thank you very much.

3.31
MR ISSA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Mr Odonga Otto rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the other Otto. (Laughter)

MR ISSA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I think my colleague was just joking because he is called hon. Odonga Otto. That is the difference. 

First of all, I would like to thank the honourable Minister for Disaster Preparedness for giving us this report. It is part of the accountability from the ministry because it gives us the details of what is happening and also corrects the errors and mischief that are reflected in the report. 

The problem of floods and subsequently drought as well as the heavy rains that are destroying crops and other properties are a big disaster. I think that Government should come with a clear strategic and comprehensive plan for this region. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has been making a big mistake especially in the distribution of food items and other domestic materials. 

I am giving a brief report from Oyam District where the food items were given to some politicians and they ended up using them as a political opportunity to undermine other leaders in that area. If some leaders were not careful and realistic, it would have caused a very big political problem and I think that this was a very big mistake from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and even the Office of the Prime Minister directly. 

I am aware that the district disaster management committee are not involved in the management and distribution of these food items, which has caused a big problem because there is no control mechanism, no supervision or monitoring of whether these items are reaching the actual beneficiaries or not. I think that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should try as much as possible to set up a system where these food items or other materials are strictly supervised and monitored by them. 

Recently, some seeds and potato veins were distributed in Oyam District but the money that went there did not benefit any family as the potato veins that were distributed to the sub county headquarters were rotten. I raised the matter with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and he told me that as a leader, I must take responsibility. I replied and said that the responsibility I had taken was to inform him that there was a problem. 

Madam Speaker, if you look at the districts that benefited from this programme, here they were talking of Apac and in particular Minakulu sub-county. Currently, the former Apac was split into two: Apac and Oyam, and what was given to Minakulu sub-county, which is now in Oyam District was also causing another problem. Politicians went around saying that these products were meant for Apac District and yet they were meant to benefit the people of Minakulu, which is in Oyam District. I urge the ministry not to use things that can benefit the common man to cause confusion and conflict in our communities.

I want to further report to the honourable minister that as I speak, a number of villages in Oyam are suffering because of problems caused by heavy storms. This morning, I got a report that it rained heavily two or three days ago and all the beans and maize that were planted have been destroyed. As such, we need to start afresh and see how to help these people urgently. I am appealing to Government and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to try as much as possible to get in touch with the disaster management committees at the district and sub counties so that we can monitor the flow of food items, so that they reach the actual beneficiaries of these schemes.

Lastly, I think that in this country we have a big problem. I appeal to this Parliament that the food security in this country needs to be comprehensively addressed because we are not talking of the 3.5 million people that are now faced with a problem of floods only in Northern and Eastern Uganda.

3.39
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I also want to thank the hon. Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness for his report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, use the microphone.

MR ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, in this report one thing confused me before I came to the tables: when the minister talked of distributing food, you know here we call maybe matooke food, but when talking of food in Lango, we are referring to beans, peas, meat and milk. But when I went to the annex here, I saw some bags of maize flour and beans and I am glad to inform you that when I contacted the office of the minister, indeed some 200 bags of posho and 30 bags of beans were released and taken to my constituency without my knowledge and I do not know how they were distributed. They ended up in the office of the CAO and I think the sub-county chief and the LC III chairperson and down there, there was no effect. When I went down to find out whether they received it, some of them told me they never even smelt or saw it, and so on and so forth. So, I think there is need now for all the stakeholders to get involved when it comes to distribution. I even wrote to his office to this effect.
I think this issue of excessive rain and sunshine has been a case known by Government. If up to now we cannot combat it, then this is a very serious matter because traditionally, we know that land plus labour, plus good rain and good sunshine is equal to good harvest and development. But now we have forgotten about this. Why? I do not understand. So, I am saying that honourable minister, this quantity that you have taken to Erute County North and then the costs involved need to be checked because even here, I do not know how much we are spending on transporting this. Thank you. 

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the member that there is no equitable distribution here. When you look at Teso as a sub-region, you should look at the district of Amuria, then at the district of Bukedea and compare that population with the districts of Kumi and Soroti and see how much they have got. Therefore, I would like to tell my brother that as a leader, do what can’t get round you. When we look at all these sub-counties of Amuria, if we have a few items to distribute, why don’t we distribute them equitably? What clarification can you give Ugandans about the fact that the sub-counties of Amuria got more than all the sub-counties in Teso and that is where you come from? I thank you. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I think the most important thing I am going to address is effect -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that actually disaster is not equitably distributed and as such, when we are working out a formula, we look for the affected areas, not the population. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us try and finish this. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this report, when you look at how people are eating as described by the honourable minister - that they eat very poorly – in fact what people in this area eat most is drinking Waragi and I wonder how long this will continue because the effects of these excessive floods and sunshine, on education, are very serious. The children who should be going to school to get proper education are now too weak and some of them decide not to go. And then, it has even affected business because Lira for that matter has been a food granary not only for Northern Uganda but Kampala; and when you go there, the prices of food, as has been mentioned here, have gone up, and some poor people can longer afford to buy food. This has also seriously affected animals; goats and cows are dying. 

The worst thing that is actually adding to this problem is the road network. I do not know why they just decide to take food and leave it within Lira district and then it is left “to whom it may concern”. That is how this food relief will never reach its final destination. So, I do not know how much we are going to put in place to ensure that this food distribution is taken at least to the sub-county headquarters. That is the only way we can trust the distribution of this food relief because leaving it at the sub-county means costs and I do not know how much they are putting in place to transfer this food from the district to the final destination. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before we proceed, I would like to invite you to join me in welcoming Dr John Kilama. He is in the distinguished strangers’ gallery. He is a Ugandan resident of the US, President of the Global Bio-Science Development Institute in Iowa, USA. You are welcome.  

3.46
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for Disaster Preparedness for making this very important statement to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Climate change brought about by global warming is one big challenge going to confront African countries for the next decade. In March 2008, I made a submission for a motion for this Parliament to debate the issue of climate change and how we can mitigate the effects of climate change. 

I find it very sad that when talking about the issue of climate change adaptation, we are limiting it to a prerogative of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. Because there is no single bullet on climate change other than an integrated development approach. We should make it the collective responsibility of all the government institutions. But the question is, “How do we facilitate inter-ministerial linkages so that we can operationalise the issue of integrated development approach in dealing with matters of climate change?”

I was in my constituency and what they expected as the first rains turned out to be drought and now what is expected as the second rains is turning out to be floods. So, in these two tricky situations there is no hope for productivity within the agricultural sector in the manner that we can expect to make our communities food secure. 

To me, by now we should be committed to promoting rain water harvest at individual household levels so that every household can harvest water and during the dry season they can use irrigation to plant about 10 acres. By now we should be seeing the potential for tapping surface water to promote irrigation and by now we should be aggressively looking at ways and options of promoting rapid afforestation projects, as surely these are the ways of mitigating climate change.

The other option; in this Parliament we have not debated the renewable energy policy of the government of Uganda, which essentially is one of the ways to adapting to climate change. Because how do we promote energy farming in the wake of climate change? This is one single strategy for regional development where resources are mobilised for promoting energy investments in favour of rural areas. In this way our farmers would be energy farmers, an enterprise, which has very limited effect. In fact climate change would be surely the only way of making farmers earn income because I find that the other international argument on the issue of energy farming versus food production does not apply to a country like Uganda. We have huge land and adapting energy farming would ensure farmers have got money in their pockets and then you will not see an energy farmer with money, sleeping hungry. I have never seen a person with money sleeping hungry. So, Government has got to vigorously adopt an approach in order to mitigate climate change issues. Otherwise, the level of disaster response over the years is going to be enormous and overwhelming if we do not deal with the situation now. Thank you.

3.51
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Very briefly, I want to thank the Minister of Disaster Preparedness for highlighting the problem in the Northern and Eastern parts of this country. However, I think the problem has gone beyond those areas. His colleague, the Minister of State, hon. Musa Ecweru, can bear me witness. Some months back he visited my district and I think we had more than a disaster then. We can give it another name; we can call it perhaps a tornado or a hurricane or anything you want to call it, but up to now the farmers have never recovered from that. The neighbouring district of Ibanda of the hon. Minister of State for Works was equally affected as well as I think even Kasese and parts of Kiruhura. So, the disaster component should be explained beyond crop failure. We saw the roof tops of health centres being swept off. We saw the roof tops of schools being swept off. This brings me to two or three important questions:

In my opinion, perhaps we should change the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and call it the ministry of emergency relief because the ability hon. Kabwegyere has is to give maize and beans. Honestly, this is what I see. I do not want to blame him for that but I ask myself, “Where is the prior planning before the disaster? Where is the management during - maybe that is the provision of the -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am wondering, in relation to what hon. Frank Tumwebaze is saying, whether this Government has capacity to forecast weather for over a year? We cannot just wait for drought and then we start rushing with 20 sacks of beans. So, if it is a real Ministry of Disaster Preparedness other than emergency and relief distribution, do we have capacity to forecast the weather for one or two years so that we guide the farmers accordingly?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, honourable colleague. Perhaps the minister will respond to that. But it adds up to what I am saying. Our preparedness to respond to disasters - I had said before on the Floor of this august House that we need to think about mainstreaming disaster in Government planning just like we are mainstreaming HIV. It never used to be a lifestyle to lead or to think about, but now you have workplace HIV plans everywhere. Even the road guys have an HIV component. So, where is disaster preparedness? Where is the comprehensive plan from the ministry to guide Agriculture on what to do? To guide Works on what to do? To guide all the other concerned sectors of Government? Supposing you heard that the roof of the referral hospital in Fort Portal has been swept off, who intervenes? The hon. Minister Mallinga will tell you, “We do not have money for intervening in disaster; you know that is a disaster.” I think we need a comprehensive plan on how to manage disasters.

Another point, Madam Speaker, and perhaps the last one, is coordination. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should play a coordinating role. The statement talks about crop failure, but you should have coordinated with the Ministry of Agriculture to tell us what they are planning. We were seeing the Vice-President in Karamoja promoting rice, a very wonderful intervention. But is that backed by the other interventions of Government? If rice can grow in Karamoja, what bigger plans does the government have to promote rice as an enterprise for the people of Karamoja? Or is it just an initiative of the Vice-President and it will end there? So, the charge I am putting on the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is that you have failed to provide guidance to the entire Government on how to prepare for disasters and you have only concentrated on distributing emergency relief, which is only short lived. I thank you.

3.56
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, and I also thank the colleagues who have contributed to it.

Let me first make some observations as far as the statement is concerned, that actually it is an alarming statement. It is a statement which is alarming but without details as far as the strategic planning is concerned, which details would help to change the situation. First of all, let me refer to page 1, paragraph 3, the last statement, where the minister is talking about death. In this House I have never been told that, “A number of people died due to lack of food”, and so I would like to challenge the minister to find out whether he can rank Uganda with other countries that have people who are starved. 

The other point is what colleagues were talking about as far as planning for the production of food is concerned. There is a general outcry in terms of adequate food and I am wondering whether many families, especially the children, get the basic number of meals, that is, breakfast, lunch and dinner. I think this situation, the inadequacy of food, is almost everywhere in the country and so we need a deliberate effort to ensure that we produce adequate food.

The other aspect as far as the minister’s presentation is concerned is on page 3, paragraph 6, where the minister is talking about the next harvest to take place in July/August 2009. Really, if the minister were serious, he would not be thinking of such long term planning, because there are fast growing crops that can be harvested maybe mid year, rather than thinking that the next harvest from now is going to be next year in July or August. This is a little bit weak in the minister’s statement.

The other issue is about the way we have handled our environment, which is causing drought. In Masaka especially, where my Minister of Environment transits through, there is a lot of over ploughing in the wetlands. And the more you plough the wetlands, the more you excessively use them, the drier the other good areas for farming become. So, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Environment to protect the wetlands so that they can feed into the lands that could be used for production of food.

Also let me make a general statement as far as what colleagues are talking about is concerned, that is, the outcry on selling lots of food to neighbouring countries. I think this is a very contradictory statement or observation because for years now we have been looking for markets. We have been looking for markets and the more we get the markets, the more we can be induced to produce more food. So, if we really complain that we are selling too much, yet we see the President going abroad to look for market, how much money does he put in that to look for markets? So, I would like to appeal to colleagues –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take it? Hon. Amuriat. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you and I wish to thank my colleague for giving way. Actually what is happening today is that a huge market has been opened up in Sudan and as a result this market is sucking a lot of foodstuffs from Uganda into Sudan. I have just been sharing with my colleague from Madi-Okolo and he has given me information to the effect that today it is impossible to eat fish in the West Nile region. It is impossible for the locals to eat fish in the West Nile region because all the fish is going to the Sudan and as you know, angara is something that is very common in the West Nile region. Previously it was abundant. Because of poverty levels people are forced to sell almost everything that they have. 

I would like to inform my colleague that in the North and the North eastern parts of the country, foodstuffs are even bought from the garden before crops mature. I think this is a very sad development. Whereas it is necessary for us to export, I think we should only be encouraged to export when we harvest in excess. Today we are not harvesting in excess. That is the information I wanted to give to my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Amuriat, I think the case the honourable member is making is that we should now galvanise our production levels and improve on how we produce, and increase that. I think you are castigating her for nothing. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam, I appreciate that. If I can be allowed to say this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Let her –

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a pity that we live in a world of contradictions. As I said, Uganda belongs the World Trade Organisation where trade liberalisation has taken place and I think we all agreed to it. So we cannot restrict trade, the movement of goods from one country to the other. We should appreciate trade liberalisation and promote it. 

But given that, I think Government can take advantage of this and re-distribute what is within the country to move goods from areas like the south where they have abundant food, to the north. But re-distribution of goods has not taken place and Government can improve on that to help the North. Otherwise, I still call upon colleagues to believe that the more we shall sell, the more we can benefit our people in the rural areas who are producing. Thank you.

4.04
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to contribute to the issue of selling of the foodstuffs while it is still in the gardens. In as much as we appreciate that the markets are there now, we also need to direct our people to be able to sell at good prices. If people are going to sell while the crop is still in the garden, like you sell off a potato garden to a trader, then we are really not helping our people. 

We also need to look at the issue from the point of view, which the minister raised; the issue of disaster. For example in my area, as much as there has been some food harvested, it has been taken away because in Teso and Lango areas, there were floods. So the people from those areas have come to my area with trailers and trucks and bought off all the food while it is just being harvested. So, as much as the market is identified, I think we are not addressing the looming problem of famine that is going to follow very shortly. 

When you look at the countryside, you find that the agricultural methods being used are not improving. Our people are still cultivating using the old methods that our grandparents employed in the past. That is why what is being planted is not increasing; what is being cultivated cannot meet the demands of the markets that are in the neighbourhood. 

If we are going to put money into NAADS, for example, by giving the farmers some improved seeds, that is okay, but we are not helping them to open gardens; we are not solving the problem because they will still use old methods of cultivation and will not open many acres of land. The problem also is that they are not listening – the other day the President, while on a tour in Eastern Uganda – and I sometimes sympathize with him because he is giving the people a very good message but they cannot perceive it because when you tell them to practice modern methods of farming, they do not just get the message. 

So we need to do much more to ensure that we are moving at the same pace with them. For example, if we put aside some money to help people in ploughing by say, availing tractors and ploughs to enable them open up their fields, then they will be able to produce more. Otherwise, if we just lament about the food shortage and prices, it is not going to help us.

I would like to applaud the hon. Minister of state for Disaster Preparedness for having been able to extend food relief to Busia District. This district has hosted people who ran away from disaster areas like Karamoja. When you get to Busia, you might think you are in Karamoja; the Karimojong have settled there, but because they do not have proper ways of economic survival they have problems of food. So, I would like to applaud the minister for the little support that he extended to Busia, although I further want to inform him that Busia still needs a lot of support in this area. I thank you very much.

4.08
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this chance. Arising from the statement of the minister, I just have one or two concerns to raise. 

Number one is that in the minister’s statement it is said that Cabinet had approved the release of Shs 9.2 billion because the Office of the Prime Minister had foreseen problems. But the Ministry of Finance only released Shs 3 billion to solve the problems and later on it took the intervention of the President to direct that ministry to release the balance of Shs 6.2 billion. 

Now the Minister of Finance is here in the person of Dr Suruma; what I would like to know is, what kind of heart do you have that it had to take the intervention of the President to make you release money to save the lives of the people who are suffering from hunger? What is your priority? People are dying of hunger and you are just here; you cannot release money –(Laughter)- to buy food, yet you are busy looking for Shs 80 billion to buy a presidential jet; you cannot release Shs 9.2 billion to buy food for the hungry people? Is that a human heart, Mr Minister?

Secondly, in the Acholi sub-region, the World Food Programme has drastically scaled down the distribution of food because it was expected that by now the population should have been in position to grow their own food –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from hon. Santos. Are you taking it?

MR OCULA: Yes, that is information from my neighbour; I can take it.

MR PIRO SANTOS: I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague holding the Floor mentioned a very important point of releasing funds for the disaster affected areas. I would like to give information to the effect that the Ministry of Finance has refused to raise the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture by 10 percent as declared by the Maputo Protocol. So, I would like to add my voice to that one of my colleague by asking the kind of heart the ministers –(Laughter)– of finance have. Members of Parliament have disaster in this House because there have been no salaries for the last two months –(Laughter)– with many people suffering; there is disaster here. Thank you very, Madam Speaker.

MR OCULA: I want to be very brief. I was saying that the World Food Programme has drastically scaled down the distribution of food in the Acholi sub-region because it was expected that by now people would be able to grow their own food. I want to say that this has not been the case because the supply of farm implements and other items has not been forthcoming and for that matter the issue of famine in that sub-region is still, actually real. But still when you check the list of the distribution of this little food, which hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere and his office purchased, you realise that in the whole of Acholi sub-region, only about 400 bags were taken to Gulu. There was nothing taken to Pader and Kitgum. There was also nothing taken to my district, Amuru, yet as another Member has noted, one county called Amuria alone has so far received about 1,600 bags of maize! I think this is not very good. 

Finally, I would like the minister to enlighten us a little bit more on what kind of disaster befell some of these areas where also some food has gone. I see that some food went to Kasese. I do not know what disaster was there. I also can see Bushenyi, Ibanda –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Ocula. The disaster in Kasese is man-made; it was caused by the government. In its wisdom –(Interjections)– or the other way round, Government in a bid to resettle some people who had run away from Congo, chose to displace people from Government land. In so doing people were pushed into displaced peoples’ camps, which made them loose two planting seasons. At the same time, the government is turning round to give people handouts. By the way our people are not used to handouts and you can take it from me that we are not happy and not appreciating your handouts. Thank you very much.

MR OCULA: Thank you, hon. Kibanzanga for giving the case of Kasese; but I am also talking about Bushenyi, Ibanda, Rukungiri, Isingiro and Mbarara. I want the honourable minister to clarify what kind of disasters befell those areas that necessitated these interventions. 

Finally, the minister stated that it is expected that by July –(Mr Byanyima rose_)– no, my elder, let me summarise. It is expected that by July or August, there will be adequate harvest to ensure that there is no more hunger in the country. I would like the minister to tell us the government interventions in place between now and that time when food would be adequate for the country. Thank you so much.

4.15
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for being disaster prepared and in this report, I expected the minister to come to this parliament to ask us to intervene as Government to allocate some urgent funds to act on the issue of agricultural subsidies for the people of the Northern and Eastern regions. 

There was a professor in Geography who said that he would rather teach people to fish than give them fish. When I continue giving fish, when I am not there, they will not eat. Now that we are giving out these food items, it is a good thing but I remember in 1980 when hon. Yona Kamyomozi was the Minister of Cooperatives, agricultural production was booming in Uganda, cotton production was high and agricultural subsidies were part of the agenda. But now we are giving handouts! 

When you come to the list of the scheduled distribution of food, since April you note that this list is not exhaustive. Pallisa District was part of Teso region and whatever emergency that affected Teso would also affect Pallisa because we share a boarder line. Pallisa got almost 60 bags of posho. But when we decided to distribute these bags of posho to our people, it was not possible for one to get even one gram of posho. So what we did was to give it to the primary schools to help them. We are saying that there is need for Government to change the attitude by giving posho where it is needed and to at least also give subsidies in form of improved seeds and agricultural equipment to prepare these people to be fishers rather than giving them kawunga every now and again. 

Madam Speaker, I remember when the Northern and some Eastern parts of Uganda were declared to be under a state of emergency, the government of Uganda released some funds thorough the Minster of Finance to address the problems of floods and its effects. But before these problems were addressed there was prolonged drought and, therefore, there was no way this ministry would have acted in the way the government and the Office of the Prime Minister intended.

The Ministry of Agriculture was given Shs 4 billion to solve the problems caused as a result of the floods. The money was released but for us, the people of Teso and Northern Uganda, we still think that the Shs 4 billion must be accounted for. Then the Ministry of Works was given Shs 10 billion to work on some budgets and some roads. But I have never been told in the House whether that money was actually utilised. There is need for us to be transparent for the good of delivering services to our people. 

The issue of selling goods and clothes and what have you, for me, so long as the government of Uganda declared this country to be a liberalised economy, then I do not see why the people who are promoting the liberalised economy can go on to say that there is no need to sell the crops. There is good produce and people are selling their crops in order to buy what they cannot produce. But the only thing that I urge my people to do is to triple their production and this one can only be achieved if Government comes out with agricultural subsidies. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is important but the agenda today is really very long, so let the minister respond. 

4.20
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My condolences to the people of Kalangala upon the loss of those children! As we move from the dry season to the wet season, there are all these incidents of lightening, violent winds, and they are not going to be in Kalangala alone but all over the place; the problem is we do not know how to stop them. However, I would recommend that we do have lightning controls. There are lightening arresters – we should think seriously of having them in our schools and even in our homes. And this is not big money; even a school and a home can buy them. I think this is again an eye opener for us to have that preparation and avert some of these disasters. We will look into what we can do if we get more details. 

The honourable member was saying that we are being watched; but I thought he is also being watched because I was hearing this for the first time. And surely if we are going to intervene, then we will have to know. There is no way I would intervene and send some relief to Kalangala without that knowledge. Now that we know, let us compare notes and see what we can do. And this is a general remark. You should take it seriously that if you do not give us information, we cannot act. It is not possible for us to know what is happening in all corners of Uganda without the information coming to us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this occurred between midnight and this morning; so the information is completely new.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, I take it that the information is new, but I also request that as colleagues, let us not just wait to point out weaknesses of Government when we could intervene if we are given information in time. A telephone call earlier on would probably have something moving in our office. 

I think this would apply also to what hon. Lagada was pointing out – there are going to be hailstorms. This is August and even in September, there are going to be all over the place, and that is why I would like to point out that when you see food relief going to some other parts other than those which you represent, like hon. Nyeko, do not think that this food is being taken there for a picnic; they also get problems. Even when hon. Kibanzanga is talking about a problem in Kasese when it arises - just because people do not realise that Uganda is for all of us - we still have to come in.  The disasters –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I would like to clarify on this matter. What has been given here in this report as your reaction is an intervention in response to a disaster; it is not disaster preparedness. From my understanding, preparedness means readiness in terms of food, - not the food you have distributed but the food you have to distribute in case a disaster strikes – health, etc. 

For food, first of all, how much food do you have in readiness in case you get a disaster? For health preparedness, how many ambulances do you have? If you talk of money, how much money is there so that if there is disaster, you respond with it? That is the angle of disaster preparedness. Now can you tell us about the preparedness not what you have already distributed? Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Well, disaster preparedness can apply even to us, individuals, and it can apply to homes. It is not necessarily a Government matter alone. I can tell the honourable member that we are now better prepared than we were a year ago. Preparedness is much larger than having food stores or food in stores; otherwise, one could say if the money for your salary is delayed, how much money did you put aside to avoid the disaster? (Laughter)

On challenges in Kumi about animals, I would like to also call upon our veterinary officers in the districts to address these diseases and the appeal is to address them from the districts themselves. That is why we have veterinary officers in the districts. As for infestation or causes of diseases and so on, I also think owners of animals have to be disaster prepared because some of these diseases have been occurring in the past. When you get floods, you get snakes. Actually snakes do come during floods. So we also have to be prepared as cattle owners, as people living in areas that are prone to these problems.  

The question of a policy regarding preparedness; this is coming. I mentioned it here sometime back but we have had time to reconsider it because we had to consult so many people. It is going to come and a number of proposals will be presented including this question of preparedness - probably having a percentage of the Consolidated Fund being put in the disaster preparedness fund. These are possibilities we will look into.

Hon Otto brought up the issue of politicians not doing their work and being supervised from the centre. One of the cardinal principles about decentralisation is that people have power to handle resources and manage the affairs of their districts. You reported to me that there was a problem and we shared strategies on how to handle it. The moment you notice that there is a problem in the district, please call upon the leaders in the district and do look for the solution because leaders are problem solvers. Now, if the centre is going to go to Oyam and check where the cassava cuttings have been sent and how they are being distributed, it becomes a tricky job for the centre. Certainly, we have responsibility but it is also shared with the local governments. 

On equitable distribution of relief, hon. Rwamirama was right-on; it is not equitable distribution of relief. We respond to a need and not all the needs because we are not in the position to meet all the challenges. We come in as an intervention –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the minister talked of responding to needs and also about us giving him information and yet we know that the office of the minister is properly facilitated to be able to collect information and not only to wait for it. About responding when the need is there, I want to find out from the honourable minister about the needs of hepatitis E, which I consider to be a disaster. It has been reported in the newspapers. Is that not a need? Did you respond to it? Have they really responded to the need of hepatitis E as a disaster?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you for giving way, honourable colleague. The issue of hepatitis E was discussed in Cabinet yesterday and we tasked the Minister of Health to brief Cabinet on Wednesday and later make a comprehensive statement to this House. So, the statement is coming.  

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable minister. I take that as a disaster. The need was there and it has been there since February. I also expect the disaster department to respond. 

On the policy, have we not waited too long for this disaster policy? We have been singing about it since last year. Why are we taking this long? Can you clarify this? Maybe that policy would be helping us and guiding us on how to handle disaster. Disaster is not stopping today; it looks like we are never prepared to handle disaster in this country. I thank you.

PROF KABWEGYERE:  Madam Speaker, I want to come here with something that I can put my name on. I do not want to come here with a policy statement that has not been well thought-out. We are trying to fill a gap which has been around for a long time. We have been focusing more on relief and not on preparedness, so we need to do that. I also want to inform the honourable member –(Ms Aol rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Aol, we are going to discuss the reports of your committees next week where you can bring this up again. I have two other matters here which I really want to address, please. 

PROF KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, this paper here was not to address all different types of disasters. We are only talking about food relief intervention. That is all that this paper is talking about. Medical disasters are there. Hepatitis is being addressed by the Ministry of Health, how can I come in here and say we are going to address it as Ministry of Disaster? There are specialised agencies and sectors. So, the Ministry of Health is addressing that problem. It is not necessary therefore that I make a statement that a disaster has occurred. You remember in the case of Ebola, it was the Ministry of Health which went in with WHO and other agencies; it was not the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness involved.

I would like to finally point out that the food relief that we are talking about is additional to the traditional food relief that is being given. World Food Programme has a massive programme for giving relief. You will not find a lot of food distributed by the ministry in Acholi land just because WFP is traditionally there. You can see the amount of money they are looking for now even for a short time - US$ 38 million - because they are there and we complement them. So, let us not be alarmed and think that Government or the ministry has not been in this area and the area has been neglected; absolutely not! 

On crop failures, as I said in the document we have sector ministries. The Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Water, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education; we all work together and we do coordinate.

You are saying we are not working enough but we are working. I wish honourable members would realise how difficult it is to help somebody in need, particularly when people would normally look after themselves and we now have to go in and meet their needs. When you hear that you are dealing with 3.5 million people who are in need of relief, you cannot do enough. You can only come in to intervene in order to reduce a disaster. Therefore, the challenge is bigger than we can appropriately handle. 

Let me also further inform this House that you have our budget. You can say intervene, but where is the budget? Our budget is what it is and we cannot sit down and create money.

This issue of Sudan taking our food, honestly -(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I am glad that you have mentioned that you have inter-ministerial collaboration in addressing these issues. I know you are aware that there is a difference between a disaster and a hazard. The question of water supply and distribution to drought stricken areas has been here for long. I seek clarification from you; what inter-ministerial collaboration have you made with the Ministry of Water to ensure that there is adequate supply and distribution of water for both human and animal consumption? 

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. As the minister is talking about this issue of Sudan taking most of our food supplies, he should take on this as well. Recently, we had Kenya talking of getting its shortage from Uganda. I would like to know whether actually there is a deliberate policy by Government or you are considering one instead of exporting. 

I know there is a liberalisation policy; instead of taking seeds or raw materials, can we take processed food stuffs? This is because the crisis is not only with humans but even the animals themselves. The poultry breeders or farmers are also crying. They do not have brand; even brand is being taken. So, why don’t we have a deliberate policy that instead of exporting the raw materials or the seeds themselves, we should export at least 50 percent processed crops. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us deal with this disaster and move on to something else, please. We are going to debate these things with the committee reports. 

PROF KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Paragraph 10 in the statement mentions the interventions by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Their particular mandate was in this inter-ministerial meeting that was held and chaired by hon. Adolf Mwesige. This is going on all the time to address problems on a larger scale. 

I want to conclude by saying that whether you want to define disaster as different from hazard, hazard plus vulnerability produces disaster. We are going to define all these concepts and we are going to popularise the understanding of them even in schools. We have a programme of educating Ugandans about how to protect themselves from disasters. Prevention is better than cure. Relief cannot help us. Those of us who read that statement by the Secretary General of the United Nations - it was in the Monitor last week – disaster preparedness can avert huge disasters. In fact, emergencies are an indication that there is no preparedness. If you are prepared, you reduce the disaster. Preparedness can even avert the effects of a Tsunami. 

So, let us all be awake. It is not a matter of central Government alone. It is all of us. I would hope that where we had floods last year, for example, people did not rebuild in the very areas where houses were washed off. If they do, they will be washed off again. I hope that when we sent in some of these materials like canvas, water processing equipment and so on, they were kept so that when floods come again, we can survive better than we did last year. I really appeal to all of us to participate and let us be very clear. 

On information flow, the honourable member from Gulu should know that we are as concerned as he is for the survival of our people. If you do not tell us what the challenges are in time, we can lament together, we can accuse each other but we will not help. There is a genuineness that must be taken advantage of in this Government. We are here to save Ugandans in their respective beliefs. Thank you for your contributions and we will welcome all information that can come in time. 

On Sudan, the question of market forces is to be studied a lot more than we are doing. You produce food and when there is no market, you say we are stuck. You produce food, when it is consumed -(Interruption)- I am not taking information because if this information is going to be useful, let us put it in a wider context rather than now where you are dealing with shortage of food in a crisis. I will accept your information, but do not call me back on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a petition which was brought here on the cost of essential commodities and shortages. I do not know whether we cannot really wait and debate that specifically. I would really appreciate it.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall that hon. Lagada raised a question on psychosocial trauma in Northern Uganda. I would like to inform the House that two months ago, exactly on 27 May 2008, I commissioned a project in Gulu to deal with this problem at Gulu Regional Referral Hospital - the Trans Psychosocial Organisation. This project is for the whole of Northern Uganda. 

In addition, the Ministry of Health is continuing to construct mental health units at regional referral hospitals. Soroti Referral Hospital already has a mental health unit. We still have a problem of ensuring that we have enough psychiatrists to work in these areas but we are trying very hard to get these people in place and to pay them better so that they can work at the mental health units. Lira Regional Referral Hospital is one of those hospitals which are going to benefit very soon. We actually signed the contract last week. So, a mental health unit will be built at Lira and this will also go a long way in addressing this problem. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you will follow up with the ministers in the committee. 

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member who raised the issue of disaster roads. You asked that the Ministry of Works was given Shs 10 billion from the government and you wanted to know what they did with the money. I want to inform the House that from part of the money, we got what we call Bailey bridges. In other words, I am disaster prepared for any floods in Uganda. As I talk now, if any bridge breaks down, I am well stocked with Bailey bridges; ten of them are already in our yard. 

We are disbursing Shs 2.5 billion to districts to work on their roads which were affected by the floods. The remainder of the money worked on some of the roads, like Brooks Corner to Kumi and there is one road - I cannot recall the name properly - but that is how we used the money. Therefore, it was for disaster, we used it for the disaster and I am disaster prepared. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to go to the next item but before I do that, you talked about food and it reminded me about a brilliant Ugandan woman whom I think we need to honour - this is Dr Florence Isabirye Muranga. Of course, I cannot move the motion from here but I hope at some stage one of the members in the House will bring a motion to honour her for her scientific discovery in Matooke.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 70 MILLION FROM THE WORLD BANK FOR THE UGANDA PUBLIC SERVICE PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT PROGRAMME

4.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The request to borrow was brought to Parliament and referred to the Committee on National Economy in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and Article 159 (2) of the Constitution. 

We wish to report as follows:

Methodology

We held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service and their technical staff.

The committee also analysed the following documents: A brief from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, project appraisal document; Public Service Reform Programme Strategy Framework (2005/06 – 2009/10); the financing agreement between IDA and the government of Uganda; the Fifth Poverty Reduction Support Operation (PRSC 5); Meeting the Challenge of Africa’s Development; a World Bank Group Action Plan, among others. We also analysed the report of the World Bank Task Force on Capacity Development in Africa.  

I would like to lay on Table: 

•	Minutes of the Committee on National Economy on the Public Service Performance Enhancement Project. 
•	A project appraisal document on the proposed credit of US$ 70 million from the World Bank dated May 23rd 2006. 
•	Public Service Reform Programmes Strategic Framework (2005/06 – 2009/2010) dated July 2005. 
•	The Fifth Poverty Reduction Support Operation dated December 13th 2005. 
•	The financing agreement for Uganda Public Service Performance Enhancement Project between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association dated December 18th 2006.
•	Meeting the Challenge of Africa’s Development. 
•	World Bank Group Action Plan dated September 7th 2005 and updated as of September 26th 2005. 
•	Building Effective States, Forging Engaged Societies Report of the World Bank Task Force on Capacity Development in Africa dated September 2005. 

Project Details

Government is seeking to borrow US$70 million from IDA of the World Bank to finance Uganda’s public service performance enhancement. The project is comprised of two components: One is to support the implementation of the government’s Public Service Reform Programme (PSRP) through a sector-wide approach programme. Component two is meant to foster performance enhancement initiatives on a demand driven basis supported by a performance enhancement facility. Access to funding is to be linked to each ministry, department and agency’s performance improvement plan for better service delivery and their demonstration of a commitment to organisational transformation.  

Project Objectives

The objectives of the project are:

1.	To contribute to improving efficiency and effectiveness in the use of public resources.
2. 	To create a more enabling environment for non-state sector operation.
3. 	To enhance economic growth and poverty reduction.
4. 	Ensure effective implementation of ROM as an integrated performance management system in MDAs and local governments.
5. 	Motivate and adequately remunerate public service, evidenced by real increase in pay each year at minimum level complemented with faster acceleration at technical, managerial and professional levels. 

The Proposed Funding

The Government is proposing to borrow US$70 million from IDA and the maturity period is 40 years with 10 years of grace at an interest rate of 0.75 percent per annum. 

Observations of the Committee

After scrutinising the project appraisal document and other documents related to this project, we observed the following:

1. 	Most of the objectives of the project could be achieved under routine activities of the ministry through the normal annual budgetary provisions of the Ministry of Public Service. 

2. 	The requested sum of US$70 million is too big an amount vis-à-vis the activities to be carried out and will certainly create a problem of absorption. 

3. 	Many of the activities under the project fall under different Government departments outside the mandate of the Ministry of Public Service.

4. 	A similar project is being implemented by DFID, DANIDA and Irish Aid under the third phase of the public service reform programme. 

5. 	The whole project design to us looked amorphous and ambiguous.

We therefore propose a revised project. Arising from the above concerns, the committee proposed that the project be refocused. I am happy to report that the Minister of Finance has redesigned the project to focus on key public service reform initiatives. The revised project requires only US$ 23 million down from the original US$ 70 million. The funds will be used to bridge the funding gap in the implementation of the third phase of the public service reform programme, which is currently financed by DFID, DANIDA and Irish Aid. The project will focus on the following key activities:

1. The implementation of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) in order to enhance the payroll integrity and eliminate ghosts from the payroll. 

2. 	Construction of the national records centre and archives for proper appraisal, safe custody and management of records.

3. 	Setting up a civil service college as a centre of excellence and for re-orientation of public service officers to service the interest of the country.

4. 	Undertaking targeted capacity building in strategic areas of the economy to spearhead the transformation process.  

The components are outlined below:

a) 	Component 1 - support to Public Service Reform Programme at a cost of US$ 15 million. Under this component, two strategic outputs are expected and these are: 

(i) 	The Integrated Personnel and Payroll System estimated to cost US$ 6 million. It will be a one stop human resource information centre which will, among others, do the following: 

•	Enable Government departments to access personnel records.
•	Enable automatic transfer of the retiring officers from the salary payroll to the pensions payroll. 
•	Sustain the gains from the payroll cleaning exercise. 
•	Provide an efficient means of human resource planning, management, monitoring and harmonisation of the staff establishment with the wage bill and payroll data. 
•	The planned activities under the IPPS are: construction of a facility to finance the system, procurement of the IPPS software and hardware, training of staff, acquisition of technical assistance and IPPS staff salaries. 

(ii) 	The second strategy under Component 1 will be construction of a national records centre and archives for proper appraisal, safe custody and management of records. It is estimated to cost US$ 9 million for the construction of the centre and equipping it with modern tools and software. 

Component 2 will be setting up a civil service college as a centre of excellence and re-orientation of public service officers to serve the interests of the country at a cost of US$ 8 million. This component has two sub components: 

(i) 	Establishment of a civil service college and centre of excellence. This will cost US$ 4 million. The college will provide in-house training for civil servants to ensure that they are responsive to the needs of the country. It will also undertake policy research and reviews necessary for the reforms in the public service. 

(ii) 	Targeted capacity building for transformation of the public service at a cost of US$ 4 million. This will involve support, training and research in strategic areas that enhance value addition and support in bridging the leadership gaps in the public service by supporting senior managers undertake core courses like MBA, to ensure that the public service is managed in a strategic and business oriented manner. 

Our committee observed the following: 

1. 	The committee recognises the need to complement the funding by DFID, DANIDA and Irish Aid for the third phase of the Public Service Reform Programme. This will go a long way in achieving the desired reforms within the public service. 

2. 	The revised amount of US$ 23 million is reasonable, taking into account the activities to be carried out and the targeted outputs. 

3. 	The committee was concerned with the continuous under budgeting of salaries for public servants resulting into supplementary requisitions. 

4. 	The committee observed that there are still incidences of ghost workers on the public service payroll. 

Recommendations

As part of the public service reforms, the committee therefore recommends as follows: 

1. 	Recognition schemes and salary increases of public officers be tagged to performance. 

2. 	Salary budgeting and planning should be at least for the entire financial year to avoid supplementary salary requisitions.
 
3. 	Supervision, inspection and monitoring, results oriented management and performance appraisal schemes should be emphasised for all public officers. 

4. 	Public Service should improve working conditions in an effort to retain and attract more professionals. 

5. 	Government should desist from continued creation of new districts and instead improve the facilities in existing districts. 

6. 	Pension reforms should be finalised and implemented since a lot of money has already been spent by Government. 

7. 	Lastly, we recommend that the public service payroll cleaning exercise be thoroughly handled and concluded since Government has continued losing lots of money through ghosts. The integrated personnel and payroll system database should be emphasised. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in conclusion, my committee recommends that this House authorises Government to borrow only US$ 23 million from IDA of the World Bank to finance the Uganda Public Service Enhancement Project to bridge the funding gap in the third phase of the Public Service Enhancement Programme. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the report has been signed by 11 out of 20 members so it is eligible for debate. However, I just needed to remind the House that this matter has been before this House for a very long time and the major bone of contention was the quantum of the money involved. I would like to know from the Minister of Finance whether he is agreeable to the proposal of the committee so that we do not waste too much time on it. The committee’s proposal is US$ 23 million.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have had a long debate and discussion with the committee on this matter and we have accepted that the loan quantum be scaled down to US$ 23 million so that the core activity of improving the public service can be undertaken. I therefore wish to support the proposal of the committee. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, now we are not talking about US$ 70 million but US$ 23 million. 

MRS RWAKIMARI: I just need clarification on page 5, where the committee says: “This component has the two subcomponents namely, (i) Establishment of a civil service college and centre of excellence”. I would like to know from the minister or anybody concerned whether it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Service to set up colleges and supervise them when we have a whole Ministry of Education responsible for that. I want to propose that this US$ 4 million be used to fund the roadmap to the reduction of maternal mortality in this country because it is misplaced. 

(Applause) This money is redundant and it is the responsibility of Ministry of Education to undertake this activity not Ministry of Public Service. Therefore, this money should be transferred to Ministry of Health to reduce maternal mortality in this country, which is killing 6000 women in Uganda.

5.11
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with you that we have had a long discussion on this same document. However, you will agree with me that it was not a waste of time because if you see the observations of the committee, you do not even get one positive; all the five observations were not positive to the document. However, having looked at the new document, which has been re-aligned as talked about by the chairperson, I still have these observations and reservations. How sustainable is it for us to borrow money for salaries? 

Secondly, if we are talking of having a college for excellence and training public servants, why don’t we also look at having part of it as a finishing school so that these children who come out of the universities can also benefit in terms of experience from the same college?

Madam Speaker, the Human Resource Development Plan of the Ministry of Public Service has not been clear for sometime.  I get worried when I look at page 6 where they are talking about targeted capacity building for the transformation of Public Service at $ 4 million. Who are you targeting?  This word “targeting” or “targeted” can be used to develop other staff members and those that are left out have always been the problem in Public Service.  

Madam Speaker, we are borrowing to clean up the payroll and ghost workers yet we know those who created the ghost workers. We know them because some of them are at the local level and connive with people at the centre. Now we have to pay for what they have done yet we can trace them. I do not agree with this. People must take personal responsibility and even if we borrow, they should be disciplined.

I do not know whether we are just looking at the Centre or we are also looking at the local government, which capacity in staffing is now at about 30 percent. Are we also looking at them? Are we looking at Buliisa with 9 percent or Namutumba with less than 20 percent, or we are going to have this money around the centre yet we believe it can be taken down to the grassroots? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.14
MR SIMON TOOLIT (FDC, Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I observe that we do not need this loan as the activities of the various ministries have already catered for most of these activities that we are seeking the loan for. Also, we still have similar projects under DFID, DANIDA and Irish Aid. We have not evaluated these projects and they are not yet completed. Why don’t we wait and see the end result of these projects, which are still running with the Ministry of Public Service?  

We are supposed to establish training colleges and save for excellence. We have UMI and MTAC, which are actually meant to train in-house employees. Why are we creating another centre? (Applause) Then we are saying we should support senior ministers to go for Masters in Business Administration. We have so many people with Masters in Business Administration loitering around and they have not been employed. Why don’t we employ these ones who are on the street instead of trying to train those who cannot be trained? (Laughter) 

The committee is saying we should construct records centres and archives. We have the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. That is the house meant for keeping our records and data. Why should you create another centre? Madam Speaker, I think this loan is not necessary. Thank you very much.

5.16
MR BUHANDE BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern was also about the establishment of the Civil Service college. The purpose for which the Institute of Public Administration, now called Uganda Management Institute was established many years ago is the same purpose for which you are trying to establish this college. I want to know whether Uganda Management Institute has failed to fulfill its obligations that we must duplicate and have a similar institution like the one we already have. I sincerely do not support that this $ 4 million should go towards establishing another institution when we have several institutions, which are carrying out the same activity. Maybe we could use some of the money, about $1 million to expand the facilities of Uganda Management Institute, Makerere University or for maternal health care as the hon. Member said. Thank you very much.

5.18
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to refer the committee to – If they had read the policy statement for Ministry of Information Technology and referred to the budget framework; annex v, which details the activity and outputs of each of these ministries, you would realise that under the Ministry of Information Technology, all these issues that have been highlighted in the revised components support to Public Service Reform Programme, the output is supposed to be automatic of retiring officers from salary payroll. All these other issues related to records and technology is already catered for under that ministry.

Secondly, we have had several occasions where we have passed budgets and loans for payroll cleaning exercises in the Public Service. What is the status report of the implementation of the payroll cleaning exercise? Have we evaluated to know whether we need money for this? Because really, if you are talking about the construction of a facility to finance the system, procurement of soft and hardware - these are in the 21st century. Why do you have to construct a facility for all these activities when you can computerise it? In the developed world, you move with a Laptop, you have all the information. I thought that was the essence of creating the Ministry of Information and Technology; that you are capable of having information on your Laptop in one office under the Ministry of Public Service, and now you are going into construction of this and construction of that!  

Madam Speaker, I think this is one of the conduits through which we fund monies that end up in people’s houses and people’s pockets. People are constructing and the President is very happy that the construction industry is booming; there are masquerading buildings everywhere. If you investigate, most of the buildings in mostly Mukono, Seeta and elsewhere are for civil servants; and where do they get this money? It is these kinds of projects that we pass, which actually have no tangible output that are duplication- actually they have said it quite well that this is a duplication of all the ministries.  

If you look at the public sector, Madam Speaker, the public sector in this budget is consuming 6.4 percent of the total budget. Agriculture is consuming 4.3 percent; water is consuming 3.3 percent of the total budget; law and order is consuming 4.8 percent; accountability which is meant to fight corruption is accounting for 4.8 percent. Now, look at how the priorities are set. What she said about maternal health - if you scrutinise the Ministry of Health budget, which is 10 percent of the total budget, maternal health is less than 2 percent of that budget. Why don’t we move this part of the budget to that instead of borrowing to duplicate all these activities? 

Madam Speaker, I want to disassociate myself from this loan, those who want to pass it may pass it; but I want to disassociate myself and say that it is a duplication of roles and activities. Capacity building consumes more than 5 percent of the budget in this Government and we cannot accept to continue funding capacity building, which is building houses for civil servants. So, Madam Speaker, I want to disassociate myself and ask that we do not pass this, if we are going to pass it, let us pass it for maternal health. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.23
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report and most importantly for having managed to reduce the total cost of this project from US$70 to just US$23 million. On that note, I am really wondering whether in the Ministry of Finance where even these other projects by Irish Aid and the like on Public Service are, the officers concerned really know what they are supposed to do. Allowing that we request for a loan of US$70 million, yet they are aware that there are other projects actually performing the same role, thus, duplication of work. Now that we have reduced the loan to US$23 million, do we really need to borrow? Can’t we find resources within our budgets to handle just US$23 million? I think US$23 million is manageable within our resources; after all, even after we pass budgets, we still come for supplementaries. So can’t we, from the extra resources we get due to efficient performance in the budget, have the US$23 million financed using those resources?

Secondly, I would like to make an observation on page 2, the committee has used abbreviations, ROM, MDS and they have not attached any explanation as to what ROMs and MDSs mean. So, I do not understand this.

Madam Speaker, on page 6, paragraph 2, there is US$ 4 million to support senior managers to undertake core courses like MBA to ensure that the Public Service is managed in a strategic and business oriented manner. I am aware that this country has trained a lot of professionals including doctors, but they have ended up serving outside this country; they have ended up in South Africa, they have ended up in the UK looking for greener pastures, and yet this Government spends a lot of money to train professionals. Now we are also going to train these public servants. What capacity do we have to retain this staff, especially after using Government resources to train them?  Because I know that there is a lot of brain drain. And secondly, are we going to bond them to at least stay for a given number of years before they can be allowed to move out of the country if they so wish?

On observation No.4, “…the committee observed that there are still existing incidences of ghost workers on the Public Service payroll.” I would also like to know how much we have been losing on account of ghost workers and how much are we going to save as a result of this proposal?  Definitely, there have been accounting officers who have been involved in this mess of ghost workers. What do we intend to do with them and I am sure the Minister of Public Service knows who these accounting officers are. So, what are we going to do with these public servants who have been eating out of ghost workers now that we have taken this measure to implement this programme, and how much money have we lost? That is what I want to seek from the Minister of Public Service. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am also getting interested. How many people are we actually talking about? What is the target group of this loan? How many people are we really talking about, for whom we require this money? Maybe somebody would answer that for me.

5.25
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Surely, the Chairman and his committee should have done more. This is not what I would have expected from this committee at this point in time.  If you look at what my colleague has alluded to on this component on page. 5. There is UMI, Madam Speaker. Why should we go in for this one? And if you go into details on the next page, page 3, the intention is to support senior managers to undertake core courses like MBAs. Sincerely, our poor children from deep down in the villages are also crying to be educated but they cannot and you are talking of supporting senior staff? 

The lecturers from Makerere are soon laying down their tools and the strike at Kyambogo is still on. So, why do we create parallel institutions when we cannot even support those ones which are present? (Applause)

Madam Speaker, if you looked at the observations, all the observations clearly put it right that this loan, at this point in time should not have come up. Look at page 4, “…the committee observed that there are still existing incidences of ghost workers…” We have passed money; time and again but up to now we still have ghost workers on the payroll? Since 2005/2006 up to now and you still talk of ghost employees? Surely, honourable chairman this one you have- 

If you go to 1 on page 7: “Public officers should be tagged to performance.” The performance actually is- (Interruption)

MR BWAMBALE: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. I want to inform my colleague that in the budget framework papers that have been presented by all the ministries, at the back page they have put a list of the employees in each ministry. I would wish the ministers to tell us whether those are ghosts or whether they are real- (Laughter) - so that we can have a payroll clean up. Are those names you are giving us real or ghosts and are we going to train ghosts that we need a payroll clean up?

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much honourable member. Madam Speaker, surely we should have done justice to our souls and the country at large. The observations, like I said, are very clear. The committee says on page 3, “A similar project is being implemented by DFID, DANIDA, Irish Aid, under the third phase.” Do we need this one, Madam Speaker? Page 5, “The whole design is amorphous and ambiguous…” and you go ahead still they talk of these monies? Even the Shs 23 million is still big; it needs to be totally cut. I thank you very much.

5.31
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to inform this House that one, I am a member of the Information, Communication and Technology committee. I am wondering whether there is real coordination of these ministries and if the Minister of Finance is aware of what is happening in other ministries. We heard the creation of the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology in the President’s manifesto. Already this Parliament has passed Shs 30 million and it has been spent and the data backbone has been constructed between Entebbe, Jinja and up to Bombo. The ministries would be able to tell us the truth that there is- even that connectivity within their offices for quick communication; immediate communication. It has been agreed that we are going to borrow more Shs 60 million to extend the data backbone to other areas where it has not been extended. 

Madam Speaker, as we discuss, we are going to discuss the policy statements of every ministry. What is the urgency of pulling out this for the Ministry of Public Service when we are going to discuss the budgets for each ministry in a very short time? I earnestly believe that this loan be deferred until we have discussed the ministry’s policy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.34
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here not in support of this loan. As most of my colleagues have put it, a loan, everyone knows it, is not a gift. You must pay with pain, with interest. Our children, our great grand children will be paying for this loan which is irrelevant.

When you look at observations on page 3, I am actually going to be disappointed with this committee. You observed so well and I was here clapping saying we have now come of age. “It is ambiguous, it is amorphous…” and then you end up putting money for a loan? Why? (Applause) No. Because you had observed so well -(Mr Kaddunabbi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable chairman; allow Members to speak.

MRS NYOMBI: So, Madam Speaker, when you look at these observations, honestly, they are the best we have had since I came to Parliament. Now that we have them, the best thing is to defer this loan. And I would propose, now that you all know the status of maternal health in this country -(Applause)- I beg to propose that the Ministry of Finance goes back where they cook these loans and go through the procedures and get the loans to Ministry of Health to expand maternity wings in hospitals, Health Centre IIIs and IVs and equip the emergency obstetric care in our hospitals. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Dr Suruma rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the minister? Perhaps let the Members finish then you will answer.

DR SURUMA: Okay.

5.36
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think people who have been taking record of what I have been saying- time has come that most of our colleagues are not serious. We have all gone through the policy statements; you have seen each ministry having a list of priorities, what you would call a wish list. But see the Ministry of Finance gambling with a loan like this one. Really I think I am at pains- (Applause) Let us put priorities among priorities. Let us go back; I know it has taken a bit of time. 

Madam Speaker, it is a bit disappointing. You see you are approving a loan of 70 then somewhere it comes to 23. I think let us set our priorities. When you look at this loan, it has been in these corridors for so long. Even if Dr Suruma would want to be honest, he does not want it but I think it has been forced onto him. 

Kindly, Madam Speaker, let us be quite reasonable this time and get this loan out of the way- (Applause) - it goes back. Let us think about it. But let us look at our priorities. There are so many roads especially roads to Karamoja, people are doing badly, to Nimule. Colleagues let us be more serious. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us hear from hon. Amuriat.

5.37
MR PATRICK OBOI AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this chance. I have looked at this document, read and analysed it critically. I have also listened to very brilliant contributions from my colleagues on either sides of the House. Their arguments are pro-people arguments. Their arguments are patriotic and I would like to say that I have no doubt that this loan is not a good loan for this country. This loan, if it were to be devoted to other sectors of the economy, would be put to meaningful use. The loan if, put in health, could build s full hospital; $70 million could even build two operational hospitals.

My dear friends, Madam Speaker, I think our sitting in this House is for the well being of this nation. And whatever contributions we make in this House should go to the fulfilment of our aspirations as Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, having said that, I beg to move that this honourable august House throw out the committee report and defer this loan until such a time when policy statements are considered after which we will then, as a House, consider the merits of this loan. I beg to move. 

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, you have seconded it?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I just stood to second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is just seconding it. Okay, let us have hon. Rwakimari.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is that instead of throwing out, I suggest that we reschedule it so that instead of it going to the Ministry of Public Service – (Interjections) – yeah! But let me make my point because throwing it out and rescheduling are two different things – (Interjections) – okay, it can be deferred, but let the Ministry of Finance re-discuss it with the World Bank to ensure that this loan, instead goes to the Ministry of Health to address issues of reproductive health in particular building more maternal centres for our constituencies so that the mothers of this country can stop dying from preventable causes. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, you want to say something? 

5.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to clarify that the Public Service is unable to implement Government programmes including many of the programmes in the budget yet many of you have questioned whether in fact the issues in the budget that were put forward will be implemented given the weakness in the Public Service. It is therefore, unrealistic not to consider some core activity to improve the effectiveness of the Public Service. It means Government will fail to implement critical programmes.

Madam Speaker, the issue of public health is well taken; it is an important matter. I would like to assure this House that between ourselves and the World Bank we are currently negotiating $ 100 million credit for the health sector. So, that will be adequate to deal deep with the problems of that sector. Taking $ 23 million out of the public service sector will not solve the problems of the health sector.

So, I would like to advise hon. Members that even if you scale this $ 23 million, it will not be available for the health sector. That is not the way institutions work; it simply mean that this money will just be given to another country to use. 

In my view, Madam Speaker, the fact that it has been reduced from $70 million to $23 and to the core activities of improving the public service, if we fail to see this point, we will not be helping the country; we will be failing it in a critical manner. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, I am also getting confused. Do we actually need to construct a special college for the civil service at $ 4 million? Please clarify. Okay, let us have an explanation from the hon. Minister of Public Service.

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I think as a nation we need a working public service; a public service that responds to your concerns and my interaction with most of you, honourable members, shows that most of your concern is that the civil service is not working. 

Therefore, this loan is intended to help the Ministry of Public Service in dealing with crosscutting issues that affect the public service by transforming it. 

I will take item by item because there is the issue of UMI. You may recall that UMI was formerly called IPA. At that time IPA had the strategic objectives of supporting the public service. In its transformation UMI has transformed itself into a business-like institute under the Ministry of Education and Sports and it is offering degrees and certificates – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, if they could give me a hearing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please allow the hon. Minister to explain.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, we had a staff college before the Kitante Training Institute, which was providing hands-on skills required by public officers. These were specific skills in different areas, either in leadership, secretarial studies, management, report writing and even in speech management. Through restructuring, our ministry let go the Kitante Training Institute. 

Looking back at other international institutions, which had divested themselves from staff colleges, they are now reverting to staff colleges. Therefore, the staff college is intended to help the Public Service in orienting itself in implementing Government programmes at different MDAs which are ministries and departments as requested. 

So it is important that we have this centre to actually do help all the 230,000 civil servants to get hands-on skills to do their jobs. It is different from professional courses that are given by Makerere University, institutes, and colleges; it is to train those who join the Public Service to deliver the Public Service programmes. 

There has been an issue of the payroll cleaning; the payroll cleaning is dynamic because people move in and out of the civil service and I can see honourable colleagues who were in the civil service here. So the payroll is dynamic. We are trying to modernise the management of the payroll by having an integrated personal system that will have all the data of the individual public servants. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to talk about the National Archives. The national records - archives are down in Entebbe –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. Hon. Byabagambi should not divert me because I am very serious on this. Madam Speaker, we have a lot of records in this house to prove that our army had ghost soldiers and that the Government of Uganda is in the business of cleaning the payroll and removing the ghost soldiers. But we have not seen the Minister of Defence coming here to ask us for a loan to remove ghost soldiers. Is the honourable minister of Public Service – even before I get to that- secondly, we also know that the Government of Uganda puts in a lot of money to fund Government universities. The issues she is narrating, secretarial studies are done in Makerere and UMI, public administration and management, leadership training – all of them are done in those institutions. 

So, is the honourable minister in order to come and mislead this House to first of all to think that she has such powerful ghosts that we have to pass a loan to get rid of her ghosts in public service when we actually have witnessed Ministry of Defence cleaning up their payroll without a loan?

Secondly, is she in order to come here and insinuate that when these public service institutions come on board, that they are going to set up a totally different curriculum for secretarial studies, management and administration, when we actually know that the very things that are being done in our universities are the very things that our civil servants require. 

Thirdly, and most importantly, is she in order to come here to ask us to give money to the training of civil servants at such a high level when we already have a shortage for USE?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, you have been here since this debate began and there has been no support from any Member of this House from both sides of the House. And really, even me, I am sitting here and I am not very convinced –(Applause)– hon. Prime Minister, I am not convinced that the courses intended to be carried out in those special colleges cannot be done at Makerere. Can’t we have at lest an additional faculty on civil service – anyway, this matter is not getting favour from this House at this material time? So can you please assist us?

5.54
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I suggest that we defer this matter. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the house is adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 August 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

