Wednesday, 3 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA TOURIST BOARD BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mrs Dr Kazibwe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Uganda Tourist Board Bill, 1994; be read the First Time.  I beg to move. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mrs Dr Kazibwe): I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 1994; be read the First Time.  I beg to move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NON-PERFORMING ASSETS RECOVERY TRUST BILL, 1994

(Debate continued.)

MR KAJUBI SEPIRIYA (Kasanda County, Mubende): Mr Chairman, that you very much for giving me this opportunity to address this controversial issue on Non-Performing Assets Trust Bill.  I am standing, Mr Chairman, to support it, with a lot of observations, Sir.

I am standing here, on behalf of farmers.  I am therefore, going to address the farmers credit scheme. Because most of the farmers are going to also be included in this section. And farmers include the rural farmers; because rural farmers, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MRS JOYCE MPANGA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, are we in order to meet before we form a quorum?  We have to discipline the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: The House does not realise a quorum, so I adjourn for 15 minutes.  

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes due to lack of quorum.) 


(Quorum formed and Debate continued.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NON-PERFORMING ASSETS RECOVERY TRUST BILL, 1994

MR KAJUBI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am standing to support the Bill; on the understanding that, it has come to save the farmers who were involved in credits from being sold up and from being mistreated by the banks.  Farmers do not want any way to escape the responsibility of paying up. They have gone through. So, in my capacity as chairman of the Commercial Farmers’ Association, and Kasanda Development Association, I think I qualify to really to defend farmers because of, first of all, let me explain to you the meaning of a commercial farmer.  Because when one talks about a commercial farmer, one intends to think that a commercial farmer is a very rich person, very proud; well they qualify him with a lot of adjectives.  But a commercial farmer is a farmer who works for profit.  Whether he works on one acre, two acres or he may be a big farmer, but that is the meaning of a commercial farmer.  And the Trust is going to include all the farmers who took very simple loans. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Karuhanga; Member of NRC for Nyabushozi, to violate one of the regulations and bring his bag here? Instead of depositing it where it should be -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member you are out of order, if your bag is here.  Please, deposit it out.

MR KAJUBI:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification and guidance from the Chair, about continuing with this Debate.  Yesterday the Minister presented the Bill, we also presented a report from the Sectoral Committee; and in his presentation, the Minister gave us the impression that the Bill was a joint venture between the government and the Sectoral Committee.  Yet when the chairman of the Sectoral Committee was referring to the report, which he circulated to us, there are lots of omissions. For example, we are told about the document, which the chairman of the Sectoral Committee waved in this House, containing names of people who owed UCB the money.  Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification whether we should first consider the report of the Sectoral Committee or go ahead and debate the Bill? Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The report of the Committee, I suppose was circulated to the hon. Members and I would like to presume that, hon. Members read the report so that report only facilitates the hon. Members now to conduct this General Debate on a wider perspective, than they would, otherwise, have done so. I think everything is in order.

MR KAJUBI:  Mr Chairman, on having described the meaning of a commercial farmer, I would like to ask the hon. Members here, to really support me, because all of us qualify as commercial farmers, and most of the people we represent in our respective areas are victims of these bank loans, and these are the people who have been really developing the areas; and these are the people who have produced milk we now consume say, in Kampala.  And these are the people who have been producing beef, and these are the people who have really grown plenty of maize, and now Uganda is proud of being one of the most well supplied countries with maize and so on.  So, we are even in a position to export our grain to other countries and so on.  Although some parts of our nation of course through carelessness have been very Hungary indeed.  I mean carelessness; we have been careless, because we did not really carter for them.

I would also like to correct the attitude of the public and the bankers and other people towards the people who are really having loans. These people are called defaulters, I think the word defaulter is really very abusive.  Because a defaulter in my understanding is a person who intends to make profit at the expense of the person from whom he gets money; or anything like that. But these people never intended to cheat banks, but they had very good intentions. They got money, not only to benefit their own families; but to benefit the areas around them, and to benefit the nation in return.  But through hard conditions, harsh were the conditions, anyway, there are arm plight, become very, very hard indeed.  Who are these people? The people I am really standing in for, are rural farmers, because this is the biggest group.  Rural farmers, of course, their portion of the day is small, but in their own it is not small because, some of these people got Shs 300,000, Shs 500,000 up to probably one million.  But they could not really meet their obligations because of the hard conditions. This group also includes women groups. Women in Uganda are known to be very honest, and to be well organised; but even them anyway failed.  They failed to pay.  These groups well includes diary farmers, ranchers -(Interruption)

MR TURYASHEMERERWA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the speaker that, Mrs Nyamungu who feel herself in River Nyamwamba was a women, and she had failed to pay almost over than 250 million belonging to UCB -(Laughter) 

MRS DR KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  The information, Mr Chairman, to the Member who has just given the information, that when such tragedies occur, we should endeavour to find out exactly what happened.  The women lent money to men who refused to pay.  That is a fact.  (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS DR KAZIBWE:  And this is typically men - women relationship.  The women lend, the men do not - you know on their side of the bargain but, Mr Chairman, I want to further, strengthen hon. Kajubi’s contribution, by saying that the recovery rate for loans given to women is over 85 per cent in every institution.  This has been documented.  The 15 per cent that do not pay are a result of natural disasters within any financial transaction.  So, maybe, a bit of research needs to be done why over 85 per cent of men do not pay when 85 per cent of women pay.  Thank you.

MR KAJUBI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The group also includes even church leaders and church associations and so on.  I mean by church, I mean religious associations, which fell.  What happened?  Why did these people really find it hard to meet their obligations; now that we have known that, we never intended to cheat banks or to break banks and so on.  Something happened, they got most of the loans to buy tractors, to buy cattle, to buy, you know poultry implements and so on; happened soon after our currency reform here.  You remember a person who had a shilling, had only 700/- shillings on his account.  Those were say, Shs10 million, found themselves with only Shs700/- on their accounts and a person with 100 million, just you know, had only about Shs70, 000.  So, by the time people got loans, their accounts had been reduced by this change. (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I thank you, very much.  The information I want to give the hon. Member on the Floor; is that, the principle here is that, when you borrow money, from anybody, just by ethics, you should not default.  That is the first principle.  The second principle is, before you borrow money, you should know what you are going to do with it.  The third, somebody who we owe money which is the Government of Uganda, should through the bank UCB, should find a way to collect that money, because there are people in this country who believe they can get away with monies that belong to the people Uganda. Now, in case of farmers and in case of these disadvantaged groups, if a case has to be pushed, let the case be outside the principle.  But the principle is once you borrow money, you must pay. And now, if we have disadvantaged groups, like farmers, like women, we can push a case forward, but we do not change the principle.  Thank you very much.

MR KAJUBI: Mr Chairman, I hope the hon. Member who has just been standing up probably did not understand me.  I said farmers want to pay everything.  But they expect the trust to be very understanding, and to be a listening body, more than the banks.  For example, the Uganda Development Bank now is selling up people’s property.  The Managing Director is selling whatever he can lay his hands on.  For instance, Mr Ogwal’s lorry; the husband of Cecilia - I am not a UPC man, anyway, I am a Movement man; but this is a member of my association.  His lorry was sold for only 8 million.  There is a racket that is buying up this property, and they sell this property to themselves. Just imagine a Tata lorry to be sold at 8 million shillings and a half of it was credit.  

So, this is the sort of thing I am really - and it is through you, that I am asking the Minister for Finance to really ask this gentleman, the managing director of UDB to stop selling up farmers property.  Because if we go on, selling up all these - liquidating farmers, no better farmers will come up.  Answering my Friend, I think he has gone out, I do not know why he has disappeared, let us forget him. (Laughter) We are not running away from responsibility, but we want to fulfill it, but we want our calls to be listened to. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is up, hon. Member.

MR KAJUBI:  Mr Chairman, even the prices of diesel during the war went up and farmers found it very hard to really pay their bills, marketing of produce, and marketing of milk also; even now, milk is very, very cheap indeed. People from Ankole - many members of the association from Ankole are finding it very hard to break even because of the prices of milk. So these are the hazards, which the farmers find but they are not really intending to leave the responsibility that they want to be considered.  Even interest sky-rocketed. By the time they took loans, interest was about 15 per cent, then it jumped to 25 per cent.  This was beyond their capacity, then it jumped to 35 per cent until it stopped at 48 per cent.  But just imagine, they had very short time to pay up and that is why anyway they found themselves really failing.  

What I would request the Minister for Finance to do is to help the farmers to extend their pay period and if possible, let them pay the principle and leave probably the compounded interest because - for instance, a person who got a ten million loan is now required to pay about 40, 50 million and so on.  Anyway, this will be up to him and we hope the Minister for Finance will really consider the farmers group specially. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr Chairman, I want first of all, to thank the hon. Minister for Finance and hon. Yona Kanyomozi for presenting this Bill very ably.  In fact, I thought that hon. Kanyomozi was about to become the born again NRM yesterday. But I find it painful because for the first time, I am going to disagree with hon. Kanyomozi.  I definitely find it difficult to support this bill; not because I am not born again but because we did last year reject this proposal of creating a Trust and we had reasons and those reasons are as valid this year as they were last year.  Before I talk about the bill, you will recall that several times, Members of this House have expressed disapproval about so many people who could have solved their problems with Ministers and heads of departments especially people from outside Uganda have had easy access to the President.  And we have expressed concern that for the dignity of the President, he should not be the one to meet everybody who comes from where and where.  I want to repeat this and to express concern.  Recently, the newspapers reported that our Head of State was going to accompany a Minister from another country to Kidepo.  I felt that the Minister for Tourism, of Foreign Affairs should have been the one to do that kind of thing.  Unfortunately, they ended up being stuck there.  We almost had a problem.  

I think we should be very careful about the security of the President, about the planes he travels in and about how often he is in the air.  He is all over the place in Uganda and outside.  I think the President’s journey should be very well monitored from his own security because as the politics of Uganda is now, the security of this country is interwoven with the security of President Museveni himself. I would like therefore, to come to the bill.  

I find it very difficult to support this bill because as I have said in the last session, this House rejected this proposal of setting up a Trust.  The main reasons we gave were that we should be able to promote and improve on the department in the bank that is responsible for collecting loans.  We think that if there are people who are not capable of doing this job properly as the hon. Kanyomozi point out yesterday, he said that the bank officials owe up to about three billion shillings.  I think if those people cannot do the job properly, we should remove them and put there other people and have the bank to do the job.  Really, how are the other banks collecting their loans?  Why? We have got all these private banks.  They are recovering their loans and Uganda Commercial Bank cannot do that.  I find it very, very difficult.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, may I inform the Member on the Floor that if he has had an accident on his leg, can be really treat this leg.  Because the Commercial Bank has a problem of collection.  Some of them are even here.  So we think it is better to have somebody else to that operation so that we can follow them and get the money.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would have been happier if the hon. Member had substantiated about people who are here, who have not recovered their loans.  Because otherwise we cannot leave that kind of statement in the air otherwise if may be regarded as irresponsible. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member for Kalaki to make here as being the owners of non-performing assets without giving clarification as to who he was referring to?  He must substantiate.

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member for Kalaki seems to be skeptical of himself.  So I have no obligation to rule on that.  Hon. Tiberondwa, please go ahead with your point.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, most of us in this House feel we are being cheated.  Are we in order to continue discussing this report and even the bill when the list of defaulters is not given to us?  Are we in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: We are perfectly in order.  Yesterday, that matter was raised by the chairman of the Committee.  So we are perfectly in order. Please, hon. Tiberondwa, oblige the House and proceed otherwise your time is running out.

DR TIBERONDWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  If the people who are working in the banks are not clean enough they should be replaced because if for example -(Interruption) If they are not good enough, you can recruit others from outside the bank because, if you are not capable of getting these people from outside the bank, where are you going to get members of the board of the Trust? Where are you going to get people to put on the secretariat of this Trust? These people are Ugandans; instead of creating a separate body, another parastatal, we should get these people that we would normally put in the Trust and appoint them to work in the banks.  It will be much cheaper and much more economical.  For example, we have the legal department in the Uganda Commercial Bank and we are now going to set up another legal department called the Tribunal.  We do not use the services of the legal department; we use the services of the credit department to recover this money. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, hon. Tiberondwa should know that the Barclays Bank had a similar problem and this mainly rose about as a result of the high interest rates imposed on us and as a result you find that the interest rates are 50 per cent and the capital may be 50 per cent and in some cases even higher.  So what Barclays Bank did was to lower interest rates and they have managed to recover most of those loans. So our officials and our Deputy Minister for Finance is here.  He should, when negotiating next time with Washington World Bank and IMF know that interest rates in any country can contribute to development, otherwise.  In our case, I am glad that it was admitted that the countryside economic activity is not moving.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I think the Minister should be very honest with us and tell us that the creating of this Trust is conditionality from the IMF and the World Bank so that we do not even discuss it.  We just accept it.  But if we are going to use ordinary logic, I do not think we should create another parastatal inside another parastatal when we are going for privatisation.  If for example, the people who are lending us this money through the right hand, want to take it through the left by employing more expatriates in this Trust as they were doing in the case of PERD. I think we should be told the truth so that we do not waste time. I think hon. Kanyomozi must have been told the truth.  That is why he was so supportive yesterday. He knows some of the truth which are do not know. (Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Tiberondwa as a religious man that there is nothing hidden.  The presentation, which I made and the one made by hon. Kanyomozi, is the truth.  You are addressing matters, which are not the matters before the House.  The matter is not how UCB is going to be managed.  The matter is how UCB has been managed in the past, which has led to an accumulated problem we are trying to solve to make UCB perform again better for the country. So, there is nothing hidden.  

Now for people to put their money in UCB, even they are private Ugandans, UCB must be a viable profit making institution.  We want to make that big institution so that Ugandans can put in their money and make money.  There is no other hidden agenda I want to assure you.

DR TIBERONDWA: I am very happy to hear that the Trust we are creating is not a conditionality from IMF and the World Bank.  I am very happy to get that information and we will take note of it.  I now want to talk about the politics of the Uganda Commercial Bank.  I want to make it clear that I personally do not support the privatisation of the Uganda Commercial Bank.  You can privatise other things but I think for political and many other reasons and for developmental reasons, I think the Uganda Commercial Bank should not be sold.  We have sold everything, and we do not even see where the money has gone.  But if we go on selling all these assets now and there are people who are buying these things when they are advertised, in fact, they are not even advertised, you find (Interruption)

MR SENDAUWULA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify or put in a point here to the contribution, which is being made by hon. Tiberondwa whereby an impression can easily be created that whatever is sold, nobody knows where the money goes.  I would like to inform hon. Tiberondwa and others that this very House, in its wisdom, decided and appointed two people to be part and parcel of the exercise of selling off the assets and certainly, these hon. Members, one of them is a chairman of the Public Enterprises and the other one is the chairman of the committee on the economy; so that there could be more transparency, so that Parliament can be continuously informed of proceeds and how funds are invested and finally used by government.  

So, in all fairness, it is not fairness, it is not fair for the hon. Member to say whatever we have sold, we do not know what has happened and someone will pick it up.  I remember the Press will pick this up and it will start selling in the public that people do not know where the money has gone.  The money is properly invested and if there was any problem the two hon. Members would have already made a statement in this House.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA: Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, what I am really concerned about -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to allay the fears of the House and suggest that hon. Kanyomozi and I are doing a reasonable job and that we did not want to bring details outside the accepted procedure which is going to be by way of a report being brought before this House. I think the House is justified nevertheless to complain that the report has not come but I only want to assure the Members that the money is properly invested and all the banks were invited to compete by way of offering interest rates including UCB as you indicated in the Statute and therefore, the money is safely there and the Minister is here.  In the very near future, I am sure you are going to receive a report accounting for every bit to the implementation of that.  

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just to supplement and complement what my Colleague has said, the only thing which we have observed and we have already brought to the House is the problem related to Clause 25 of the Statute and we have already mentioned it here; that we found was not working the way the House thought it should.  We have alerted government, we alerted the committee we are working with and we have alerted Cabinet both verbally and in writing; and they are going to come to you as the Minister for Finance the other day said, whatever little that has been done, we have made sure - and I repeat, we have made sure that, that money is not squandered. All the money that has been secured was competed for as my colleague has said and got a very good return in all the banks where it is deposited. Nobody has touched it yet and it is going to come and be used as the Statute stipulates so that we gain the benefit from those assets that we have so far liquidated.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the two hon. Members from Ntungamo. They must have been informing the people of the three counties of Ntungamo District. (Laughter) One of the things which is worrying the public is that when things are ready for sale whether they are hotels, houses, land, companies and so on, the public does not know.  You are told so and so has built to this house, so and so has built that house, a Minister, a big person and we do not know what is ready to be bought. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that all the assets so far sold have been advertised in most of the local papers.  New Vision carried this thing for three months, International Press carries these things.  Surely, I do not know whether he wants us to display it in the villages in Igara or elsewhere. (Laughter) We have done what the law requires.  The law requires that we advertise and give time to those who can read newspapers to read to the papers and respond to the adverts.  And that one, we have actually adhered to religiously.

DR TIBERONDWA: At the beginning, Mr Chairman, I told you that hon. Kanyomozi was born again and you can see.  (Laughter) One of the reasons why I think we should not sell the Uganda Commercial Bank is that I think the Government needs a bank which it can use for development purposes.  Take for example, the Rural Farmers Scheme.  If it was not badly handled, it was a very good scheme. (Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to whether he means by not saying UCB, that UCB cannot be privatised.  Of course, the two are different.  Is he saying that UCB must remain and should always be a government company or is he saying that UCB can actually if being a government company be privatised, local Ugandans buy shares and remain a Ugandan based organisation?  Because the two are different. If you can clarify on that one.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, what I mean is this, we have for example, the Sheraton Hotel, we have been able to hire good management and we have not sold it.  I would like the Uganda Commercial Bank to be treated in the same way; we have good management contract instead of selling it to other people after all, this is a peoples bank, every Ugandan has got shares in that bank and, therefore, it is not fair to put it in the hands of a few people who are capable of buying it off.

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is up hon. Member. Your time is running out.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I am about to finish.  I, therefore, want to propose that when we come to the Committee Stage, I want to propose that Schedule 3 of this Bill, be deleted completely so that we are not preparing the U.C.B. for selling, but we are preparing it for good performance, for good management when it is still a Uganda people’s bank.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

BRIG. MOSES ALI (East Moyo, Moyo):  Your Excellency, sorry, Mr Chairman -(Interruption and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Sometimes, Mr Chairman, there is a belief that what comes out of somebody’s mind may be is God send and perhaps one day you will be addressed Your Excellency, we do know.  So, I do not mean it, but it is a prayer.  I stand to oppose that this Bill must be carefully studied and certain categories, the performers or contributors of the economy of this country; some of them should not be included in this Bill or the Bill should not affect them.  The reasons due to the nature of their work; these are the farmers.  The farmers’ nature of work is completely different from any other work that is done to promote economy of this country.  A farmer has sustained the 17 or whatever million now of Ugandans on their own for all these years and for many years to come; and this farmer depends entirely on unpredictable weather.  The farmer again, a son of Uganda has come from overseas with good ideas to uplift the living standard of these rural farmers by introducing Rural Farmers Scheme and he assisted these people without guarantee although the whole project was ill conceived.  It was not properly studied, the farmers were not consulted, the problems were not studied and all this has been put on the farmer.  Now, the farmer is to pay this money.  If this project or the scheme was not created, I am sure all these farmers who are now subjected to harassment, will not get access to this money because after all, they do not know how to go about it; they would have remained to where they are but without harassment.  But somebody with good intention although his project was ill conceived, brought these people into problems. The money given to them under the Rural Scheme has now triple; in fact has gone many times, people have changed their places, they do know what to do next.  So, this sort of people, because they have been brought into problems by the Government officials without studying the project properly, I think he should be excluded from this scheme, because -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member who is also a member of Commercial Farmers, the Committee did meet the Commercial farmers, they presented their problem, we looked at those problems, and we actually did - I did yesterday even say that some of the Scheme were ill-conceived although good intentioned there was a problem in the Farmers Schemes where they were given inputs and those inputs did not come in time and they did not even negotiate what inputs they should get, the loans were structured in such a way that they - we did discuss this with the farmers, representatives, but we found a bit of a problem in giving a general blanket cover to them.  Why? Because certainly, knowing the nature of our society and not only our society, all societies, certainly all the loans would suddenly be turned into farming in one way or another since most of us live in rural areas.  You would say a part which you borrowed to build a house was a part to house the Manager of the farm.  So, your loan would be turned into a farming loan.  

Since there is a provision in the law, that the trust will look at each case differently, then it will be easy for them to bring these points across so that the adjustments can be made because each loan, or each ‘defaulter’ will be looked at and his circumstances studied so as to arrive as to what how much he should pay, when he should pay it, and in what manner.  That one we thought would be the easiest solution instead of having a blanket solution of saying all farmers should not pay, who is not a farmer?  It is not only the commercial farmers, they are peasant farmers whom we said are holding Shs120, 000. We wanted this to be left to the Trust so that they can deal with it at the time of dealing with these people.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  That it is due to poor Policy in approach to the farmer that we are having these problems. What ought to be clear and done financially, is to create a loan bank which closely is associated with the farmers so that in each area all over the country, grass roots are clear - the character of the persons who borrow the money would be clearly known, locally as well s the bank; because we have the 40 agricultural officers and community development officers and that would clear to be close to the farming community.  The Trust we have proposed in my view will be faraway from the farmer.  I bet you with my chicken, it will not get in touch with farmer.  Look at the red gap of the middlemen that will be created to get into the farmer.  Let us think in this House, particularly those who agriculturalists and agricultural economists who are close to producing from the land through the farmer.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to allay the fears of some of the Members and the Member holding the Floor that this problem was discussed intensively and extensively.  I for one, you know, I call a spade a spade not a big spoon, but the way money was dished out, was not proper and therefore, the only way, because they were cheats from some of us in Government and it was not proper, but the Trust, I thought very deeply myself would be the only way of going far in collecting some of this money, because some of the bank officials were involved and you cannot take a thief to catch a thief; I am not saying that bank officials are thieves, but they lent money to themselves without proper guidance and they also accepted chits from Government officials.  Therefore, when we are discussing this problem, we must go into the roots because the problem has got its appendages even on some of the people who have left the bank; who were lending money from once one area of the country and therefore, this problem.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I accept those information, but I am saying that I am speaking on behalf of the farmers especially the rural farmers who are not represented here.  If we are all farmers, nobody apart from one or two has spoken about the rural farmers scheme including the chairman of the Sectoral Committee on the economy.  

So, we are saying, if you do not bring poisoned food to me, to eat, that is rural farmers scheme, these farmers would not have suffered and therefore, they should not continue to be punished for mistakes which are not theirs and we are saying, theirs are very neutral.  Now if you go to Luzira just to go and visit; there is Upper Prison, for specialised crimes, there is Murchison Bay, that is for thieves of chicken and so on, you do not mix the critical criminals with small defaulters. These rural farmers are minor defaulters, so, you do not mix willful defaulters like those who borrowed millions and millions, and do not want to pay and they are also officials of the bank; you cannot put these people in court.  

So, that is why I am saying, keep these people or send them to the reformed school. The farmer should be kept outside this exercise moreover, there is an intention in future to re-organise the farmer. Now, if you just put them in one place like that, then the future of the farmer could not be there.  We are thinking of having a bank for the farmers; we are thinking of having special rate of interest for farmers, but if now you put farmers together with this man in Kikuubo, who goes to Busia three times a week and can beat the interest rate, all this I think is a wrong approach - is a wrong way of helping farmers.

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the House and the Member to continue referring to these small men who have been punished and talking about big fish who are being protected.  Is it in order to keep referring to these, without substantiating and bringing the big fish to the knowledge of this House?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not very clear to me whether the hon. Member is after the big fish or the small fish.  So, I have no cause to make any ruling, hon. Moses Ali, please go on with your Debate.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  When I talk of small men, I refer to the rural farmers, the beneficiaries of the Rural Farmers Scheme - the small men; the big fish if he wants me to use his words, are those people who are Managers of the funds they give themselves.  So, they are in a better position to give themselves as much as possible.  So, this is what I am talking about and if he wants to listen for more information, he should go to the chairman of the Economy Committee; he has the entire list and the figures.  So, that is as much as the rural farmers’ scheme is concerned, and that they should be kept out of this Scheme or the Trust.  

Next; another ill-conceived package, the RPE, this loan from USAID and EEC and indeed some of us have benefited from it and many of them are not here and so on.  This scheme again is ill conceived because they were rated in American everything is decided; even the bankers here, they do not know how to go about it.  Now, when the scheme comes you are given a tractor and that tractor is delivered to you today LCs may be opened six months ago, Now, when the LCs opened, that is when the loans start earning interest, the day you get the tractor after six months, already your loan has increased - accumulated by the interest of six months, you have to wait for another eight months to get the plough which you have not got, because it is not delivered with the tractor, that means therefore, you cannot use the tractor for two years - then you will get the last equipment in order to be productive.  

Now, how can you ask this farmer whose grace period has even expired in two years begin to pay you when in two years he has not done anything with this equipment and this is what you say, is a loan, is killing the farmer.  This is a man who is seated here and did not know about the man from America, they came, they brought the money and the money was brought to Bank of Uganda who added his interest, UDB his interest in this case UCB and so on.  So, a farmer must be protected; this is ill-conceived package; the interest that has accrued was all put on this farmer without consulting him.  He has never said, ‘I wanted a trailer, I wanted a tractor’; he never said it; it was just brought, and he was told ‘take this’ -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member your time is up, please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that apart from these problems of the interest accruing, there are very many of these farmers and other businessmen who have been supplying to Government they get loans from the bank, they do whatever they are doing, and then they supply Government departments; the Army, the Prisons and so on and then as the loan accrues interest, the Government does not pay these people; there are people to whom Government owes millions of shillings from as far as 1990 and these peoples loans are accumulating interest and these people are also included in the list that hon. Kanyomozi has. I would like to propose therefore, as additional information, that hon. Kanyomozi should undertake to put this big list in the Parliamentary Library; so that we can all go and see this list and we can deal with it pointing out various groups of people who are becoming victims of this very unfair system. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up; please wind up, hon. Member.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want Members to really follow this issue properly.  Very many people are suffering without bitterness; nobody talks about their fate.  So, we want these people to be given chance, leave them out of these problems. Now, we were to take further this problem of the domestic debt, I think, I have raised this issue here many times and it appears to be regarded a secret of Ministry of Finance we are fully ware - even the unborn child is aware of our external indebtedness, that is 2.6.  Even if you are deaf, somebody will tell you, you know, but why can we not know our domestic debt?  How much are we indebted to our own people, how much?  We do not know.  

Now, as Honourable has said, these people are incapacitated because they are not paid by Government and they borrowed the money from the very UCB; the interest accumulated, it has been compounded and now they are the people who are going to be - their property are going to be sold yet, they have not been able to pay because the Government has failed to pay them.  Now, whose mistake is this?  This is -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up hon. Member.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  This is a government’s mistake. These people must be kept out of this boat of Trust Bills; it is completely out because Government is a party to their own mistakes. So, I think Members should understand when I talk of a farmer, I am not interested party, but I am talking of these poor people in the country who wanted to be helped.  They ended up in a grave alive. So, this is a shame and I am sure Members will support me.  We keep these three categories or even four if they are discovered later on out of this.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MISS BAHEMUKA (Women Representative, Hoima): I stand to support the Bill but with the following observations.  Section Number 5 talks about the objects of the Trust.  I should think that the word ‘object’ should be termed as ‘objectives.’ It gives a better meaning in this Case.  Then when I look at Clause No.6, Subsection V1, it says anybody who has interest with the Trust, shall not qualify for appointment to the Board.  Then when I look at No.7, it contradicts No.6 because it says here – ‘any member on the Board, who is found with interest, shall declare in writing his interest to the Board’.  

Now, if this member has interest and yet he is disqualified in number, how is it that he is going to be considered to be appointed on the Board? This is creating a loophole, which will make the trust to fail in its objectives. (Applause) 

So, I would say, No.7 is deleted. Then when I come to subsection no.8, it says still - a member of the Board has interest, he is found out and he will be convicted, he will be made to pay the fine of 1,000,000 and shall also be removed from the Board. But then, he has already been transacting business on this Board. He has participated in making the policies according to Clause No.7. So, the policies which such a person will formulate are found to make the trust fail.  So, here I would request the Minister responsible for this Bill to reconsider the wordings of these clauses.  Otherwise, this Trust is bound to fail to carry out its objectives.  

Then, when I look at No.12, it says that this Trust will set the rates, give the terms and conditions of its work.  Suppose there is a loophole which was not foreseen and such members are appointed to the Board, the rates they are going to set and the terms and conditions will be in their favour - not so much in the favour of carrying out their work as indicated in the objectives but they will be considering their own in terms so that they perpetuate their interests in the Trust. Therefore, we shall find that this parastatal, which is being created, is not doing any better work than the UCB.  The money they intend to recover may not come forth and therefore, we shall find ourselves having to create another parastatal, which will carry on this work. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  The rates under Clause 12 are not the rates being payable to the people working on the Trust.  The money, which is going to the people working in the Trust, is determined elsewhere by the Minister of Finance.  This section is dealing with what the people - the defaulters owe.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Kanyomozi to assume the role of the Minister? (Laughter) Because he is answer every query.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member is in order to give information. He is in order.

MR KANYOMOZI:  So, I am saying, Mr Chairman, I will not assume the role of a Minister.  I have had my time of being a Minister; and I hope I am still in the running to be a Minister sometime.  I do not want to use up any bodies position but I am saying, because I think since I was involved in this thing that I should be able to clear some anomalies, which the Members may be having, and also to supplement the hon. Minister so that this Bill is finished quickly and work is done.  That is all.  So, I am saying, under Clause 12 the rates which are in that Clause are affecting the defaulters and that will modification so that people like the rural farmer’s scheme or those who are adversely affected by the macro economic policies of government are considered differently so as to enable them to clear the indebtedness that they have.

MISS BAHEMUKA:  I thank the Member for the information.  Now with these rates, I think the different defaulters, each of them should be considered as an individual because each person has different reasons for having failed to pay the expected amount.  Again, under this payment, we have already been told that some branches 32 of them have been closed, more especially upcountry.  Now, in these branches, the farmers and other people who got the loans have been facilitated to make savings.  Then it becomes worse for them to save if there is no branch in their area or co-operation.  

I wonder whether the Minister has put in place an alternative whereby these people can be facilitated to make some savings.  Some of our areas upcountry are really far away from the main branch at the District Headquarters and it becomes difficult for those people to carry their money to the town and again we have some ambushes on the road.  Now, it will be still difficult for these people to pay back these expected amounts.   I thank you.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabu County, Rukungiri): Thank you Mr Chairman. It is not normally my tradition to be irrelevant or to smuggle information but I feel impelled, to say something about the statement made by the Minister of Health yesterday.  I want to apologise to the House that I came in a bit late and consequently I did not hear everything he said; but the House should know that I was one of the people who insisted that Minister makes a statement about the sate of malaria in this country.  The reason why I did it is that Rubabu I think more than any other county of the country is very severely affected.  We have several scores of people dying every month. I am certain we have lost more people to malaria in one sub-county only - than we have lost to famine in the north east of this country.  

So, it is extremely serious and I was surprised that we are not told clearly whether the Ministry of Health is doing everything possible even emergency to make medicine available to people because a lot of people are not going to the hospital, they are dying in their homes simply because even when they go to government they have to pay for these drugs.  I want also the House to know that when I asked the Minister of Health to come and see for himself what was happening in Rubabu, he told me that the Budgetary Provisions for his Ministry do not make money available for him to travel internally in this country.  

Turning to the Bill.  First of all, I want to thank the Minister of Finance for bringing this Bill to this House; because this country has to find its own solutions to its own problems. I also want to thank hon. Tiberondwa says that for once he disagrees with hon. Kanyomozi.  I am surprised - even identical twins do disagree more often in their lives than once.  (Laughter) But definitely, the report presented by hon. Kanyomozi to this House, I think was a masterpiece.  (Applause) I have no doubt in my mind - unfortunately hon. Kanyomozi was not here to hear what I said about it.  But I think it demonstrated very careful study of the problems that we had at UCB and I think we should be encouraged as Ugandans to find solutions to our own problems. 

This brings to my mind yet another; what you would call relevant solution, having also listened to the hon. lady representative of Apac at the CA; I think this country is moving forward.  Her statement in the CA was also a masterpiece like hon. Kanyomozi’s was here.  The performance of the Uganda Commercial Bank.  First of all, this is a Government Institution.  Therefore, it is not difficult to understand why at times the Uganda Commercial Bank has had to do things that a normal commercial institution would not do; but we should know that there is already a great amount of improvement of the performance of the Uganda Commercial Bank.  We are told that the Uganda Commercial Bank is already making profit.  Therefore, are we not right as the Legislative Body of this country to support the Uganda Commercial Bank?  The only bank, I believe which can take risks with the ordinary Ugandan citizens.  It is not an allegation that more often than not, even with good projects, you walk into some of these other banks and you turned out simply because of the pigment of your skin.  Therefore, the Uganda Commercial Bank is an absolute necessity for the development of this country. We must support it.  

I want also to mention that the Uganda Commercial Bank, though a lot of the money has not been collected, may be, this money has in one way or another contributed to the growth in the economy we have been talking about.  It has -(Interjection)- yes, many times money that the Uganda Commercial Bank has not collected is in this country.  Therefore, it is not quite lost.  It needs to be reallocated to the right place.  

Therefore, I want to totally disagree with those people who thank that the answer to our problems is closure of the Uganda Commercial Bank and hon. Tiberondwa should have known that instead of the Trust being a proposal from elsewhere, actually the proposal or the thinking in some quarters outside Uganda was that Uganda Commercial Bank should be done away with.  We must resist that. All we need is to restructure Uganda Commercial Bank and encourage it to grow.  It is like any other institution in this country.  Who would ever dream that we could have an army that we can respect, whose members we consider our friends and not enemies.  

Since the Uganda Commercial Bank is showing us signs of improvement, why should it not continue? I think it is important that the Uganda Commercial Bank be restructured, be privatised.  Again I want to disagree totally with hon. Tiberondwa.  Now, if only I could be allowed - because we really disturbed - some Members instead of giving information, they make contributions to the Debate. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, go ahead.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I was saying that Uganda Commercial Bank should be restructured.  I disagree with hon. Tiberondwa.  I think we must privatise the bank and one day the bank should wholly belong to the people.  Not through the Government but directly.  Therefore, I want to propose that we privatise Uganda Commercial Bank stage by stage.  (Applause) I am told it has been done elsewhere.  But I think Ugandan’s will be very proud to own shares in the Uganda Commercial Bank.  Why do we not sell 10 per cent of the shares to Ugandans? And make them in such a manner that even ordinary Ugandans can afford to buy these shares.  

Together with this, I would like to propose that there be a structure whereby the majority shareholder who is the government, surrenders a lot of his power to the ordinary Ugandan shareholders because there has always been a tendency for abuse of government run institutions or where government has got majority shareholding.  When we are legislating we should not look at what is happening today, we should legislate for the rainy day.  Even engineers when they are designing structures, they would design them for the worst scenarios not for the best.  So, I want to look at the time when you may have a Minister of Finance who is not necessarily born again and therefore, might want to interfere too much with the bank.  

Therefore, I would like us to be more rigorous or more transparent when it comes to appointing senior officials of the bank.  The managing director, the chairman, even heads of departments.  There must be a system by which these people are chosen purely for their merit not when we present, I owe you tickets.  First of all, political I owe you tickets.  So, when people, when Ugandans buy shares in this bank, they should be allowed to have some reasonable influence; even though they control minority shares.  At least, this would be government demonstration of their good intentions that people be in charge of their bank.  

I want also to refer to too much interference in the affairs of this country by people who think that they are smarter than we are.  There is a tendency for some people to think that because Uganda’s economy is low, is poor and because we have had political misfortunes, there are not any Ugandans with brains to manage certain institutions! Yes, we have had problems but the solutions will come from us, Ugandans.  You find that for example, the Uganda Commercial Bank has got what you would call consultants from outside and the like but I think a lot of the work that these consultants do, can be done better by our own people. (Applause) 

The only thing we need to do is to have confidence in them and motivate them.  It is pointless to appoint a person - a head of department, managing billions of shillings and his pay is not enough to pay his children’s fees. This person uses all sorts of ways to make ends meat and anybody gets surprised.  Even mathematically the equation cannot work. (Laughter)

 Therefore, once we give people responsibility, it must be accompanied benefits.  Why should a consultant earn $.10,000 a month and you think a Ugandan can only do with $.500 dollars. They buy the same meat.  They buy the same fuel, they send their children to the same schools and if they do not, they should. They should, there is no reason why they should send their children to lesser schools. But surely, when you have an Institution like the Uganda Commercial Bank which makes money for heavens sake pay workers; and once we have given the carrot then we should come with a stick as viciously as we possibly can do, but not before.

We have heard options presented to us by hon. Kanyomozi, and I have already said that as far as I am concerned I do not agree with liquidation of the Uganda Commercial Bank at all or the only think we need is to capitalize it through selling shares to Ugandans; and by the way it should be to Ugandans, where we fail then we could sell them to outsiders.  I am told that even when they privatized the British rail they insisted that a certain percentage of the shares had to be bought by British Citizens.  Why did they do that?  Because it is important that the people of a country take pride in owning part of their economy.  

Therefore, I want to conclude by supporting the proposal that we have a trust to recover the loans that have not been recovered.  Why do I support this?  There have been a lot of problems in this country, we have had political problem, we have had economy problems; we have had social problems! Therefore, this trust will have to sit down and study all these. I dislike someone coming with a computer and figures and saying these loans are bad and therefore, must do this and that.  There is no social political impact, that will arise out of collection of these debts; the trust, therefore, must not only do economic but must also do social and political study of the effects of what they are going to do.  Nobody from outside will do it better than a Ugandan here.  

I do agree, and I think the Minister intends to amend this Bill by saying that the Minister does not appoint Members of this Trust.  There should be better ways that we make it more transparent and more democratic so that we save the Minister the problem of having to answer for anything that will go wrong.  

You see, in this country whenever, we give power to individuals to appoint or do what, we do not realise that we are putting them in very serious trouble.  In fact, the Minister being the boss of Uganda Commercial Bank should not be the Judge. He should be someone else; therefore, there must be a fairly independent way of appointing Members of this Trust, so that even the Minister himself can take them to task, how would he do it if there are his appointees? He cannot.  The Uganda Commercial Bank is totally incapacitated to collect these loans.  We remember recently there was a bit of restructuring and many people lost their jobs.  Some people wrote in the press and said that the Managing Director of the Uganda Commercial Bank had certain things, had dismissed people, had done what.  Little did these people realise that the people who did the work of recommending restructuring of the bank did their job long before the incumbent was in place.  

So, we would like to save the Uganda Commercial Bank, the by foreigners, by the like.  Let this job go to a freshly mandated body who have no incumbencies of any sort and they will do their job without fear or favour, Mr Chairman.  I support the Motion.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA ANGELO (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have been wondering all along until yesterday as to whether the concept behind setting up of a Trust was justifiable and I was saying this because if you look t the manner in which a lot of money was lent out, it was purely because of very poor modality; it was because of corruption and there are records valuable in UCB to the effect that even in some cases chits were being issued on what they were calling character loans; and many of the loans were issued to people who are around Kampala and a few regions. It did not, actually, reflect very will on government; and so some of us thought it was like someone who is trying to cover a deep pit by digging a hole inside it, I think you understand what I mean.  If you try to dig a hole inside a deep pit I not know when you are going to cover that pit, it is a similar move when many of us thought was being carried out.

However, on a second thought and especially after looking at the well researched papers submitted by our committee, headed by the hon. Kanyomozi, I have reluctantly now come to accept that a Trust maybe an answer; and I, therefore, tend to look at this Trust as a comprehensive surgery, hoping that it is going to put in place collective measures, and try to bail us out of most of these ills which have been affecting UCB, Co-operative Bank and other areas including even Bank of Uganda.  

One thing which I regret so much is the fact that in UCB that time, the powers that be, of the day, where incapable of controlling one department.  I am to point out the Development Finance Group; this was the most notorious department, where he officers gave out to themselves a lot of money and unfortunately most of them are no longer there.  Some have died, and some have reportedly left the bank.  

There is a company - an International Company called ‘Coopers and Lybrand’ which did a lot of auditing of Uganda Commercial Bank during that period; and they seem to indicate that the Bank of Uganda failed in its mandatory role of supervision and control; and I would like therefore, to call upon Bank of Uganda after we have given it more powers to be more autonomous, this time to exercise that mandatory role, so that we should not have problems with UCB again after this exercise.  

Privatization of UCB is desirable, I want to associate myself to the recommendations made by ho. Members including the hon. Prof. Kagonyera, to the effect that the best way of assisting our people to create capital - to create capacity is really to indigenous.  We should allow the people first opportunity and the rest of the Institutions can come up.  If we insist on public companies being formed first, I have already seen that even with the Kampala Stock Exercise it is impossible for the moment to set up public companies, then we shall not be doing any justice to ourselves; and more over it is in the national interest to ensure that really the people are first.  So, we can privatize UCB, but first give the opportunity to the citizens and then others can come up again.  

I also want to appeal to the Minister and through him also to Bank of Uganda and all the Commercial Banks to this time try to safe us, especially, the farmers from this very big problem of high interest loans.  Uganda is one of the few countries in which it is extremely difficult to get a loan; they give you all sorts of conditions, they talk about securities almost talking about defence issues as if you must provide your own defence in order to qualify for security. Most of the conditionalities are really not justifiable, and you find the interest rates are so high that before you have finished the period, you will not have paid even half of the cost of this loan.  I want to give an example about Transport Loans Scheme which was given last year to some people in Uganda for buses, the loan facility was so stringent that I understand in fact, of these buses - the Steyr buses have already gone off road before most of the beneficiaries have paid even half of the cost! So, commercial banks should be more nationalistic, they should more patriotic and try to help us, so that we can create credit facilities, which the poor people can benefit from.  

On the issue of the farmers’ position, I would like to assort myself with the hon. Brig. Moses Ali that it might be useful for Government to yet think about another scheme, but which must have a better modality then the Rural Farmer Scheme.  I am saying this because in many countries which have assisted the people, government, actually, subsidizes agriculture, and there are ways of dong this and here - I do not know how much we have done if the Minister of Agriculture was here maybe I would have been informed better.  But it is important to give some special subsidence some deliberate policy towards assisting the farmers.  

I want to end on this note that loans which have been received by Uganda and which we continue to receive maybe on bi-lateral agreement, multi-lateral agreements the conception behind that loan, why do you need a loan? This has continued to be the problem.  You will find the many loans are issued because of some diplomatic relationship we have no bi-lateral understanding etc; and the second issue is the moneys of these loans, you find that the counterpart participation is not there! You will find there is little or no monitoring on the part of Government, you will find there is no evolution, you will find that co-ordination is a problem, and this in the end results in most projects stolen; there are a lot of projects I would mention but there are a few projects which 

I am well versed with where non-governmental organizations have been participating, because at one time, I had some relationship with the non-governmental organizations! You will find the foreigners take the show of our places being reporting on so many projects having stolen and sometimes you are surprised when you ask a Minister to explain the position of a loan or of a project! You will find the Minister even does not have that updated information. 

This should be a lesson to us, and we should be more serious with our loan management, loan disbursement and accountability in terms of both the partners, that is the Government and the counterpart partner.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMERCE, CO-OPERATIVES AND MARKETING (Mr Ssendawula): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the Bill, and while supporting the Bill I want first of all to pay tribute to the Members of the committees that got together to compile this report.  (Applause) the Members who got together, that is the committee on the parastatal, than the committee on the economy and then the other Members who got together on finance did a wonderful job and I can only appeal to my colleagues in Parliament here that I think we need to assign these brother other duties, because there are bodies which in my view would require a thorough shake up of a nature that was done on this particular Bill.   Because we have put a lot of money in a number of bodies.  

I look at, for example NEC, it has been one  - it has been taking money and it has taken money and contentiously has got to see what it is doing in taxpayers’ money! And several other bodies, which fall under our various Ministries, some of them have taken money and over a period we have not seen exactly what goes on.  But if we had opportunity of a thorough study and then a thorough analysis, I think good decisions will be arrived at, whether they are worthy to retain or not worthy to retain; and I think that would help even to form the bases; the bases on which we finally determine on what to divest and what not to divest.  (Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Deputy Minister that as a matter of fact, when we conceived the idea of setting up the Standing Committees, the purpose was that, each Bill controversial or other wise would have to be assigned to a committee for study before, it would come through this House.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSENDAWULA:  Thank you for your information, hon. Member.   I will look at the contribution, me as someone who has been following the Debate and hearing what has been going on and being a Ugandan I have full interest in the Uganda Commercial Bank.  I am looking at Uganda Commercial Bank as the bank with the biggest branch network in this country; and that is very important in the banking industry, because at least, there is a branch of Uganda Commercial Bank in each one of the districts of Uganda.  

So, that in itself is so vital to the economy, because it enables the people in a district - an area to learn to save, because one area where we are so weak in this country is on savings.  You know, you sometimes analysis - I once went to Mukono to attend praise giving ceremony to people who had sold vanilla and the exporter told me, he had brought in to this country a total of now nearly 985,000 dollars - nearly 1,000,000 dollars; and I wondered how the entire Shs1, 000,000,000 where it has disappeared to within these sub-counties.  You would have at least had 50 per cent of that saved, if you effectively had a savings system.  

So, I look at this bank as an enabling Institution for us to get involved in the habit of saving money and providing services, because the Bank of Uganda which is a main Bank to the Government gives cheques to Members of the public and its servants and these cheques have to be paid at one point or another.  The administration at each point cannot pay these cheques; the only organ that can effectively pay these cheques is Uganda Commercial Bank.  So, it is important that this Institution he looked at in that respect as one point.  

Two; I am looking at it as a local bank, our bank where the personnel and policy understand our local environment; and these are of pertinent and every relevant to all of us, because I have heard other people making contributes, particularly, I heard hon. Tiberondwa when he said, what has happened to other banks; do they not have similar debts on their accounts? How do they solve their problems, why can we not have these handled in the same way? 

Certainly it is true, but you will have to appreciate that most of the managed funds, funds provided to us by USA and others were all managed through Uganda Commercial Bank.  When the foreign banks, which are operating in this country, find that there is very little for them to earn, they cannot accept to dispatch that particular credit.  If the funds have got into this country either say, IDA funds or any other funds come to be available for onward lending to the people, if the commercial banks - these other foreign commercial banks see that the margin that they are going to earn when they manage these funds is so narrow, they will not accept, and if you as a customer of these banks if you go there and say I have hard there is this kind of fund available can I apply for that money through you from wherever that money is?  They will always say we are not managing that money; and UCB was left to be the only bank to handle this kind of situation.  

So, it is so important that this kind of Institution is maintained and retained in our system.  I want you also to appreciate that the political interference rates of interest and to some extend some mismanagement, have all contributed in one way or another.  I would want you hon. Member to look at page 26 of the - that is Appendix 2, of the report. You will see this analysis; the analysis gives you the principal of the amount we are talking about now.  We are talking of a figure of 52 billion but now is it broken down?  Of this 24 billion is a principal, the 27 billion is interest, and you know very well how interest has been moving and you know very well the rates of interest that were applicable at the period that we are referring to.  So, you can see all these have been contributing factors to the Mover.  

I also appreciate and do respect the point as covered in the reports of the hon. Members that there has been some bit of mismanagement.  But who is contributing to this mismanagement?  At times, it is we, the politicians who have been totally contributing to the mismanagement.  How does it start? It starts by notes, a chit that, ‘so and so is so deserving, and can you extend the loan of so much to him’? And someone finds himself totally frightened; the person who is in charge of the Institution finds himself - you know, at crossroads. This chit that I have received is from so and so; and his office is relatively high. Then even if in your normal appraisal of credit you would have said that this is not deserving, you fear sometimes to give that answer, because you know, it may back fire.  So, these have also contributed extensively, and -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, in view, of this very important statement the Minister has made, about the indebtedness being caused by some politicians and big people, would have liked to make a statement about this idea of following up the bank officials who have involved in dishing out loans? Because they dish out these loans, because they fear the politicians, they fear the presidents, they fear the ministers.  Would he like to say something about following them up for loans, which have not been recovered?  

MR SSENDAWULA: Mr Chairman, I think the clarification which the hon. Member is calling from me I think this would have been basically handled by the committee which handled this exercise.  Because he would have had the chance to be there, every hon. Member, was free to visit the committee, and give views.  But certainly the committee has elaborated extensively within its report -(Interjection)-, I do not know whether time will be compensated, because I as asking allowance and yet I fill this is extremely important as a report.  We have heard statements and we have read, on page 3 of the report you will see that the staff are said to be also to have taken part that they borrowed substantially or they allowed themselves credit. 

I had mentioned earlier that what was available was partly depositors’ money locally and part of the money managed funds, which funds were accessible to all Ugandans if they so qualified.  It turns out that nearly Shs 3,000,000,000 is what has been loaned out to the staff.  The bank in its wisdom to see that it gets back on its feet has already taken effective action and requested those Members of staff who had big loans which necessitated their supervision of business for which they acquired the loans to accept and voluntarily retire so that they go and attend to these businesses so that they can make effective payment of these loans; and I think that is move in a right direction, and as mentioned by one hon. Member of the House, I must say from what I have been hearing and seeing the bank has certainly started to improve and it is improving for the better. Provided, of course, that we do not leave vacuum because the period as covered, in this report show that the waste period was between 1989 and 1991, here there was a properly appointed management and there was a period of where management was still in a balance, because Government has been taking extremely long time before they can decide who can finally fill the gap; and that is a very expensive period for a Financial Institution. 

Now going by the points as covered here, I must say, I think I will be misunderstood to be contradicting policy by considering that this Bill redrafted by a committee, I think as a Member of Government, I am also entitled to say that I feel in this area, it is not appropriate or this would not have come in, and I think my colleague on the other side would not feel that, I am contradicting him in one way or another.  

But, I must say, the intentions initially of restructuring and creating this body, to me seems to be when you read this report, that it was to make the bank ready and its balance sheet clean for selling out to whoever would want it; and I wish to thank the committee here for having been extremely firm to say please, there do not do that, for this nation, and I feel and pray that this House retains Schedule 3 and effectively looks at what is covered in the report of this committee, because when you look, at the report of this committee, on page 11, you will see where the committee received assurance from the Minister of Finance that during the privatization of UCB priority will be given to Ugandan public, the committee feels that the manner in which the privatization have to be carried out, should be provided for in the Bill as the Third Schedule.  Now, this is what stated and the redrafted Bill has accommodated that one as a Third Schedule.  

But then when you go down reading, you will see further, that if you are reading that page, 11, further, the committee noted that one of the objective of privatizing the bank, is to raise private capital, the earlier the bank was privatised, the less the amount of the capital injection that would be required from Government, so someone is we were not really very careful, using this excuses, someone can easily disregard the Schedule (3), and we end up having the foreigners coming to take an upper hand and take over the bank -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. (Inaudible) some constitution exports, that in order to avoid that situation, that schedule three should be incorporated in main body of the Bill, so that we insist on making sure that, that loophole is not left unattended to; although the empirical evidence so far shown on PERD Bill does not seem to support that, but if now it is brought in the open and our position is made categorically clear that, that is what we want, and in my presentation yesterday, I said that we could phase the privatization in such way as to enable Ugandans first take a share.  If we can in corporate those things somewhere in the conditions of - as a condition to passing this Bill, then we may be assured that somebody somewhere he will not take us for a rid.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I wanted to give information to the Member about removing the schedule into the main body, and slightly differ, with the advice that hon. Kanyomozi received from the constitutional lawyers.  You see section - third Schedule, is made under the provisions of section 27 of this Statute.  Section 27 (4) of this Statute says, ‘that the Minister my be statutory order with approval of the legislature amend the schedules.’  Now, I would rather prefer that we leave it in its situation, because it means that we shall have another chance when the chance working on the privatization of the banks, the Minister will have to come back here, if he wants to do anything which is not included in here.  

So, if you have anything to do, this is now the legal advise I would like to give to the chairman.  You say anything you want to say, in the schedule and leave it at that, if the Minister wants to change or improve it, he will have to come back here for implementation.  But if you do not, and you just put this in here, then the Minister says okay, you go ahead and work; and what is happening is that they can easily privatise according to the other law, and we do not achieve our objectives.  So, it is better that we retain it as it is. 

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House in light of the information being given, that a Government operating through Parliament, operates during its time, to implement its policy.  This Government believes in the policies, it is implementing with this Parliament.  Even if we shift programmes from here to there, and another government, which is not equally enlightened with another Parliament of the same type, they will amend all those laws.  We should not surely be bothered - we think this Government must do certain things.  If the quality of leadership were to change, the policies will also change, the Parliament will be of that quality, they were meant all these laws.  

So, for me I have more confidence in the quality of leadership and formulation of policies, this Government - no Minister will bring here a policy to be endorsed by you, just to go back the following day, to take advantage and change.  If you want, she has to come back to the House! I think it is better to believe in the system than in the individual operators who happen to be there at that time.

MR SSENDAWULA:  Mr Chairman, I wish to thank all the hon. Members who have given me information.  The concern of all of ours, if it can be taken care of, is retention of that institution.  Our feeling are very clear, I must say as an individual, I subscribe and support the idea of privatization but I have given you the background and my feeling about the Uganda Commercial Bank, and the importance that are attached to it, because what we want is economical advancement and initially when the Bill was tabled here, I was one of those who said, kindly, let us have the Trust created, because we have some money waiting to be utilised if we can create this Trust, and if we do not improve the bank, the bank will not be viable and useful to our Ugandan public. 

But we must bear in mind all of us, whether those who were there to day, or those to come tomorrow, that most of the people who come in this industry, just like any other industry, come here to make money, and there are not prepared to share their profits, with you by going and provide a service in Kalangala, because there must be a service in Kalangala or be in Kapchorwa because they have to provide a service, and that is why you find that some of the foreign banks which have a very health balance sheet, are a one branch bank.  What they do, is to make sure that they do wholesale business, get all the big companies as their customers and keep quite, and then they forget everybody and forget about the development of this country. The institution that can carry this country to develop it, and you cannot develop a country without money; finance is a key factor.  

So, you must be sure, that there is financial institution which is prepared to understand the conditions if you go and solicit money, that institution is prepared to management that money and send it to your person t the grassroots. But you will never see a bank, which is stationed in Kampala Road here, sending money to Mawogola and be able to help someone who is in Lwemiyaga of these other places. So, that is my sincere feeling that, that is why we say, if there is privatising the Uganda Commercial Bank, it should be privatised gradually and it should be privatised through Ugandans for the time being.  We have so many other things that we can put on the market but not for the time being kindly, Uganda Commercial Bank should be taken as the last resort if any think.

Turning to the Bill on page 11, Article 15, there is issue of the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal.  Now, the tribunal as issue has come up and has been qualified and explained by the Member of the committee, on the basis that they feel going to courts and so on, will take a long time.  So, if there is a tribunal to attend to all these people, they will come in then they will advise the tribunal and so and so forth.  But then when you see, under Clause 17, you will see that any person aggrieved by the session or order of the tribunal, may within one month after the decision or order appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision of the order.  Now, you are moving away from the courts, because they are going to take long, but then you say when somebody has appeared before the tribunal, can now again move to the courts.  

Now, I do not know which way because, as a matter of policy, there has been effective analysis, I think this Tribunal should have categorised which loans, which credits should go to the tribunal and which ones should be implemented directly by the Trust.  Because every time you move to the bank manager, and seek money, you tell the bank manager, the purpose for which you inquire the money, he gives you all the necessary forms and then finally decides to give you the money, and I am happy to look at this analysis that the unsecured position is not that very bad; the unsecured position if you look at the appendix, appendixes which are given, Appendix 7 on page 31, you will definitely see the unsecured position is relatively small, it is about 12 per cent. 

So, in that respect, I feel that it is only the Rural Farmers’ Development Scheme, which is reflecting nil that, should go to a tribunal of some sort. The rest, they were forms, which were signed, legal mortgages are registered with the bank, if there is any improvement that one can make, the bank should go out and even carry out calculation now to the properties in whatever form they are, and then we move according to the legal documents which are in the position of the bank. 

Otherwise, we have had incidence and it is not long time ago, that you might have seen one time as a director my name, that when I pressurise somebody to make sure that the payment is mad, someone said, I would have got away with it, if it was not for that man insisting that I should pay.  For one, I say we have legal documents in place, we have to get a court order and implement and ensure that we create our security, and when we moved in the fellow moved to the same courts and got another order, then the next day the locks were already cut off the shop.  So we seem to be contradicting each other. If we are creating a Trust to recover this money, then our law must be strong enough to stop anybody else interfering in the process of recovering this money.  Thank you very much.

MR KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thank you for the opportunity to make a contribution on the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill.  But before, I do I have one or two points to make, which I would like to bring to the attention of the Members of this House and to your attention.  In my Constituency, Nyabushozi, there is a very big problem of drought, there is no water, and the people are on the move.  

Accompanied with that, and it is very important that you realise this.  Accompanied with this is the problem which has hit us so hard, the problem which hon. Kagonyera talked about, the problem of malaria, and two weeks ago, there was a big problem also of meningitis which also hit the place, to the extend that maybe it is necessary that the Ministry should actually carry out the task force in that area, because all the old people now are dying, the old women cannot move to hospitals; the other day luckily for my mother, I had to send a car to pick her which went at night and now she is here saved.  But you imagine what happens to the rest of the people? 

So, if there is away to confront this situation, it is so alarming and what has also alarmed me most, is that, as I was reading Daily Nation last week, the same problem has come up in Kenya, which means that there is a real problem in the region, and I do not know, I am not convinced, that there is a task force addressing this situation.  For us the question of water is perpetual, I keep on saying this as I told you last time, it is almost a song, but people are really suffering -(Interruption) 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is raising a very important issue, which was also raised on the same Floor some few minutes ago, by hon. Prof. Kagonyera, I would like to inform the hon. Member of the House, that this particular problem should not be looked at as a Nyabushozi problem or Rubabo problem or Iganga problem because today I was even reading in Paper, where 117 people are dying.  We would not like this in Jinja side, we would not like to wait - people who are dying in Rwanda, 100,000 by the time they came to rescue, there was none to be rescued.  

So, I think it is the time now when signals come that the Minister responsible should take up action; he should not wait and as it was being reported that he has no fund to allow mobility. I think this is a national issue or a regional problem, which should be attended to, now or immediately.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA:  Now, if the Minister really says that there is no money available for him to travel internally -(Interjection) Obviously, I mean there no problem in traveling abroad. But, I think we should - I am calling upon the Government, the Government should address the question of malaria in our country, and a task force should be set up to confront this situation, like there was a task force to confront the famine in the East and the situation should be addressed immediately.

Before I turn to the Bill, I think I would like to make some comments following on hon. Tiberondwa’s comment, about our President traveling so much and working so hard, and that it is not good thing for him to be moving up and down.  I think it is time we got a President who works.  The President who sits in Kampala, in Nile Mansions and drink wine, the whole day, they whole evening singing, people singing for them, is not required in Uganda today - we should be very proud of President Museveni’s contribution to our country; and the other day, I was reading about Mandela.  

There is a time when President Mandela to his age, spent 72 hours without sleeping, he was addressing people, he was moving around and they had these camera talks, and he wanted to fulfill something, they had to finish at 3,00, even the journalist could not cope with President Mandela’s programme at that time; before the election.  At that time a man who is that age, why should not our President work?  Let him work, he has a specific programme to achieve, and he is doing his best, - okay, we can only pray that the people who support him, do not give him defective vehicles to move in, and defective air-craft.  

But I should think we should be proud of the President’s contribution towards our economy, towards the progress and towards bringing a good name to our country.  Those who want to have President who sit and drink wine and enjoy themselves should wait for another regime to come -(Interruption and Laughter)


DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor, that if the President for example, could counsel one of his trips abroad, the money saved, would be used to treat the malaria he is talking about all over the country.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, that in our laws we have an Act, known as the Engagement of the President.  If that Act is properly under protocol, properly utilised, so as to balance the activities, such as the one of Luwero in 1964 did and collapsed.  So, in this case, we need his services and at the same time utilise provision to Presidential Engagement Act, properly for his betterment.

MR KARUHANGA:  I am very grateful for hon. Obwangor’s citing of the Act of President’s Engagements Act. I am not certainly grateful for Tiberondwa’s contribution and information.  I know that President Bush at that time as he was, when he went to Japan at his age, he collapsed.  I also know that many Presidents do certain Ministers and go with them, for example, when the Secretary of State goes to Israel or Egypt or Lebanon or Syria, the Secretary of State of America always entertained by the President to go with Linder Chalker a country which is giving us the highest aid in development.  To say that the President should cut on his travel abroad, obviously to stop him from creating a better image of our country, which he has done. So, I think that, that aspect of it can also be taken.  

Now let me go back to the Bill. This Bill was prepared in March, we are now in August; the bank has made strides towards improving the situation.  There, I would like Members - I am not opposing the Bill - to be aware of the time change. Quite a lot of Loans are being recovered by the new restructured organisation at the Uganda Commercial Bank. The figures that the Sectoral Committee has read for us are no longer as valid as they say. (Interruption)

MR KAJOBO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I think the Member may be right.  But the only thing to help us to debate this Bill effectively is to avail us with list.  Without list, we are wasting our time for nothing.  I think it will be better this list to be produced. Even some of them are here, let them stand up and say, I have not paid, and then we see what we can do. Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I know that there is the list that hon. Kanyomozi is moving around with, because I am privileged to sit next to him and once in a while I do peep there to see what he is carrying.  But I must say that the man is moving around with it.  But we should ignore the list.  Let us make the law. In any case, the Committee has seen that list and the committee represents us.  Secondly, we do not want to excite the business community. However, having said that -(Interruption)

MR RWABITA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, although it will be interesting to know why the debtors, the problem is, we must also follow the law.  There is confidentiality in the banking system.  If you are to allow everybody to know what or how much one keeps in the bank, really you better close that bank because the customers will not be trusting the bank.  So, unless there is a Court Order, it will be wrong to present that list here.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: I am not taking any information about the list any more.  However, the reason why I was so moved, to ask to contribute in this Debate is only one.  That reason is the fate of the rural farmers - the peasants who for the first time in the history of our country were invited by Uganda Commercial Bank and told to do not give anything, your character is enough.  They gave these loans based on the character of the individuals.  They gave no assets; the money was given to these peasants. It was the first entrance for peasants in banking halls of Commercial Bank. Now the same peasants of ours - and these were widows - who were growing beans, some of the orphaned youths who were trying these projects and they insisted that they were going to the peasants.  Now the peasants have burnt their hands.  An organisation is being created to go to these peasants and harass then for the mistakes of the big people.  When the peasants were invited, it was a good act by the Government and it was in good faith.  In fact, I pressed the bank for finally arriving at the grassroots.  The peasants were very pleased. When the peasants heard this, and they came in, they were given not cash, but items; Sengenge, hoes, wheelbarrows, and so on.  The pressure to which these matters were being put, the peasant had no say.  Whether somebody was eating a Commission on it or not, the peasant had no idea. (Interruption)

MRS WEKIYA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, can I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House, that the results by Maria Musoke from Makerere University about the rural farmers scheme and that before you start charging for these people, you would really look at this study because it has disclosed a lot about this scheme and you may be surprised to find out that the women you are talking about might not have been the real people who benefited from the scheme.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA:  When this scheme came up, there are some women who came to see me to help them to meet the people and operate the lifts because they had never entered lifts.  So, I took some of these women and they got some money and you know it was not must money; it was very little money and they were given few things and went and started growing beans.  They even tried to make payment and as you heard from the lady Minister, she said, we made a good attempt; some did not.

We come to the operations of the tribunal.  I would like us to differentiate two categories of people.  The rural farmers scheme group and those who are getting USAID money for development to agriculture.  Those people, because of the reasons given by the Minister and by hard working committee and incidentally I must take time to thank our committee and it is this performance of this committee which has really helped to appreciate the use of committees.  Because I was going to oppose this Bill to the end.  But the way the Committees have educated me, and the trouble they have taken to write a new Document, I am now in a dilemma because I came to oppose.  Now, I am shattered by the Committee. (Applause) 

But it is a good thing that we set up these committees.  But the only thing I think which we would like to put in this, is this Section 15.  

Let the Rural Farmers’ Scheme, and the Commercial Farmers Union be the ones to face the tribunal so that the operations of section 12 can also be taken into account, where the legislations are in individual level can take place, so that the human nature of a person can be considered by that Committee.  This is very important.  The rest of the people who get loans from these banks must face the law as it is today.  They should have their recovery implemented by the bank.  There is no reason why we should even go and force these people to do this.  The banks organised should go ahead and sue and collect.  I am not having any much sympathy. 

Hon. Members, remember the farmers who cannot speak here, they are the ones who are going to be affected by legal later.  I know the Lawyers are going to have a great time.  They are really now leaking their lips because they know we have just printed something for them to make money in this tribunals.

Let us spare them, and provide for them.  I hope that this appeal will go well to the economic committee to the finance committee, and to the others.  Now having said that, just quick comments about the Law.

One, I quote: ‘the Minister may revoke the appointment of any Member of the Board for misconduct or inability to perform the function of his office on the ground of mine or body or for any other sufficient cause.’  This is a very bad law.  That sufficient cause makes the Minister dismiss you at will, and when you ask him, why he says; it is a sufficient cause.  You harassed my brother when you appeared before the Board.  So, cancelled it out. Then the wording of section 6.  That is not any financial interest.  It is the other way round.

Then Section 8; the Minister still wants some three names recommended by the Board for him to select one name.  When they go to the World Bank they came back and say, the World Bank has refused this, they want this Body to be independent.   You know, it has happened.  Hon. Minister came here the other day, and said, the bank had refused his powers -(Inaudible)- in this authority business.   So, next he liberalise this thing - after all we are liberalising.  Let the Board be appointed by the Minister.  

Let the Board appoint the Executives.  Then this Board will be inefficient and will create another Body to solve the problems of this Board because the other one has become inefficient and regretted this Board.  The Minister should just appoint the chairman of the Board and finish.  Then the last bit, is on the chairman and Managing Director of the Bank.  I am very happy with the current chairman of the UCB and I am happy with him also and his performance.  

But there are certain things I want to question in UCB which re taking place which I am not happy with. The house, which was built by the Managing Director in the old days, it is still hanging around there empty.  Something has to be done.  Is that now a recoverable asset?  Should we put it in this and then charge the bank.  It is a non-performing asset.  So, what do we do with it?   

Any way that is not my point.  My point is that we should stop the business of having the Managing Director being the chairman of the Board t the same time. (Applause) I know the man is efficient.  He is doing the wonderful job but let us have separation of powers.  When you implement something, somebody is there to see whether you have implemented it properly. It is not you to go there and say, oh, we are performing very well.  So, let us  make this a condition of this.  We make the condition that the Board with U.C.B. will have the chairman separately and the Managing Director, for this Bill to pass. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification because we are dealing with two issues here and I would wish considering that the hon. Member who is contributing is a Learned Lawyer to help to clarify this position because there is a U.C.B. Act which handles -which was passed by Parliament - which handles the operations of U.C.B. and then we are having this Bill which is in the pipeline.  Now can he tell us how we can mull the two for purpose of this Bill.

MR KARUHANGA:  I just said that we make a condition.  But by passing this, no.  You promised to bring and amend that law here.  (Applause)  The question of U.C.B. Managing Director in what I am saying - the last bit is the question I would like the Minister to clarify.  As I said, when this Law came up, the bank was recovering some debts.  Now, they are recovering, settling and entering into contract with some people for payment.  They have agreed on some schedules of payment and people are paying. The Institutions we are creating has got powers now.  We are going to give it powers.  Will it go and start interfering in the management of the recovery of loans of deals and agreements already signed by U.C.B. or not.  Where is the cut of point in this. (Interruption)

MR SENDAWULA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, what is being covered in the report here, and which is sort to go into the Trust, are accounts which are already classified and where the bank is no longer debiting interests and taking them in as part of profit and loss.  In other words, these accounts which are talked about here, are very clearly segregated.  They re already separate.  

So, in short, when we talk about the bank performing now, we are telling you that without these non-performing assets, the bank under its current management is showing a lot of improvement and is working effectively.  If it is given chance for these accounts to go into the Trust, then it will help the bank to enhance much further and even have more loanable funds available because before you are permitted to lend a certain percentage of your deposits you must cater for so much which you have already lent.  So, this is already affecting the bank operation.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. In Section 13, I think I have a bit of problems that this section has given extra power to the tribunal to even go beyond assets of the debtor, which actually has not been affected by the law, and section 13 says that; where it appears to the tribunal appropriate.  What appears.  How do you -(Inaudible)- appears, and appropriate.  This is witch-hunting.  It is no longer in law. How do you know that this man today is going to form the ideas about your assets and so on. He is just a human being like.  I think this law is going beyond.  It is going to send everybody into the bush.  (Applause)

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member has a very valid point.  The section is a witch-hunting section.  You see in normal banking practice, when you go to get a loan from the bank, you give a collateral. And normally the collateral is acceptable to the bank before they give you money.  What this section is trying to achieve is - it is saying, that in spite of the collateral, this Trust we are creating should move around to see what else you have to grab it.  Meaning that in the first place when the bank was conducting the business with you, it did it wrongly.  Now we are protecting the bank too much at the expense of the individual.  We are protecting the bank too much at the expense of the individual.  You must now decide which  -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, you know our findings. We actually examined that. Those people do agree that monies borrowed for particular do not end up in those projects.  In fact, in most cases the money is diverted and put in something else and the reason for that provision was to cover that anomaly which we know does exist, and it is because of that reason.   If everything has been okay, we would have been providing for the Trust because people would have paid up on the basis of what they borrowed what they invested the money in.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to inform hon. Kanyomozi who gave me the Floor before I take hon. Ndege’s information, that normally this - we may do a little bit more here - in law there is what we call, piercing the Bill and this section is trying to achieve that to pierce the Bill, to see behind the limited liability clause and start harassing.  We have to be very careful about that.  Leave this to the existing law, there are sufficient safeguards in the law for this.  We are talking about creating a tribunal outside the court system.  Try to bring this is a situation which is outside the court system you are asking for a little bit of a trouble, and as Brig. Moses Ali was saying honourables, it can tantamount to which hunting.  We are writing a law, we are writing a law, we are not base collectors of the bank, we are not implementors, let us write a good law, this is a bad law.  Section 13 (b) is a bad law, cut it out.  Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, as I enact while winding up on the Budget Speech, it has been easy in the past to reply to an economic debate because in the past, 80 per cent of it concentrated on politics which was outside that economic.  These days on this particular Bill, the hon. Members have confined their times to the economists of this Bill. but it is because time, till I find this time to reply to all observations made.  I would therefore, Sir, reply just a few, which I need to clarify.  Therefore, I want to thank Members for their contribution, because their debate has enriched this Bill, and there is out way and I trust we shall at the end of the day come up with a Bill in an act which serves the purpose for which we have intended to put it up.  I want to thank hon. Kanyomozi as chairman of the committee in which he reported, and I think it has shown that where we have to Trust each other, a government can operate its work through the committees.  

But in the past there has been always suspicion, some people think that government must be hiding something, and therefore, you start with this attitude and working together becomes very complicated. But where we all appreciate that we need to put good laws to solve problems in our community, and we are all trying to do our best, that meeting of the mind can help our work to go on very well and we can wait to be charge by the future.  

Of course, hon. Tiberondwa I think, it would be possible for some one who have a certain political group to work with people of unpolitical groups. Hon. Kanyomozi has shown that hon. Tiberondwa is wrong, the basis of the NRM is to get people with different political background to come together, work together to cheer their country to higher horizon.  And I hope hon. Tiberondwa will joint this band without being accused of being a re-born again.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am grateful for hon. Kafumbe Mukasa for giving me the Floor.  I just wanted to say that I have been walking with hon. Tiberondwa on the Presidential Committee, Presidential affairs committee, I think he is one of the ablest chairmen we have in this committee, and he has been working and operating with us and working as a nationalist and we have been very happy under his leadership.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, this means, there is no body in the movement who is re-born again.  Therefore, because this can be threatening attitude say, when I said this -(Inaudible)- I have done anything, I think the movement is intended to pull all of us, to pull our resources together, but that was a political joke, I know hon. Tiberondwa was not serious about it, but he was pulling a piece from the old situation.  

I also want to inform hon. Butagira, that loans which were given in the past are very difficult as hon. Kanyomozi used.  For them show the bias on lending by regions, for one reason or another, people were borrowing money to take a project to a particular region, and shift it to another region because of circumstance. For example, when I was a director in the old days in Uganda Development Bank, we lent money to a company called Gulu Foam Mattresses so that they could take a factory to Gulu.  But because of security problems there, they asked for permission to take it to Jinja.  We said yes, the important thing that the people of Gulu at least would buy the mattresses.  

So, if you follow allocation, this Gulu foam mattresses is not in Gulu it is in Jinja. But the consideration was to say whether we should have put a factory in Gulu. But the condition at that time could not permit, but now Uganda is producing many, many mattresses. (Interruption)

MR SEKIZIYIVU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that Gulu foam is not in Jinja, it is in Njeru which is in Mukono.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, that has improved my point, that this project could shift to where they were not originally meant but as long as they are in Uganda they are serving the purpose of the people of Uganda.  The people of Jinja always contest with the people of Mukono what is done where, that is their home politics.  Mr Chairman, I want to clarify a few things regarding the law, as it was put on so that we can all agree to come up with the very good law.  I will start with the latest, hon. Karuhanga thinks that the management of UCB is now doing very well and so on, and I appreciate he was not here yesterday, as I said, the current management of UCB is benefiting from the restructuring of that bank which started two years ago.  The success is that some good management is now in place, and therefore, they can operate fairly well.  but the exercise is not yet completed, unless this bank can get new blood in form of capitalization which is now being hindered by the balance sheet which they have, it shows terrible performance.  

So, that is where we call cleaning this balance sheet to give that management room to do better.  I think, I want to agree with hon. Karuhanga, we have not come here to seek impunities, majors and so on, which were not used by Uganda Commercial Bank, we have not come here to create Uganda Commercial Bank again.  That is why the trust is not a parastatal, the trust is to do a task force within given period.  And the idea is to say, if people have not been paying money because UCB does not listen, can you go and pay to this independent body, which will listen to you.  Why are you not paying, you have your security.  Hon. Moses Ali, hon. Kaijuka, they have given their case, why rural farmers, why commercial farmers have not been paid.  This story they have been telling UCB for the last four years, and it is may be three years now, UCB is not interested, instead it has been compounding interest on their account making them more frustrated.  Government says, can we have an independent body there, to tell them to show cause why should take this public money without giving back to treasury.  

So we think this arrangement without forgiving loans, will create a forum for people who think they have not been listened to  properly, to go to be listened to.  And if they are aggrieved by the trust, which does daily work, let them make an appeal. And since we do not want suffocation, let exhaust the appeal so that we cannot say we, farmers, everybody would have seen that you farmer you should pay.  

And also you have seen the Bill, some people are saying because of the economy, the interest compounded the problems, is it true?  To explain this to UCB, it is not, you cannot go very far.  UCB wants the interest to pay them save the wages and salaries.  So the fairness of it cannot come to them.  We tell someone to separate, they make recommendation.  I think all the grievances of the farmers, of the rural scheme and so on, are now going to be heard by an independent body.  Hitherto, they frustrated because they have been explaining to the same man who also wants the fee from them.  So I think this is a good provision, and will help to solve this bottleneck which we have, but will let UCB start on a new note.

So, where the law does not achieve this, we can look at it, we can address it to achieve this.  We have not put a slaughter house in the form of the trust, we are putting a mechanism to recover as much on this money as possible to go back to the treasury. But the treasury is ruling in a short run to pass on the money to the bank so that everybody can be looked at, by this bank and it can be assisted and the economy can move. 

I want to given an indiction about interest rates.  As you all know, today the rate of inflation on a monthly basis which includes food prices, has dropped to 10.1 per cent; but on the year rate of inflation without food prices, is only 3.9 per cent which we if these banks were not telling us they have many overheads, they should bring down their interest rates to a level which reflects the improvement in the economy.  You will find that since March, the advances commercial advances in Kampala banks taking this for example, where some people are associated, the advances have been between 25 and 28 per cent.  When interest rate i am telling is going for frequently 9 per cent.  The savings deposits are at 13 per cent, the time deposits are between 15 and 17 per cent, that was in March.  Despite remarked improvement in inflation, still in June the advances were being charged between 19 and 20 per cent. That downfall is not proportionate, to the downfall inflation and those what government desires, we think that is still high.  But they say, where shall we get money to pay this, we want to pay this one, to pay this one, to pay the house hon. Karuhanga is talking about to its sweepers.  

So, we want to bring down their cost, they must bring down their interest rates, our people can accept credit and produce farmers industries and commerce people and then GDP will start reflecting money in the pockets.  So, there is this close relationship which is causing problems to the economy which we want to redress and solve immediately.

Hon. Gerald Ssendawula is very much associated with the banks and that is why I respect him very much, he is a banker, and he has worked a lot, he has done a lot of work for Uganda Commercial Bank until recently.  So his contribution is very nice.  But I want to tell him that nobody is going to do the job UCB was supposed to do.  Because UCB failed to do its job, we are coming to salvage the situation, stop the bad situation from getting worse by trying to recover some money.  So the bank should not say we are there, you make big laws to do what we are not able to do.  Otherwise, Parliament will be looked at as where you go to make laws for UCB work. UCB must bail itself out this new management.  And for us since you are putting in public money, the public wants to get as much back of that money as possible to treasury, that is why we want this trust. 

Privatisation of UCB, the power, the mode, the method of privatization are the powers of this House.  Government is directed to seal UCB only to indigenous Ugandans, or what is government refuse. I think, this is not a matter of trying to be covered here in bell, it is a matter for us to agree generally what should be for our body.  So, any provision should be in the law but it should not be for fear that, minister must be tied here like this, no, the minister brought this law and we are together in this approach. 

Hon. Drani thank you very much for your contribution, I will talk about it and I think, it is high time this country decided deliberately to invest in agricultural production.  Deliberately when we operate a budget of 600 billion as an investor, there is no harm to put 10 per cent to go to farmers some how, even if this money is not re-paid, there will be food, there will be this, and this to everybody. 

So, I think mediaries can be talked about, this idea of Entandikwa, I think that is how it convinced the President. That you must find a way, if you want food security, you want this to stay we have our own method from our prove as a treasury as the people of Uganda will return 10 per cent of it back to the production of this food and what not, and what not, to ensure even if ministry of agriculture failed you need that the RC.1 in a certain place made sure their big farmer there have got something to produce.  It may cause shame to the village if he did not produce for them the millet.  I think we need to think of our own ways and I think this Entandikwa is going to make us think a lot -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister of the Floor of the House to the effect that, that production and more money talked about can only be harnessed and procured if we have a state owned property in the form of Uganda Bank but that services may be loaned or sold but the property of the Uganda Commercial Bank, the headquarters particularly as it stands now, as I was one of those who participated to this generation to procure the materials you see there along Kampala Road on Plot 9/11, it will take years.  So therefore, the Government - I put a caveat, the government of the day must not sell that structure, which is a palace edified of banking.  

DR TIBERONDWA: Further information. Mr Chairman, if you talk about using a bank for development purposes but once a bank has been privatised, the individuals cannot be ordered around to go and open a branch say in Ibanda.  they will not.  Once you privatise it then you cannot convene as a government, we can no longer use it for development purposes.  The bank will be governed on commercial basis. You could decide as hon. Sendawula pointed out, to deal with big businessmen here and you can forget all the poor people if you privatise this bank.  If however you private it conditionally, for example, and you say no individual will buy say more than five per cent shares, many be you can widen the ownership but even then it will be privately owned.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Further information. Mr Chairman, I think the economic activities that take place in the country are very much influenced by the fiscal policies of the government.  If through this House annually, through our budget, we decide through fiscal policies that agriculture is our direct preference, all the banks will go there and whether they are private, whether they are public it is a question of policy emanating from this House.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Further information.  Mr Chairman, government and the state can direct the way private business is conducted.  It is done elsewhere and I do not see its impossibilities here.  We can create incentive structures for these institutions which will make them so attractive that they will have to redirect resources in those sectors if we want to do so.  

Furthermore, even if you were to say this is a public owned bank or stage in state hands, unless the environment is such that it is enabled to perform and those are the most important things, you can create institutions, leave them in state hands and they will not deliver.  We have seen them before.  UDB is there, has it helped because it is publicly owned the Starch Industry?  No, what we need is to have conditions which can enable these institutions to perform.  If that was not the case, in Europe or elsewhere, things would not have moved.  

In the far Eastern Asia  -(Interjection)- it is far but there are countries.  If the conditions that we lay down which will actually help us.  The way we design policies is what will help us to get things moving.  It is not that the bank is owned by the state that will make it move. 

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I am glad about all these point of information, they show the concern which we have but my concern is that we can be original on our own public resources.  The problem is that the farmers as so far seen as people in their private capacities, they take things on their own risk, they can suffer on their own but you must also see the collective effect of these small farmers.  What if they were not there? What if they decided to sleep one month, on work.  What would happen, what would be the cost we pay? We have already got a formulation of the RC I, RC II, RC III.  We must now try to use these organs as also vanguards of some economic action.  But this is sometimes, it is out of the norm which is done in many countries but there are no two countries which are the same. Every country must also look at its own peculiar problems and they devise a peculiar system to address this.  So, whether we go through banks or go through what not, I would just we let us start to this about this.

I want to thank hon. Kagonyera for his contribution but some times I want to beg you hon. Members.  It is not true that people in the government also have no idea at all from themselves.  We go to the lending institutions like the World Bank because we do not have money to finance our ideas.  So, in the discussions they also bring their conditions because you want their money but that is why some of us have grey hair now, we think a lot about ideas.  (Laughter) 

So it is offending to say the World Bank did this, these are as human as you are, as we are.  But when I have my idea I go to UCB, I will do my ranch on my own.  So, UCB cannot claim that you see I gave you the idea of ranching.  So keep trust in your people and yourself. It is these Ugandan ideas but for lack of money we go outside and also say what they want because they have got the money but do not give them all the praise that we are just stooges there.  We do some thinking, please.

The hon. Lady from Hoima, I have taken note and I want to assure you that the closure of these branches were as of that time, according to their performance.  If the branches improved the bank will bring branches there. The branches are not closed for good.  Where the branches were, the bank is operating agencies.  She was asking me what is in place.  The agencies, because they are cheaper to operate, have replaced branches but where the local leadership have helped the people to get around and can go back to branch, UCB will upheld it accordingly.  So, it is not the end of life as far as UCB is concerned.

I think I have replied to hon. Moses Ali’s contribution through farming and the small farmers and so on and I want him to continue farming, please.  We must put in place appropriate instrument to address the farmers.

MR MOSES ALI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the Minister has always either deliberately or whenever that point comes in his mind I think he has some electrical shortcoming that he gets forgotten. We have talked about domestic indebtedness, its effects and so on.  Deliberately, always he does not comment about it.  Can I now ask the Minister specifically that he should not forget again and tell us something about the indebtedness.  Domestic indebtedness and its effect and what is going to be their position in this Trust.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: I do not know.  Hon. Moses Ali so gets electric short and jump fast on these matters of domestic indebtedness.  (Laughter) I have taken note of matters in your contribution, which you related but when you were not there I referred to domestic arrears. Domestic areas are arising about mismanagement of the budget at different government centres.  Those people accept goods and services of higher value than what is provided in the budget.  So the Ministry of Finance at any one time bids up a list of verified creditors and makes a budget provision to pay them but until we discipline all officers in government, domestic arrears keep coming. 

Two years ago we paid 33 billion shillings of domestic arrears in the hope that we had finished this problem.  The following year last year, we provided for 22 billion shillings, which is already paid out.  Now, outside the budget they have submitted bills of 13 billion, which we cannot go to court and defend because an officer of government somewhere issued an LPO It may have been without CTB but goods were received. 

So, it is not possible for me to tell you today that the government owes more than what it has been brought up and what it owes.  The 12 billion we know of is provided in the budget but we are streamlining the system of government purchases and acquisition of services to be within the budget approved by Parliament.  That is how you can avoid the occurrence of future domestic arrears.

MR KIGYAGI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, on the issue of domestic arrears, in the last budget, the hon. Minister promised us that everybody providing goods and services to the government will provide them against a letter of credit, a local letter of credit.  Mr Chairman, since that promise was made this has not been honoured by the different centres which are receiving goods and services on behalf of the government.  If this was in place, I am sure this issue of domestic arrears would be gone by now.  I do not know what the Minister has in place to cater for this.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: I do not know whether you are a supplier to the government.  All wise suppliers to government now get letters of credit because they have suffered in the past, they are not taking a risk.  It is only people who are still taking, I can tell you the Ministry of Defence in buying most of its stores through a letter of credit.  I can inform you, if hon. Chebrot was here, the Ministry of Local Government they insist, they issue first with a letter of credit and what does that mean; it means that money is deducted from the Treasury and the Bank of Uganda is given instruction for you on delivery your L/C to mature.  You can consult people who deal with banks, this is the process but for one reason or another, a number of suppliers also get advantages by not going through this L/C.  So, you encourage them, if there are any problems, come and let me know I will address the problem.  (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that these banks that were closed, if my be they were allowed to operate throughout the week, may be they would realise the money that is required but now that they are operating just once in a week, it has even discouraged people who would deposit their money on these accounts in most of these banks.  Thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Further information. Mr Chairman, the other point is on security. If say in an area people know that, that bank opens on Wednesdays to give out money and receive money, you alert these highway robbers and in some areas the insecurity has increased on grounds of these allocated days because people would know that on such a day someone is going to draw money or he is going to bank money and these people will make arrangements to attack these people on the way. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Can the Minister also comment on the promissory notes that are given to these debtors or creditors to the government, that the promissory notes bears interest which interest is lower than what this man is paying to the Commercial Bank.  Who is going to be in charge or bear the difference between the interest paid by the Treasury on promissory notes and that one which the loan is bearing, is earning from the Commercial Banks. There is going to be a difference but who is going to be responsible.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KIWAGAMA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I understand the Minister saying that people who supply goods to the government now are given Letters of Credit before they supply.  What about suppliers of services; like Consultants, Quantity Surveyors, Architects because those take three years to recover their fees.  What have you done about it.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, the problems of UCB with the improvement and so on, fortunately, there are directors from this House who sit on the Board of UCB. Secondly, there is good report now between leaders like you from your areas with a new management of UCB. These are areas as leaders you are entitled to go to discuss with the Bank.  So, I cannot tell you that tomorrow that branch can go back there then I will be interfering in the Management of the bank.  Secondly, promissory notes.  Promissory notes is really to the government a post dated cheque because you are managing a cash flow budget.  While you want to pay today may be we shall provide the cash three months later and meanwhile we give you an interest rate and we are only guided by the interest rate we charge or we pay on Treasury Bills because that is our source of revenue. (Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to have the Minister clarify this.  While they are thinking of giving you interest on a promissory notes for some three months to come, why is it that there would be totally oblivious of the fact that the debt might have been owing for the last three or four years without interest? How do you clarify that and you think that it is reasonable.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, the Member should be happy that this government, every year becomes more positive in thinking. (Laughter) So, we cannot say that because five years, we were not positive we stop being - you should congratulate us on our performance that we are putting new instruments in place.

I just want to wind up.

Suppliers of services are the same like suppliers of goods.  What we want is that if Parliament approves 600 billions, we collect that and that is paid for the services we consume.  Anything we incur beyond that becomes a debt which becomes difficult to pay because each Financial Year has to come to Parliament and get through on complication.  So, I would be grateful if you play any part to reduce this problem.

As I said, I am going to talk to hon. Kanyomozi and his committee to look at two just technical amendments.  The role of the Statutory Instrument and also the role of the Schedules to a Bill so that the lawyers help us to bring them in their true perspective, otherwise, I thank everybody for such a good job well done.  Thank you.  (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill read a Second Time.)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Assembly rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned till Thursday, 4 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

 





