Wednesday, 6th August 2008

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Before we begin the general debate on the budget, I would like to invite you to join me in welcoming some pupils from Kasubi Church of God Primary School and St Mary’s Day and Boarding School Karuhuza in Kibale District. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, as I indicated yesterday, I would like to give opportunity to members who did not speak on the State of the Nation Address. 

3.05
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to raise a few issues on the budget speech by the Minister of Finance. 

The minister talked about investment and he specifically talked about improvement in public and private investment. On private investment, I would like to request the Ministry of Finance to recognise the role played by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs especially through the missions abroad in attracting investments and to that end, facilitate Ministry of Foreign affairs in attracting investors. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and our missions abroad get constrained. They are actually doing a lot of work and yet locally here, they are portrayed as a ministry that is not contributing a lot to the economy of this country.

It is good to talk about investment but it is also important to practically attract investors, not by statements but by putting infrastructure in place. This attraction of investments should not be centralised. Investors should be attracted to invest in any part of this country and therefore Government should put investment infrastructure in place. 

I have heard somebody say that we give you land. I want to assure you that in Gulu where I come from there is abundant land for investors. However, I should also assure you that this land is available on condition that the investors come and partner with the land owners because the land owners would like to be part and parcel of those investments. There is no contradiction in that. It has always been the stand of the leadership from the Acholi sub-region that whenever investors come, we partner with them. 

There are even some investments that require little land. For record purposes, I would like to say that in Gulu in particular, we have given some free land to investors –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I thought we are having a formal session and so making informal statements should not arise. In Gulu, if you need a small piece of land, you are welcome. We will even give you free land to invest. We have given so many investors free land and they are now opening up this land to put up schools, health centres – and these are private people. 

For those who want big chunks of land like Madhvani, please come and negotiate with the land owners. The land owners will not sell you the land; they would want to be part and parcel of that investment and have a share in that investment. We think this is the only way the poor Ugandans are going to rise up; not by selling off their land but by being part and parcel of those investments. We should not only look at employment, that when they start their investments people will get jobs. We also want our local people to get some profits. So, take it from us that investors are welcome to partner with our local people in Northern Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the minister talked about rural development and basically narrowed his focus on provision of seeds and seedlings, agricultural implements, irrigation and pesticides. You know, agriculture is the backbone of our rural communities but in order for our rural people to be uplifted, it has to be broadened. You can give all these provisions but if the rural feeder roads do not have bridges, our people will have difficulty in accessing the markets. They will have difficulty in transporting these goods to the markets. We would like Government to focus on that. The rural roads, the rural economy should be entirely focused on. On top of that, Government should do everything possible to avail markets for our rural farmers so that they are able to get incomes and are able to stabilise. Government should also come up with deliberate efforts to give loans to people who would like to establish small scale processing industries in these rural areas so that farmers can get their goods processed for better value in the market.

I also think that one of the things that most African economies, especially Uganda, do not focus on when we talk about development is transforming not only the rural but the informal sector. The majority of our people continue to live on informal activities. The informal economy is actually rife throughout. So, unless we have a deliberate effort to transform the informal sector into a formal economic sector, it is going to take us a long time to fight poverty in the rural areas.

On Peace, Recovery and Development (PRDP) for Northern Uganda, I would like to say that we are very grateful with the Juba process. As we speak now, the majority of our people have returned home. Over 80 percent of the population has returned home. We would like Government not to wait. People are returning, so when are they going to be facilitated to catch up? The first rainy season is almost over and the second has started so Government should come in. When you come in to support them in December or in January next year, it will not be useful.  

3.13
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity. I want to begin by expressing my deep appreciation to the Minister of Finance for the budget proposal presenting Government policies for the fiscal year 2008/2009. The minister’s budget was excellent. It addressed a range of fundamental issues affecting sustained development of our country and he described accurately, the performance of the economy.

I also want to thank the shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, for his response. If you look at the quality of the paper, this is really very expensive paper. There can be no denying that prosperity has already landed on the Opposite side. (Laughter) The transformation has come.

Madam Speaker, if you allow me a minute, I would really want to dwell on the factual response to some of the doubts raised by the shadow minister. The minister asked the question, “If the Ugandan economy is growing at an impressive rate of 8.9 percent, what does the common peasant in your village have to show for this growth?” He went on to say, and this time I am not assuming: “Assume for a while that you have visited your rural village to consult with your constituents as an MP, and now assume that you wish to break the good news to them in your local language - I will not use my local language because you would have a problem. I will use English - that finally the economy has grown and as a result, they have reason to celebrate; what is your speech going to be like? This is the only way representatives of the people can test what we do and say by checking if we share our understanding with the people we serve.”  

I really want to demonstrate, factually, that indeed the impressive economic performance record has been translated into practical results and these results can be seen on the ground. If you allow me, because Nandala-Mafabi cast doubt about the accuracy of figures in the minister’s budget speech, I also want to consult or at least share with him records of other scholars and documentations which confirm that what the minister told the House was actually accurate.  

In the response of the shadow minister, he doubted whether the economic growth was pro-poor. He questioned that growth in Uganda was only benefiting 20 percent, and he doubted whether GDP growth has reduced poverty at all. He also questioned the role of micro finance, cooperative development and so on. It is unfortunate the minister is not in the House but I hope you will convey the message. I am addressing him and pleading with him because I wanted him to be humble and at least accept the facts the way they are going to be revealed. He is not known for being humble, but this time I want to appeal to him that these are the facts.  

First, the transformation of the economy has begun. Transformation of an economy involves - and the Leader of the Opposition would appreciate it better - changing portions of the structures of the economy for purposes of improved performance. It also involves an economy-wide shift from primary product production to more service, industry and manufacturing. It also involves increased monetisation and increased contribution of industry, manufacturing and service into GDP more than agriculture. On the human development index, it involves improved life expectancy, increased adult education, education attainment, increased access and availability of services, increased quality of life. I can show you that all this is happening. 

Let us look at the contribution of sectors to the economy. I have some figures which you will allow me to share to show that these figures are not necessarily from the minister but are from other relevant bodies. I have the figures that the economy –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And hon. Nandala has arrived. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: You have arrived. I have figures by the World Bank on Uganda’s country economic memorandum and this is current. These figures are also reflected in the Background to the Budget. Without having to open the papers - I have just xeroxed the relevant pages - if you look at the relevant pages, it confirms that Uganda’s economy has been growing. For the years 2004/2005, the growth rate was 6.6 percent. In 2005/2006, it was 10.3 percent. In 2006/2007, it was 7.4 percent. In 2007/2008, it was 8.9 percent. These are the same figures the minister quoted in his budget speech, confirming that the record is really right and there could be no denying.

Secondly, the same document shows that poverty levels have been reduced. In 1997, the proportion of Ugandans living below the poverty line was 56 percent. As I talk to you now, it is 31 percent. If you wanted me to show you in the village that indeed prosperity has started, I would show you. I would show you the number of houses roofed with iron sheets, the increased enrolment in primary schools, in secondary schools, in universities; I would show you all this. The life expectancy has increased. Honourable minister, it was 43 in 2000 and it is now 51 years.

Honourable minister, if time allowed me, I would have even showed you that in the very place where you come from, to show you the freedom of cooperatives you were able to be elected the chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union. This shows you how important this thing is. I would want the minister to accept that these are facts showing transformation and showing the budget proper. I thank you very much indeed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Hon Kamuntu, are you laying the papers for us?  Are you laying those papers for us?

PROF. KAMUNTU: No, I was just –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is okay. 

3.22
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister of Finance for the budget speech and the Shadow Minister of Finance for the answers rendered. 

Madam Speaker, I want to begin by thanking the minister for emphasising the Education Standards Agency because when we emphasise it, the agency will eliminate misuse and make sure that our pupils who enrol in P.1 complete P.7 and eventually go up to S.4. I want to urge the minister that they should not stop at eliminating misuse but should also make sure that schools have fire fighting equipment so that in case there is fire, they are able to control that situation.

On that note, I also want to thank the minister for exempting tax on income arising from operating schools and tertiary institutions. This has been a recommendation of this Parliament for over five years. I want to thank the minister for realising that it is an obligation for this Government to make sure that we educate all our citizens. Since it has realised this, it is a very good venture.

I also want to thank the minister for correcting a mistake; I recall two years ago, the minister increased the excise tariff on beer made out of local materials from 20 to 30. I want to thank the Minister of Finance for addressing that anomaly because this will stimulate production and increase effective demand, and it will even eradicate poverty. I want to thank the minister for realizing that error.

I want to thank the minister for the move they made in this budget speech to make sure that we improve our road infrastructure. Many roads have been cited, for example Mukono-Katosi in Mukono is one of the roads that is going to be improved. However, I want to remind the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Works that since 1996, the President promised to upgrade Mukono-Kisoga-Nkokonjeru–Ngogwe–Najja-Nyenga road. We had a by-election in April and the President and the ministers who were there re-affirmed to the peasants that this road was going to be worked on and it is even in the budget. They said, “Do not talk about it because the road is in the budget. You just vote for the Movement.” The people also tested us; they said, “If what you are saying is correct, first give us the road.” It is regrettable that despite Government losing the seat of Buikwe West, we have gone ahead not to give them a road. I want to urge the minister to reconsider –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, have you discussed with the Minister of Works? Are you are sure that that road is nowhere?

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Madam Speaker, the road is not there. They just included a portion from Mukono to Kisoga then they took the Katosi side and left the Nkokonjeru side. You recall that Nsuube was one of the popular schools those days when the road was good, but now no parent can take his or her child to Nsuube. So, it has really undermined the growth of that area and even Prosperity for All has been affected.  

Madam Speaker, I also have concerns about inflation. A lot has been talked about regarding the increasing prices of agricultural products and the minister is happy. The minister said: “It has been a fundamental policy of this Government to maintain stable prices for all goods and services without interfering in the operations of free markets. This year was no exception. Despite difficulties arising from high prices of fuel on the international market, and the escalation of domestic food and other commodity prices that built up in the second half of the Financial Year 2007/08, the government maintained economic stability through macroeconomic measures that did not interfere with the markets.” Which markets? Is it financial markets or goods markets? 

You will agree with me that although we are boasting about high prices, very many of our constituents actually are having one meal a day. What is the cause of high demand? Has the population just increased in one day? Maybe production was low. We all depend on agriculture and we depend on natural rain, so the effect has already been felt; schools have increased school fees and transport costs have increased. As you boast about the high prices to stimulate production, at the moment there is a crisis. When you actually measure the inflation rate, it is over two digits. Actually, my constituents requested me to appeal to Government to do something about the increase in agricultural food crop prices.

3. 29
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this budget debate. Allow me to thank the Minister of Finance for presenting a budget which is focussed, with specific priorities in five areas for this financial year. I know at the end of this financial year, we shall be able to judge whether we have achieved these specific priority areas.  

As I support the budget, allow me to make these observations: on land, I applaud the government for putting up a revolving fund to be used as a land acquisition loan facility specifically beginning with 30 districts with each district benefiting Shs 100 million. My concern lies specifically with the interest groups. We are aware that in this country there are people who were displaced by the government because of the policies of gazetting some areas as forest reserves and wildlife reserves and these people have never been resettled anywhere. In Masindi, there are areas like Mpumwe where people were displaced by the Uganda Wildlife Authority. These people have never been settled. This fund is meant to pass through the SACCOs but these people are still displaced. I remember in the last Parliament, it was promised that these people would be resettled on Ranch 11; to date, they have not been resettled. What plans does the minister have for these people? 

The second category of people are the minority ethnic groups like the Batwa who were displaced from the Ecuya Forest from Kanungu, and the Ik of Kabong District from Timu Forest who were displaced and they have never been actually settled anywhere. Can the minister tell us how these people are going to benefit even when they are not actually represented on local councils in their specific areas?       

Madam Speaker, about road infrastructure, I commend the minister for prioritising Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi road. I pray that this road commences as stated in the budget speech. My concern lies with the officials who draw and sign contracts with those people who are supposed to work on these roads. Specifically, some of these contracts which are signed by the technical people do not provide for access bridges to the community or even drainage systems. On Masindi-Kafu road, actually these two specific things were missing and I personally kept driving one mile away from my home looking for an access route to join the main road. 

When we contacted the contractors, they told us the access routes and drainage systems were not part of the agreement. I want to ask the minister that when signing these agreements or when these agreements are being drawn, let us put into consideration community access bridges and also drainage systems otherwise these roads at the end of the day will be washed away by rain.

On human development, the minister assured the country about improving the efficiency and quality of Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE) by strengthening the Education Standards Agency in order to undertake the inspection function and remove wastage and misuse of resources both at the centre and lower Government levels. He noted specifically that the enrolment in the public education system has continued to increase while the number of students who complete education remains low. 

I want to ask the minister; how will the Education Standards Agency remove wastage from the primary and secondary education system? This concern is particular with the rural districts where girls and ethnic minorities are more likely to drop out of school. I feel it will be necessary to ensure that the wastage which is removed is not taken away simply because students are dropping out. 

It is necessary for the Education Standards Agency to ensure that the salaries of the qualified teachers are not cut. Sometime back, we passed the service tax law and teachers who are paying PAYE are worried because their head teachers have asked them to pay PAYE on their other sources of income and the head teachers have been told to fill forms concerning information on every teacher. They are concerned that if they are paying PAYE, why should we again tax them on the meagre monies they are getting as salary? This is the concern and I am praying that the salaries of the qualified teachers are not cut.

As the Education Standards Agency tries to perform its functions, it should also ensure that the current technologies - the computers and printers - are provided in schools and specifically to rural areas.

3.37
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by observing that it appears we are talking to ourselves because the mover of the motion is not in the House, which is rather funny. Maybe we could get an explanation before we go on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip is in charge of the situation as well as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.

MR YIGA: Thank you. I would like to raise the following observations as I thank the Minister of Finance for his speech: 

One, I am concerned about the provision for SACCOs. When I look at the money which was provided last financial year - Shs 10 billion earmarked for infrastructure and capacity building - and I also look at the money going to be provided this financial year - Shs 22 billion - it appears to be very little money. We have around 1,000 sub-counties and I know there is a SACCO in every sub-county. If we are going to share the Shs 20 billion among the 1,000 SACCOs, each SACCO may get around Shs 20 million. This money is not enough for our people with all their problems concerning finance and it will not be able to fight poverty. We need to increase and provide more money for SACCOs to begin. It is three years now and we have been talking about empowering SACCOs but no money has gone there. We need to help the SACCOs get money to lend out to the poor people in our villages.

I am also concerned about the Shs 3 billion which was budgeted for the land acquisition fund. This money was meant to benefit 30 districts but the Ministry of Finance has not told us which 30 districts. I would be interested in knowing if Masaka is one of the districts which benefited from this money. I would like the Minister of Finance to tell us which districts benefited and also give us a plan on whether he is going to add money so that the land acquisition fund is boosted.  

I would like to commend the government for the UPE and USE programmes. Of course, the challenge remains that of quality and ensuring that pupils complete primary education. Looking at my constituency, although Masaka is taken to be a well off district, I have to say that my constituency is doing badly; there are very many Government aided schools which lack infrastructure, pit latrines and even water for drinking in my constituency. I request the government to reconsider the position as far as Masaka is concerned so that they also look at our rural constituencies which are doing badly. When they talk about Masaka, they only look at the municipality where schools are okay, but for us representing rural areas our schools are doing badly and require money for infrastructure development.

The other issue of concern is health. In Uganda there is only one constituency which does not have a health centre IV, and that is my constituency. I have been requesting Government for the last seven years to construct a health centre IV for Kalungu West constituency but they have not yet yielded. I therefore request that this time that the government has provided more money for health infrastructure, Kalungu West should be considered and a health centre IV for my people be constructed so that they can also benefit from the national cake.

Lastly, I am concerned about rural electrification. In my constituency, we have two lines which were constructed recently by the government but these lines have not benefited my people greatly because the government has not provided transformers. Could transformers be availed so that my people can benefit from the rural electrification programme? Thank you very much.

3.43
MR PEREZA AHABWE (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with hon. Kamuntu on his analysis of the response from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Hon. Mafabi is an economist and knows very well that there is a difference between economic growth and economic development. If your concentration is on economic development, your analysis is possibly right but in terms of growth, it is quantitative and not qualitative. However, I want also to appreciate the responses by hon. Mafabi. Rather than being on the defensive, I think we should read the document by hon. Mafabi because it is analytical and we take advantage of the critical areas that he has talked about. I think that is the beauty of multiparty systems.

I want to talk about the Kabale-Kisoro road, which was mentioned in the Budget Speech by the minister and I want to report that progress on this road is going on very well. We the people from Rubanda and Kisoro are very happy about the progress. However, I want to warn government that recently when I was discussing with officials of the African Development Bank, they were concerned because there were designs, which were added on that road that were not in the original design. Those designs are so costly that the money that this Parliament approved is not likely to be enough. So, if we gave this road a three-year programme - I want to ask government to prepare for the eventuality that this road will need more money at the end of the day. Do you want to disagree with my -[Mr Byanyima, “Information”]- You can give.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, it is disappointing because at the beginning, this road was estimated to cost $400,000 per kilometre but it has turned out to be the most expensive road in the whole country to the tune of $879,000 per kilometre and it is a six metre carriage way. I feel that the minister should save us that embarrassment because I don’t think that this Parliament will pass an extra penny for that road. I feel that the minister should intervene at a very fast pace to avoid any embarrassment to this country. I thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am now speaking as an engineer. It is too early to start speculating over costs of this project; we are just on the preliminaries. I think that the honourable member should keep an eye on this but not be alarmist that this project will be too expensive. It is too early.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala, don’t you think that it is wise for him to inform the government that he has got fears about the prospects of that road?

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for saving me from the speculations of Engineer Byandala. I was very clear and I said that I had interactions with officials of the African Development Bank in Crested Towers and they told me that the designs have changed because of the terrain and they are saying that the money that this Parliament approved is not likely to complete the project. I am telling government that they should prepare ahead of time and I think I am right. To add to that, the original –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you are supposed to be listening to Members.

MR AHABWE: The original surveys where the road is passing are changing because of the swamps and they are now digging into the hills in certain places and diverting the road yet the population was not compensated. Now the population is threatening to interfere with the project. I am informing you because I was there last week. Therefore, the issue of compensation should be worked on very quickly because I am playing my public relations role to make sure that the population does not interfere with the progress of the project. However, the project is moving on very well. For Engineer Byandala to say that they are in preliminary stages is actually not true. They have started pouring - we call it kolasi in our local language. (Laughter)

I want also to express my concern about - Honourable minister, let me make one point and then you clarify. The contractors are actually interfering with the water system in the area. Many of the pipes that have been laid have been cut. Also, many of the spring waters where people have been drawing water for drinking have been destroyed and they are saying that they are not responsible for replacements. I am reporting. My people are now turning to stagnant water, which is likely to be a problem to us. I think the ministers concerned should take note of this because we shall not accept to drink that stagnant water when the project is the one interfering.

Let me mention one more point about Ministry of Finance. We read very good speeches and write very good papers but when it comes to implementation, we have problems. Sometimes I see Ministry of Finance taking on too much compared to the rest of the ministries. I will give you examples. Every good project that comes, even if it falls under a different sector, is taken over by Ministry of Finance. The new proposed Uganda Development Co-operation, I hear instead of being housed under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, has been taken over by Ministry of Finance. The proposed SACCOs, instead of being under the Ministry of Trade, including the proposed SACCO Regulatory Authority, are being taken over by Ministry of Finance. Uganda Investment Authority, which used to fall under the trade and industry sector, was taken over by Ministry of Finance. When we made noise on this floor of Parliament, Uganda National Council for Science and Technology was taken over by Ministry of Finance. I think we need structural rearrangement for some of these institutions if we hope to operate efficiently.

3.52
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this budget speech. Generally, when I read the budget speech, it indicated that in Uganda, we are having a positive economic trend. I want to appreciate government for this new financial year’s budget, which is trying to reinforce the same. However, Madam Speaker, I have a few comments. 
In reality, when you reach the ground, you will find that although we have a generally positive trend countrywide, the gap between the rich and the poor is widening. That is practical. I want to find out from the minister what he is going to do to ensure that this scenario of having two wings within the same country is resolved.
Another concern, Madam Speaker, is that I have heard two contradicting statements from leaders of this country. It is very dangerous for leaders of the same country to start giving out contradicting statements. I have heard leaders urging people to leave urban areas and go upcountry to start agriculture as a way of developing the economy; but I have also heard leaders of this same country urging people to leave the villages and come to urban areas so that they get more involved in the service and industrial sector. 
So, our people are now on the crossroads; they do not know what to do. Some leaders are telling them to leave the land vacant so that it can be used economically for agricultural production, so that more people get involved in the service and industrial sector; but other leaders are telling the people to go back to the villages and get involved in agriculture. So, as a country, what should be the way forward? We should have one voice and tell our people the way forward which will be economically viable for our country.
Madam Speaker, when I read the Budget Speech, I found out that the minister intends to develop the rural communities by using two programmes. One is reinforcing the SACCOs and another one is NAADS. But I want to tell the minister that these two programmes need a lot of sensitisation about the modus operandi. People are not yet aware of how these programmes are going to work. So, if they are going to be successful, we need to make more sensitisation about the two projects.
The other major concern of the Budget Speech was improving the rural infrastructure, but I also want to add that the minister and the government should ensure that market information and research is reinforced to ensure that we provide demand-driven services. That is the only way we can sustain production from the rural communities. 
About the infrastructure, Madam Speaker, I want to give a scenario of my constituency, Bujumba in Kalangala District. We have Ssese Islands. We have two main entries into these islands: one is through Nakiwogo by the steamer ship and the other one is the Bukakata-Luku road, which is properly indicated in this budget that it is going to be improved upon.  However, I get surprised because this is now the fourth year that this road is mentioned in the budget. I do not know whether this time it will be real.
I want to also inform my honourable minister of infrastructure that as he also recalls, a memorandum of understanding was signed in 2005 in order to improve the Ssese Islands as one of the productive typical rural areas of this country, and in this memorandum of understanding, which was signed between government and Infraco - which is an international company – to use Kalangala Infrastructure Services Limited, a local company here, to improve on the trunk road on Bugaka Island, it is supposed to start a hybrid project of power generation and distribution, and it is supposed to provide clean water. But since the memorandum of understanding was signed in 2005, nothing has taken place. Can I know from the minister what is going to happen, whether we still have hope to have this rural area improved? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.58
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to that of the honourable colleagues who have supported and appreciated the Budget Speech by the honourable Minister of Finance, and also my colleague hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for his response particularly on issues of pension arrears. I think we need to do something about pension arrears because a lot of our people after retiring from work serving this country, some of them actually retire to poverty. I think we need to address this issue of pension arrears once and for all. 
Madam Speaker, I was also intrigued by some of the conclusions reached by hon. Nandala-Mafabi on page 3 of the statement of his response, particularly No. 7 and No. 8. I think it is in No.8 where he says, “Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, several scholars have established that the growth in Uganda has induced important employment shifts out of agriculture, which has dampened increase in poverty.” That is true and actually, he goes on to say that “…growth that does not translate in welfare is meaningless and suspect.”
Madam Speaker and honourable members, I took a keen interest through it because I found it a bit contradicting. Of course, it is clear that growth in Uganda has actually helped to lift many people out of poverty and a shift of many people out of the agricultural sector into other non-agricultural employments have helped to reduce poverty and that is the explanation of the meaning of ‘dampen’, but the conclusions my honourable colleague reached seem to be in contradiction with actually the conclusions of the researchers of that study, which is quoted on foot note No. 2, Robert Kappel, Jann Lay and Suzan Steiner. The title of the study is: “Uganda: No More Pro-Poor Growth?” and I just read the conclusions. I will go to the last page and read the conclusion of that study. 

Those scholars say that, “Regarding the indirect way of pro-poor growth, we find that the Ugandan government has made notable progress in investing in the assets of the poor. Between 1992 and 2003, the Ugandan population experienced important welfare gains in terms of consumption. During the 1990s, the consumption increases were broad-based and even pro-poor and thus, growth significantly reduced poverty.”  Growth was clearly pro-poor and in summary they say, “To summarise the main findings, our assessment of the indirect way of pro-poor growth in Uganda benefited the poor, particularly investments inhaled and education.” And these are the findings and the conclusions of that study.  

My honourable colleague concludes that in the last ten years, although the study was for 1992 to 2003, the number of people living below the poverty line increased from eight to nine million, which is actually contrary to the findings of the study. So, I thought maybe that that should be corrected for the record.

The second issue, Madam Speaker, is on No.7, where he says, “…however, the minister failed to inform Ugandans that the growth talked about was not pro-poor growth, but growth without poverty reduction.” Madam Speaker, this is a fallacy in economic terms. These are conclusions by many economists. All growth is good for poverty reduction.  Growth is like a cat, whether it is black or white, it will catch a mouse. (Laughter) So, any growth is good for poverty reduction. I have not heard of any country that has grown and reduced poverty without economic growth, and that is a fact, take it from me.  

Secondly, there are other people who have collaborated. There is a study which was released in May this year, which shows that Uganda has actually done a lot of good in investing in health, in education and now this year, we have put quite a bigger amount of money in infrastructure. 

It is also an economic fact that not all of us can grow and become rich at the same time. If we want to become rich as a country, some people have to become rich first. So, when you talk about the Gini-Coefficient, it is just a ratio. The fact that the Gini-Coefficient will increase from 0.35 percent to 0.41 percent does not mean that the lowest 20 percent have lost.  

If we had a small cake in 1992 of $400,000 million as GDP and we have a big cake now of $9.4 billion, the absolute share of the poor in a bigger cake may be the size of this table. It is quite significant compared to the cake of $400,000 million which was the size of a cup. So in absolute terms, the poor in Uganda have not lost. The lowest 20 per cent have not lost; they have made their in-group gains; in-group gains are very significant. That is why the reduction of poverty from 56 percent to 31 percent has been able to lift over 18 million people out of poverty.  

I agree with you that in absolute numbers below the poverty line - the 31 percent; they are significant if you take the 31 million Ugandans, those are about eight million people. But compare the eight million with the 18 million people that have been lifted out of poverty because of the percentage change from 56 percent to 31 percent. So, incrementally the increase in incomes from the lowest quintile may be slower than the increase in the absolute amount of money that is going to the top 20 percent.  

4.06
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to speak about our Budget. I thank the minister for having succeeded in making a very good Budget for our nation. I also particularly want to thank the President for his leadership especially that in this Budget, 70 percent of the resources to support the Budget will be from our own Ugandan resources. That is very great! I commend the NRM Government for this wisdom and also all our leaders and Cabinet ministers for this effort. It is not usual that the donors will support us by only 30 percent. To me, this is a great turning point for Uganda.  

However, I have some concerns, Madam Speaker, and one of the concerns is on the roads. The roads, especially, the existing ones have not had good maintenance. I am talking particularly of Kampala – Mityana road. For the last many years I have known it, they are always patching it and yet the Ministry of Works has been given a lot of money and that makes me think that perhaps the people who are given contracts are not carefully selected, and that also makes me call to everybody to watch out for corruption because it is not that roads are not given the money, but many times we have found that in these projects, the money is put to the wrong uses. So, I am putting it before the House that really we should all be watchdogs for corruption, especially with these contracts and maybe some technocrats in the departments that are responsible for roads.

Another thing, Madam Speaker, the roads in the rural areas are very bad; they are impassable. I am speaking of my own constituency Kyenjojo –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I wanted to adhere to your advice that I should respond at the end, but there are some issues that come up and you really see the House being misled. When you look at the road she is talking about, the Kampala-Mityana road, this road has had some problems and the problems were with the donor funding. We tendered this road but on the day we were going to sign the agreement there was a change in government in Sweden and immediately they said they did not want to see their money being used for that road. The money was diverted somewhere else which I do not want to mention -(Interruptions)– okay, it was taken to Northern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, we have been struggling with that road by only patching; the work that they had been doing is the right and specified job within the amount of money we had in our pockets. Now that we have got our money - you see, I want also to thank you because you have recognised that it is the first time that the NRM Government has got enough money to fund its own budget by about 70 percent. I want to thank you for that recognition. Now, because of that, because the design was already done, we have decided to do the fast tracking of tendering out this road. Take it from me that four months from now, that road will be fully reconstructed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but honourable minister, I think the Member was complaining about the patching that has been going on for so many years. I think that was her complaint.

MS KWEBIHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She was just appealing for action. Yes, she was only complaining about too much patching year after year. That is where her problem was. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: She said that there was corruption; that it was being worked upon every year and that money was going somewhere else in the wrong places, which is wrong. I am saying that what was being done on that road every year is what we call routine maintenance on the road. You just patch with the little money you have so that the road can remain motorable. That is what we had been doing. Otherwise, there was no reconstruction on that road at all. We have not worked on that road. So there was no money which was diverted or stolen or taken away to different places which she is talking about. 

MS KWEBIHA: Thank you, honourable minister. However, even up to today as I speak, the road is very bad and yet they work on it everyday. (Applause)

Before the minister explained, I was talking about the rural roads in my constituency. Apart from the roads being very bad, the bridges - someone talked about it but I want to talk about it because it is a problem that is keeping our people backward. There are some of the bridges which cannot be done locally on rivers. Many of the rivers do not have bridges and that causes the children not to go to school even when there is UPE because they have nowhere to pass. So, I am calling on the ministry responsible for the construction of roads and bridges at least to have some mobile equipment or to reach out to where the roads cannot be done locally. Because I understand some of the roads should be done by the local councils.

Another concern is the poor and marginalised people including pensioners and the youth.  First of all, we need to bring many people on board.  Now, pension is for people who have been working. Some were employed or have social security but there are those people who have grown old - old housewives who may not have worked for an organisation or a government department which could pay pension. I am thinking that we should pay pension to our old people so that the government should be a welfare state to cater for the people who are not able to cater for themselves. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.15
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am only going to point out a few issues so that we can debate and face the future with confidence. 

One, I just want to say that we are already engaged in the process of transformation. I will give you one simple example which you need to appreciate. At the time of India’s independence, the population of India was 280 million - [Hon.Members: “When was that?]- 1947 and by then I was in P.5 and I am still current and I want you to be more current than me so that you have the future and you do not despair. 

Now as we talk, the population is 1.1 billion but still the poorest of the poor are still in India and they amount to about 250 million. But the difference has been transformed into the best scientists, the best rich people. In other words, by 2020 India will be on top of the world in IT, therefore the brain power for the first time will shift from the West to the democratic majority of humanity. Still, there is this lag of this small group below but they are not desperate. Although they are still poor, they are not starving. So, automatically you must be confident that from where we moved to where we are, definitely the situation has improved and we only need to face in that direction; we do not become desperate to come to power tomorrow but take our pace. Let us take the proper steps and I am sure you are going to leave beyond 80 and you will be able to be current and see this country moving ahead. 

Secondly, I want to thank the Minister of Finance. Last year, he said he was reorienting the budget to face in an area which is very vital but which has never actually been faced in since the world was created, by all succeeding governments. One, to address the question of the rural poor, we need to reflect on our society that we who are here and speaking English and those who make a difference in selling what they do not produce, we only constitute 20 percent. 80 percent of our people only love to fend for their stomachs yet many of them are incapable of fending for their stomachs on two meals a day. So, our job is to have a strategy that will be able to transform that 80 percent so that it is able to join the 20 percent as we move ahead. Unless that is done, there is no acrobatics of putting money here and there to transform society. So, that should be properly appreciated. 

When Nandala, on page 16 – hon. Nandala - [An. Hon. Member: “Well, he is your son; you can call him Nandala.”] Well, he is my son and I am proud that I am facing my son and I want him to also face his son some time in future parliaments. I think that will be an achievement for him.

Anyway, hon. Nandala says that this seems to be a wrong strategy and that there will be no employment. But the essence of this strategy is that, we must reactivate the 80 percent and bring them into the money economy. Unless that is done, the majority of our souls will not be employable; there is no other strategy other than doing that. 

He also talks about human development. These are strategies we must be able to agree on, but let us also agree on how we reach there. The objective must be clear. Our target for the rural poor who measure the 80 percent is okay. You can criticise that we have poor education and so on, but the question is, how can we be able to provide education to the poorest number of people? This is so because the history of our country has shown that it is not the professors, it is not the rich people who brought the present changes. Our President has said that in the whole of his history none of his relatives has ever been even a Muluka (parish) chief. That means if he had not been brought up, probably we would not have been able to benefit from his wisdom. So, what we are leaving behind, the 80 percent, may be actually where the solution to our national problems will emerge.

On local governments, my colleague, hon. Mafabi becomes very enthusiastic. He says that government hurriedly borrowed their idea on the abolition of graduated tax. However, I can talk with authority that the idea that graduated tax was backward and primitive was not actually mooted by hon. Nandala or his age group. In 1980, when we differed from the main political trends of the UPC and DP and formed a third one, which incarnated into the Movement under the UPM - if you read through our manifesto, you will realise that one of the objectives was to abolish graduated tax. I do not know where Nandala was at that time. So, please do not get these things –(Interjections)– do not worry, I have been around. I am still around and current and relevant. So, please get the facts correct.

The idea that we must decentralise and send money to the districts was a good thing. We did it because we assumed that there was nationalism among Ugandans and that if we sent money to a place like Gulu or Iganga, the people there would be able to use it to attend to the basic problems of their country because our target has been to reach down to the lowest person. Every one of you here is voted by that lowest person. We know that this decentralisation has worked, but we are also moving further by trying to make the LC III, which is the gombolola (sub-county) to be the focal point. Once it becomes a focal point, we expect the people in that gombolola to be able to determine what makes their lives better and finance those projects, which will improve their lives.

Not only that, under the Prosperity for All, we want to target households. Unless change is effected in the household, nothing will happen. I have already told the people wherever I have been that if anything does not happen in your LC I, even if you hear that it is happening anywhere, the fact remains it has not happened to you.

So, our target should now be the households. The households we have are approximately five million. The strategy is how we can make them productive; that is the challenge. When you read this budget, there is evidence that we have moved from one stage to another. We started with $44 million by the time we took over government in 1986 and now we are talking of billion – (Interjections)– yes, it takes time, Sir. If you want to produce a child, you must wait for nine months, earlier than that you will have a foetus and not a child. So, please, you must realise the fact that even growth has a time and scale. [Hon. Members: “Address the Chair.”] That is it. I am addressing you, through the Chair. 

So, those are the few points, which I wanted to bring to your attention. Let us face the future with confidence so that we are able to move in order to reach there. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you contributed to the State of the Nation Address, you will not be given chance to contribute today and I have got the list. I know who spoke; I have got the list here.

4.25
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for highlighting the sectors that are going to be tucked-in this financial year. However, I would like to restrict myself to the business environment, which the minister talked about in terms of improvements that have been done to that sector.

I am very concerned about the description of improving the business environment. In Kampala, traders and the majority of whom are Ugandans are complaining about favouritism to foreigners. Improving the business environment for foreigners in this country is very demoralising to our indigenous business community. Local traders and the business community feel that government has targeted them negatively to edge them out of business. What incentives is government putting up for the locals? We now have arcades in Kampala full of immigrants from China who disguise as investors – (Interjections) - well, I know that we still have enough space, but we should improve the space for Ugandans first before we can have Chinese occupying all the small shops in the city. 

And we want to task the minister and the ministries concerned about the regulatory instruments they are using to curb this trend. Is there a coordinate effort to reverse this negative trend by the relevant ministries? How do we describe investors, do we separate investors from immigrants, because I think Uganda has become a hub for immigrants from Africa and now from China and Asia. This is going to cause some strive among the business community who are very concerned that government seems unconcerned about this issue. 

Under opportunities and challenges on page 12, I would like to talk about the opportunity that Uganda has had of positioning itself as an education hub in the region. Private schools are a major income earner for this country because regionally students come from Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and Kenya. Infrastructure has been put up by local Ugandans but now there is a challenge because parents are very concerned from across the region; has the ministry come up to put in place a fund especially in the disaster preparedness area to curb the uncertainty and insecurity around schools vis-à-vis the fires and other security concerns that would threaten this income earning sector? We do not think that we can talk about containing anything of this nature with words. There should be money set aside to help in curbing this threat on lives and also infrastructure. 

So, I am very concerned that the minister could not be here. I think he will just answer after we have spoken. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.30
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today, I want to discuss the economies of rent very briefly. I want to ask a question on why a government which would be here in perpetuity continues to be a squatter on private property. Paradoxically, parastatals which are really children of government have got their own homes, but government does not think that it is worth having a home. 

I want to start from history, when President Kennedy was receiving the instruments of government from his predecessor David Eisenhower, Mr Eisenhower warned the incoming President, “Beware of the industrial military complex.” He was saying that industries which had military applications had such a strong lobby within government that every toy was being sold to government. We have a similar scenario here under a different arrangement; we have a strong lobby in government by big property owners who do not want government to build its own premises but continue to rent. This is not sustainable. 

I want to put the Rt hon. Prime Minister on notice, the frontbench is full of my OBs. when I am thorough with Parliament, one of them will appoint me as the managing director of the Post Office. My first executive order will be to evict the Rt hon. Prime Minister from the Post Office building. (Laughter)

The Budget Committee said this, “The renting of accommodation for public offices has been found to be not only expensive but also a source of arrears and fraud during negations….” I have done a small case study concerning Uganda Bureau of Standards. They borrowed Shs 20 billion and built a block which accommodates 300 people –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is it Uganda Bureau of Standards or Uganda Bureau of Statistics?

MR ARUMADRI: Sorry, I thank you, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, next to Ministry of Finance. Now, if we borrowed such money every financial year, we would be paying interest rates amounting to Shs 1.1 billion out of a total of Shs 13.5 billion which we have been paying on average per annum for the past five years. We have paid cumulatively about Shs 68 billion to rent government premises. 

Madam Speaker, if you have not been to the Ministry of Education, please do not go there you will be thoroughly shocked, because a core ministry – although I understand it is our own building, but those people are not housed. Senior officers to the level of commissioners are in corridors. I told my committee that when I was a student in the University of Nairobi, my room was much better than the ones being occupied by senior government bureaucrats – (Interruption)  

MR KIVEJINJA: I would just want to inform my counterpart on the other side with whom we were at the wick that at the time you and I studied, we were only the privileged few. Now, education is for all. We cannot expect to enjoy the facilities, which were enjoyed by one person at that material time. And the population, by the time I went to the university in 1957, there was nobody. So, everything could be there to pamper the few. So, the situation has changed and we cannot compare.

MR ARUMADRI: The Prime Minister has not helped me at all. In short, I am saying that we should start allocating money in the Budget - in fact, we should be bold enough to go and borrow $200 million; that we can borrow. And by the stroke of a pen, we would build ten blocks like the bureau of statistics. 

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, it is contained in our report of the Budget Committee to the President; that we should put aside at least Shs20 billion every year to construct government office buildings. It is there in the report. And I am happy, my dear friend, that you are now relating to the report that we made as Parliament, to the Budget speech and the speech I think of the shadow minister of finance, which should be the real way we should be progressing with this debate. Thank you very much.

MR ARUMADRI: I have referred to your report; it is here. You talked of Shs20 billion per financial year. I am saying that this is too late. We have been borrowing money, Madam Speaker, for capacity building, which is not tangible. Capacity building is just cocktails - (Laughter) - yes, seminars, something we cannot put our finger on. But with this one, we can go a long way; close our eyes, borrow 200 billion and we get ten blocks, and we would be saving a lot of money. 

I have got some startling figures here. The big guzzlers: Office of the President, last year, 2006/07, spent 802 million; State House 744 million on rent; Office of the Prime Minister, 718 million; Justice 1.3 billion; Local Government, 540 million; Gender, 1.4 billion; Uganda Police, 400 million; Directorate of Public Prosecution, 550 million. And listen to this. Uganda Revenue Authority, 2.3 billion. Madam Speaker, we cannot go on like this. We need to take action. Thank you.

4.40
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to first of all thank the shadow minister of finance for that brilliant submission. In fact, he is Harvard material. He deserves to be minister for finance. But I would also still thank the Minister of Finance for knowing what is good for this country much as very little has been done.

Madam Speaker, I would love to start with an issue of infrastructure. And to begin with Mityana Road because I feel cheated; I feel there is a big problem of verbosity in the Ministry of Works. Nothing is being done, they just end at talking. Since February this year, I have been on hon. Nasasira’s neck over Mityana road. And in fact, I am asking myself whether the road has been written off or whether the people there are not important or it is also a sign of economic growth because indeed this road has become a recipe for disaster. 

Madam Speaker, when you take that road, when you get to Busega roundabout, you just have to prepare your own shock absorbers because you cannot handle it. This road has manholes - I cannot even call them potholes right now. 

In February, when I approached the Minister for Works, he told me that they were actually working on the road. And the work which was being done was patching these manholes with murram, which was washed away immediately it rained. And –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nakawuki, I do not know whether you were here but hon. Kwebiha raised the same matter, and hon. Byabagambi said they have been patching but in the next four months they are going to re-do the road. Is that not what he said? That is what he said about that same road.

MS NAKAWUKI: Madam Speaker, I thought it was important because at least two people die every week on this road. And I needed to know from him when this work is actually beginning because they are just talking and they are not acting. When is this work beginning because it might take another three years?

And the other issue under infrastructure is the issue of health. I think we are really getting mistaken that it is all about structures. Well, we thank government that we now have structures that we call health centres but they are not being of any use to the people. For instance, I will talk about my constituency health centre IV. We have this health centre, which is not even facilitated –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Name the place so that we know it. 

MS NAKAWUKI: This is in Wakiso Town Council. This health centre in most cases gets Shs700,000 per month, which comes even after three months. We have an ambulance but it is not put to work because it never has fuel. Recently, I went there and Umeme was taking the doctor to court because he has not been able to pay the electricity bills simply because the little money that he gets to run this entire hospital is almost nothing, it cannot do anything. Many Members here use such an amount of money to run their homes, and it is not even enough to run their homes. And the inspection officers are also not doing their work. These doctors and the health workers are not being well remunerated and that is why all of them have their subsidiary clinics. So, they spend all the time there. You find patients lining up and they are not being assisted. Medicine is just being sold. 

Now you realise that if you need to have an injection, you have to take your own injection and you have to carry gloves to the hospital; you have to carry practically everything including a razorblade. This is really a shame to this country. So, as we look into the health system, yes we are grateful to Government but a lot more needs to be done. 

We also thank Government for UPE and USE but in Busiro we are almost losing out. We have these so-called first world schools which are Government-aided but we do not gain. As I talk, in the whole of Wakiso Sub-county and Wakiso Town Council, we only have two USE schools. Even the UPE schools are not catered for. In fact, in Kayunga one of the classroom blocks is almost collapsing on the pupils. We had to visit the district and they said they were helpless. I believe Government needs to come up with a culture of maintaining what is in place because if you do not maintain these things, we are not going to gain anything. 

Concerning UPE, I believe a hungry child cannot learn. These pupils go to school, they do not have lunch but they have to study the whole day. Even the teachers are not fed, so at lunch time the teachers go to their homes and prepare food for themselves. I believe the ministry ought to address this problem because there is no way we are going to have good results from UPE schools when children are not fed and parents are not even allowed to contribute towards the feeding of their children. 

Finally, I am really concerned about the continuous increasing prices of commodities in this country. The cost of living is going very high. The standard of living is very high but the salaries have remained constant or even gone down. I do not know how Ugandans are going to survive this because people have just lost it all. 

I was so concerned about the Labour Day celebrations’ speech by the President when he said that he was actually glad that these prices were high and he is actually praying hard that they even go higher. That reminds me of the French during the reign of Louis XVI when Marie Antoinette told the French that if they cannot afford bread, let them eat cakes. People cannot afford one meal a day and now we are rejoicing that the prices have gone high! What has Government done about this?

4.48
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the Minister of Finance and the Shadow Minister of Finance, Nandala-Mafabi. 

Without wasting time, allow me get to page 31 of the Budget Speech of the Financial Year 2008/09, and it is about the Peace, Recovery and Development Programme (PRDP). As a concept, PRDP is a very beautiful, important and good concept. If well implemented, indeed it will actually go a long way in rebuilding Northern Uganda, ensuring sustainable peace and recovery from the war. However, I have a very big question about the implementation and the way the programme is being structured. 

When you look at the 14 points, the major target of the PRDP programme is about the energy sector - construction of Karuma - and law and order where more judges will have to be recruited using the PRDP fund and more police personnel have to be recruited. To me, the PRDP programme should be over and above the government programme, and to the best of my knowledge, it is Government’s responsibility to come out with a budget separate from the PRDP fund for the energy sector, for example. 

In my view, the best thing to do with the PRDP fund is to have the IDPs resettled by providing them with farm implements, constructing feeder roads, hospitals, schools and so many other things that would help to benefit them. When we talk of recovery, what do you recover by constructing Karuma Falls Dam? It was not destroyed. We believe it is the primary responsibility of Government to come out with the fund to construct Karuma but not to over stretch the little fund provided for under the PRDP programme. 

When you look at this year’s budget, Shs 51.6 billion is budgeted for the PRDP programme. Last year, Shs 18.1 billion was spent for a similar programme. When you sum it up, it comes to a total of Shs 70.2 billion. However, when you go to the ground right now to asses whether there is any impact to that effect, you will get a shock of your life. Excluding a lot of donor support which is going to the ground, you will ask yourself where all this money is going.

I want to refer the House to Annex 5 of the Budget Framework of 2007/08. A total of Shs 254.29 billion has already been spent under the PRDP programme. I want to ask the responsible ministry, where have you spent the money and for what purpose? (Interruption)

MS BAKO: I just wanted to give you some information. According to the current budget speech, the official implementation of the PRDP programme starts this financial year. So, the minister in charge should be put to task as to where he has been putting all these billions expended in the PRDP programme and yet the official implementation of the PRDP programme is this financial year.

MR OYET: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, when I was consulting and going through documents, I learnt that the PRDP programme was supposed to start this financial year. I still demand explanations as to why the Shs 254.29 billion was spent in the last financial year in the name of PRDP? Where is the money and who spent it and why? 

Finally, last year Shs 18.6 billion was spent under the Department of Disaster Preparedness and an investigation was carried out and nothing serious was taken to that effect. We want to get assurance that the Shs 51.6 billion budgeted for in this financial year will not be mismanaged. If it is mismanaged, how sure are we that the person will be brought to book? Fortunately, we have the Leader of Government Business, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, here; we want that explanation and clarification before we can proceed on the programme. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.54
MS MARY TUUNDE (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to say something on the budget. I would like to thank the minister for his good statement. I would like to say that whatever he put forward was a priority and at the same an emergency. However, looking at my background, obviously I would like to say something about industrialisation and employment. Unemployment is not just a matter of looking at poverty. When we create employment, we are not just eradicating poverty but we are also looking at reducing conflicts in Africa and the whole world at large. When we look at all the factors which accelerate conflicts in the world, unemployment is one of them because first of all, if somebody is poor, he is forced to do anything.

Secondly, if you look at the theories of conflicts in this world, there is also the youth work theory. The youth are people who are interested in doing everything and they have a lot which they want to achieve. When they are not employed, obviously you know that they can be confused to do anything. In Uganda if you look at the population, the youth are very many so they need something which can occupy them so that they are not confused into doing anything they want.

As I thank the minister, I cannot go without asking these three questions: one, if you are talking about jobs, what type of jobs? Two, whose jobs are you creating? Three, what have you done to maintain those people already in employment? 

When you talk of creation of jobs, you should not forget decent work. It is not a matter of creating a job for the sake of it. Although they say that a beggar has no choice, but this time as workers, we need to have a choice. The jobs created should be decent. As far as Uganda is concern, decent work is not a new phenomenon and we are not creating a new wheel; the wheel is already there but what is remaining is just effort and more energy on the wheel to make it move faster. 

Uganda has ratified very many labour standards. It is also a signatory to very many human rights labour related conventions. Uganda has also come out with many labour laws. However, what is happening is that there is a huge gap between the legal instruments and what is happening in the work place. We are seeing investors coming to Uganda to take over, to create industries and factories but they are looking at cheap labour and making our workers suffer. 

Look at some industries; we do not want jobs to be created the Tri-Star way whereby Jane had to ask for permission from the immediate supervisor when she has “gone to the mountains of the moon” to go to the wash rooms. We do not want John to ask for permission to go to the toilets. Because he has to ask for permission, somebody has to count how many times he has gone to the toilet. This is very improper. If those are the type of jobs you are going to create, then we would rather do away with such jobs.

When we talk of whose jobs, the indigenous Ugandans are lacking jobs. Why is it that so many people are coming in to take over our jobs? Go to Hot Loaf, for example, most of the people there are not indigenous people; they are people from outside. The so-called investors are doing work which we can also do. In Uganda, we do not lack disciplines; we have all the disciplines. If somebody came in here wanting something to be done in his industry, we can learn very fast so they can tell us what they want and we shall cope.

As I said, make new friends but keep the old; if you are saying that we are creating new jobs, what about those people who are already in employment? When I read the budget, there is nothing concerning increment for the workers of this country. If we have to fight corruption, how can we postpone a problem? How can you not increase anything for the workers? However strong their morals are, things will not come out as you want. 

Long ago - for some of us who started working long ago - during Labour Day and Budget Day, we could bring out our small radios and what we expected was a percentage – two or five percent - and that was a motivation. Without even calculating what you are going to get, it motivates you and you start working better. Now we do not expect it to come and then at the end of the day we say workers’ salaries should stay put. Madam Speaker, this is not fair and you remember as people -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO- OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the good old days when UPC was in power -(Laughter)- there were two things on Labour Day, increase of salaries of workers and increase of produce prices, every year, without fail. Go and check records. (Laughter)

MS TUUNDE: Thank you very much for that information. Fellow Members of Parliament, as I said, workers are not happy because whenever they think of reducing the expenditure in a work place, it is obviously the worker they target. What about reducing the buying of vehicles, computers and other items? Unlike other assets in the work place, people can talk and they have feelings. So they will continue to disturb if they are not well remunerated. 

Lastly, I would like to say that ever since the inception of structural adjustment programmes, workers have lived in fear everyday; they do not know who is who. Permanent secretaries have ceased to be permanent. When it first came, they were told that they were laying off people, redundancies came in, displacement was there, cleaning of the payroll and so on but those who remained in service would be well remunerated -(Member timed out.)

5.02
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Female Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the Minister of Finance for the budget speech. I have a concern and I do not know whether it has already been said in this House, but this is about simplification of the budget speech and related documents. I understand these speeches are made for the benefit of Ugandans, majority of whom live in the rural areas and actually are involved in the informal sector or in agriculture. However, when you mention such technical words like bank performance, economic growth, economic development even here some people were trying to define the difference between economic growth and economic development. They were defining it for Members of Parliament. We are living now in a world of simplifying things and we should endeavour to simplify these documents for the benefit and participation of every Ugandan. 

Secondly, I want to talk about the road sector. As persons with disabilities, we went to the Minister of Works, where Eng. Byandala is a professional, and asked them that when they are constructing roads they must have access facilities where persons with wheelchairs can easily pass. They told us that they have specifications for those access facilities but whatever roads have been constructed, we do not see those access facilities. I just want to know; do they have the specifications or they do not? I also want to know what they are going to do to provide these access facilities for the old roads and actually also the new roads which are not yet constructed. 

Related to that, I want to talk about Mityana Road. I want to thank the minister for saying that they now have a budget for constructing this road, but there is an emergency. As a result of constructing the Northern Bypass, that part near Busega is a swamp and the part of the road which passes through the swamp is almost sinking and we do not know when this will happen. As a matter of fact, the Northern Bypass was heavily funded and the after-effects of that construction must be dealt with. Can we request the responsible ministry to look into that emergency?

Also, I remember I rose here to ask when the Jinja Bridge would be renovated. Reading through the budget speech, the minister said that they approached the Japanese and the preliminary findings show that the Japanese may be willing to fund. When will they fund and if they do not fund, how sure are we that we are safe when passing on that bridge? Can we also know the longevity of that bridge so that we know that by a particular time, we should not pass there?

The other issue is about energy. It was said that we want Uganda to be an investment destination and one of the issues to be regulated is the energy sector. For the information of this House, when you look at the provision of electricity, there are about three companies which  are supplying us with electricity and it is such a tedious exercise for one to get electricity. Are we sure that the investors will not be hindered by our bureaucracy?

Lastly, I would like to talk about security which is said to be one of the five priorities. Where does that security start and end? I understand people like Kony have been defeated and people are going back to their homes, but every now and then people are killing one another in their homes. Here in Kampala, a woman killed four of her children. Go to Bushenyi and Mbarara, there are so many incidents of murder. How are you going to curb this situation? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the speech and I will restrict myself to a few areas, one of them being improving the standard of education. I would like to thank Government for having introduced USE. However, the teachers who teach in these schools have only their salaries to take home whereas teachers who are in other schools have PTA added to their salary. Can the Ministry of Education do something about this so that we can improve on the standard of our education? You cannot talk of improving the standard when the service providers are not motivated.

About the roads, right now Jinja-Bugiri road is being worked on and in the budget speech it was mentioned that money was allocated for a dual carriageway which was said to be coming from Busia or Malaba to Katuna. If this road is being done at this time, when will the dual carriageway be worked on? It should be at this time that the dual carriageway gets introduced because we do not see sense in making the road now and then next year they start working on the dual carriageway. I would like the Ministry of Works to look into that because we do not want a scenario where a road has been worked on and then the following year, the same road is allocated money for similar work. 

On the same issue, we would like to thank the government for having introduced industrial parks. However, these parks are going to have heavy vehicles pour onto the main road. When are we going to have these roads decongested? This is the time to open up new roads so that these heavy vehicles can have their own way and the main road which is already congested gets decongested.

When the minister talked about a resident airline, I expected him to have said that there is going to be a new national airline for the country but instead I heard something else. When will this country get an airline of its own? Even smaller countries like Rwanda have their own airlines. When shall we have an airline called by our name?

5.13
DR MICHAEL BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe South, Mukono): I would like to thank the minister and his counterpart this side for the speeches. I want to talk about only three things. One of them has been mentioned by hon. Nsubuga who happens to go through my constituency to his, and that is the concern about the road which had been promised by His Excellency for the last 15 years while on the campaign trail. I want to assure you that he was embarrassed once he stepped there and he will continue to be embarrassed if this is not addressed.

There are certain aspects of this budget speech that I want to talk about. Those are the aspects of helping communities so that they can contribute to the national Budget as well. For instance, there are many fish landing sites within my constituency and we have got very many vehicles which go for fish and I know my constituency contributes a lot to the foreign exchange for this country through the fishing industry. But these communities are not assisted and the roads which reach these fishing communities are the worst in Uganda. 

Hon. Mukisa here is privy to this information because he managed to use these impassable roads when he came to campaign against me - but I hope that we are friends here and colleagues. He will be able to attest to this. We need to make sure that the fishing communities in Buikwe South Constituency contribute to the GDP by helping them have their access roads repaired and repaired on time. 

The second issue is about the education sector. We have just gone through the amendment of the Education Bill and I can assure you that there are schools in my constituency which have never seen Government teachers for the last eight years. And the community working together with the skeleton staff simply contributes to ensure that they hire teachers to sustain their children in schools. A case in point is Lugoba Primary School which has never seen Government teachers for eight years and the community hires teachers from the community to sustain the children in schools. 

The question was, should we break the law and sustain our children in school by hiring teachers or we should lay our hands off since the law says so? I advised them to maintain their children in school by making their contributions as it were as the Ministry of Education sets itself up in order to rectify this anomaly.

The other issue which is captured in this Budget Speech is about the provision of safe water. I had spoken to the minister concerned and a survey had already been done about safe water for the constituency. Some of these programmes I have not yet known and unfortunately the budget does not spell out where these priorities should be. But I want to give this information to the ministry concerned that certain areas within the constituency have been surveyed and they have no potential for water so the construction of boreholes cannot be done. A case in point is Najja sub-county and the minister concerned knows about it. Minister Maria Mutagamba knows about this.

The provision of water tanks - prioritise some of these constituencies where such research has been done. I hope the constituency of Buikwe South will not be forgotten in this programme.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is the issue of the provision of Anti-Retroviral Therapy. My constituency has got the poorest access to Anti-Retroviral Therapy being one of the vast constituencies with a simple hospital, Nkokonjeru Hospital, which is a missionary hospital that has of late acquired accreditation to provide Anti-Retroviral Therapy. But Members of this constituency must travel distances to Jinja or Kawolo in order to access this treatment. 

The other hospital which has got potential to provide this Anti-Retroviral Therapy through accreditation is Buikwe which has been constructed by the Czec Republic and it is being manned by doctors from the Czec Republic. We hope that the Diocese of Lugazi will take it up. Unfortunately, the provision of this kind of therapy to make a catchment of two other vast sub-counties is not yet actualised. 

I am advocating that the ministers concerned should look into this in line with the Budget to ensure that Anti-Retroviral Therapy access is provided. This should also help Buvuma County, which incidentally is next to my constituency and it is worse off than my own constituency. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.19
MS AGNES AKIROR: (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only about two issues to raise. One is in regard to improving Universal Primary Education. Just as my sister hon. Grace Oburu said, if we have to improve UPE, then we have to address the plight of the teachers. In some of these schools, you get a classroom block and there are no teachers’ houses and they ride 14 kilometres to school and back. 

One time I had actually to act like a ministry of education; I had to ferry a lot of grass to roof all the teachers’ houses so that the term could begin. I hope the minister will address some of those issues. You know most schools in our region are now UPE schools. 

Another time I was coming from hon. Alice Alaso’s constituency and I just saw so many children - actually it is Awoja Primary School - but from P.1 to P.7 all the children are studying under one tree. Each class is under a tree and the trees are just near the main road. I do not know how we shall improve on that kind of education. Honourable minister, I have photos I can give you tomorrow.

Then lastly, the minister talked about high lending interest rates and when he talks about SACCOs; he also talks about increasing money for which I am very grateful. But he has not addressed the issue of women from the greater North; that is from Teso up to West Nile. Most of our people have been in the camps and are very poor. These flat interest rates the President talked about of 13 and 17 percent are quite very high for our people. If they have to move from being absolutely poor to just being poor, the rates are not friendly. I do not really know how we are going to make them prosper with those high interest rates. I thought we needed some affirmative action in the greater North. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.21
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to contribute to the Budget debate. I am going to concentrate in a few areas: One, on roads, two, on health, water and then a little bit on tourism. 

On roads, I must say I am very disappointed that whereas Government is spending billions of shillings to rehabilitate and construct new roads, the maintenance regime on these roads is lacking. It is just conspicuously absent. I have got examples to support my argument. Drive along Mbale-Tirinyi road, a road that is long overdue for re-ceiling; it is going to waste. I am surprised in this year’s policy statement of the ministry there is no provision whatsoever to repair these roads. Axle road control is lacking in the Ministry of Works. Apart from just a few main roads, other roads are not controlled. 

I visited Namalu recently and on my way there, I had the opportunity of visiting the new road between Sironko and Kapchorwa. For a long time, the people of Sironko and Kapchorwa have yearned for a good road and six years ago, this facility was upgraded to tarmac. Today, trucks from UCI, which are ferrying limestone from Karamoja and from a site in Kawowo in Tingey County are destroying the pavements under the noses of the ministry. I shed tears because this new road has already developed potholes. The ministry needs to pull up their socks in terms of axle road control and to caution road users to use the road responsibly.  

I would like to remind my friends on the other side of the House that in the year 2006, you promised the people of Uganda tarmac roads linking districts headquarters. It is in your manifesto and I have read it several times. When you look at this Budget Speech, it is not reflective of an advance towards connecting different district headquarters with tarmac. Time is running out and I would like to remind you that you are in your mid term and Ugandans are going to ask you when that day of reckoning arrives so take note of that.

Today developers are almost building on roads; the road reserves are not preserved. I believe some very powerful investors who cannot be touched are involved in these developments. I am calling on the Ministry of Works and Housing to help us to have these road reserves respected. Even along the Kampala Northern Bypass where heavy compensation was made not long ago, already there are people occupying the road reserves and actually building permanent houses there. Where is the Ministry of Works? 

I would like to also lament on the lack of emergency funds to repair roads in the event that a bridge collapses, is washed away or in the event that a highway is washed away. There is no such provision in this budget. Just imagine that we woke up one morning and found that the Jinja Bridge had collapsed. This would spell doom to a nation because I am sure, judging from the policy statement and the Budget Speech, that the Ministry of Works is not prepared.

On health emergency, the Ministry of Health does not make specific provisions for emergencies. I would like to cite an example. Today in Uganda we have a case of Hepatitis E that thousands of people in Northern Uganda are suffering from. What is happening with the ministry is that they have had to run to development partners like UNICEF and other agencies and source funding. When is our country going to be prepared?  

MS AOL: Thank you, engineer for giving me way and thank you, Madam Speaker. It is on a sad note that Hepatitis E is a disease, which never used to exist and yet it is here with us in Uganda. Unfortunately, the people who are most vulnerable to Hepatitis E are women and pregnant mothers and whenever they get this disease, they do not survive.  Many have died and to my greatest dismay, Ministry of Health does not have funds to fight this disease so it is the development partners to come to our rescue. Where is Government? Are we really a Government and if we are, we should always have something for emergencies. I want to inform you that just last week, we were told to go and lobby our development partners to support us and fund Hepatitis E. This is very unfortunate.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for that information. There is evidence that the NRM Government does not care for pregnant women and sick children and tonight, I would like to urge the government to care for –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, hon. Amuriat is my friend and I am usually very reluctant to put him to order. We share a lot in common except political ideology. Saying that the NRM Government does not care for pregnant women when it is on record that it is only the NRM Government, which has done wonders as regards immunisation and in everything- Is the hon. Member in order? He knows very well that the only thing I know about him is that is well informed. Today in the Ministry of Health we were discussing that issue and Cabinet is serious about it. There are funds for it and the Ministry of Health is battling it; it is on the ground and the people who come from there know this. But to come here and say that the NRM Government does not care about pregnant women- Honourable member, are you in order to belittle the mighty NRM Government like that? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think before we went on recess for our committees, the Ministry Of Health was on the floor of this House responding to the issue of Hepatitis E. So, I do not think it is really true that the government has not made any effort to look into that situation. I was here when the minister was explaining.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, there is no adequate budgetary provision to cater for the needs of women and children. In my village, when a pregnant woman turns up in a health unit they have got to pay for the gloves that are used on them and pay for the injection that stops breeding. (Interruption) I will take the information. 
MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Amuriat. I would like to inform you that you do not have to go up to your village to look for the troubles the women of this country go through. You have to go to Mulago Hospital, the National Referral Hospital of this country and you will find mothers who have just delivered barely one hour – all the women in this house can bare me witness. I know they cannot clap for this because we went to Mulago as a team. Madam Speaker, you will find a baby of barely one hour lying in the corridor of Mulago Hospital. The maternal mortality rate in this country is still 505 per 100,000 births. How can we boast here that we are doing some things? (Applause) we have not paid attention. 
Recently, the government came up with paper work - hon. Amuriat I sit in the social services committee- they came up with paper work called a master plan for health; we have just scrutinised the budgetary provisions for Ministry of Health, you will not see a coin for it. So, when we talk about commitment, don’t even think about your voters who are the forgotten species. There are problems in this country. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the women on either side have spoken. What else do I have to add? 
Finally, I want to comment on water; safe, clean drinking water. And to say, I come from Teso and in Teso, when you promise an Itesot something once and you do not deliver, they will probably forgive you. When you promise them a second time, they will not take you seriously. When you come the third time and promise and do not fulfil, the fourth time you come, they will carry a big stick after you. 

A few years back, the people of Kumi were promised clean running water and the minister then of water, Hon. Major Gen. Col. Kahinda Otafiire of Ruhindi County came and spoke during the commissioning of a dam at Kodukul and he told the population that “Look, next February, you are going to have tap water drawn from the lakes around Kumi.” That was four years ago. Come January the following year, there was no project. We have waited for another three years; there has been no project. No wonder we unleashed our anger on the government of President Museveni by not voting for him. I want to promise this House that we shall still not vote for him if his Government does not deliver on their promises. I thank you very much. 

5.37
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the Budget Speech. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Budget he read to us on behalf of the President. I would like to concur with the Vice-President that this Budget is pro-poor and if it is well implemented transparently and efficiently, I am sure we shall accelerate our development. 
I would like to commend the government for the tremendous economic growth realised last financial year from 6 percent to 8.1 percent. I think that must be appreciated and definitely, this can be seen in construction, manufacturing, transport and communication. If you take construction, there are a lot of new buildings mushrooming in the cities, in municipalities, in small towns and even at homes. People are struggling to ensure that they have at least a decent House. 

The greatest challenge we have on construction is the physical planning. We do not have a national comprehensive plan from the city up to the small towns which we develop. As a result, a person gets up and constructs any structure of any size, big or small without access roads. So, we have to take this seriously if we have to really streamline our construction. 

For communication, I think nobody can talk about it. Everybody has a phone in his or her hand and you can communicate. I think that is the greatest achievement we must commend our Government about. (Interjection)- Yes, the technology can remain outside but it does not reach the state where we are. It is the government that has facilitated all this. Do not derail me please. Thank you. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the inflation rate. Uganda’s inflation rate has been stable for a very long time and we are very proud of it but unfortunately in the last financial year, it has accelerated because of reasons, some which are beyond our control and because of this, you will find that we who are in business are affected. For example, if you bid something for about Shs 2000 today, next month it will be Shs 4000 and by the time you sell, you have no profit. Definitely, business people are suffering because of the inflation. You cannot keep money in the bank because you are not sure of what will happen tomorrow. 

And also in the whole household, essential commodities have become very expensive and I have no hope that really this inflation will come down. But what we must do is to match with it by working hard. If you are a business person, definitely, you will sell and make more money than before and if you are a farmer, whatever you produce will earn you money. Therefore, I call upon all Ugandans to take opportunity of this inflation so that you have something to sell and you can also get that money. Otherwise, if you wait for inflation to come down, you will wait until eternity. So, we have to work hard.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the Prosperity for All. We have the four pillars of Prosperity for All. One, we have increased production, two we have added value, three we have SACCOS, micro finances and then lastly we have market.

On increased production and improving the quality of production, we find that it is important to use NAADS. The NAADS programme is a very useful programme. What is important is that it must reach every village and every home and people must be sensitised so that they benefit from this NAADS programme.

MR WADRI: Your former student wants to seek clarification.

MS BABA DIRI: What clarification?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking it? Apparently she is not.

MS BABA DIRI: My student; you are wasting my time. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please hon. Wadri she is not taking the information. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Margaret Baba Diri, my former teacher, for accepting this clarification which is humbly being put to her by her former student.

I have listened to you talking about the NAADS programme and Prosperity for All. To the best of my knowledge, the NAADS programme under Ministry of Agriculture has been here for some time and yet Prosperity for All was used as a campaign slogan just two years back and the whole of Uganda is expecting Prosperity for All to come with its own money. People are waiting for that money but now you are telling us that Prosperity for All is going to be realised through the NAADS programme. (Interruption) That is why I am asking for clarification.  Can you therefore, my former teacher, hon. Margaret Baba Diri, help me understand what the government of Uganda, through the NRM party, has to offer to the people as promised in 2006 that there is a programme called Bonna Bagagawale or Prosperity for All vis-a- vis NAADS which has been there for long? Can I understand the difference between the two?

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you very much hon. Wadri. I would like to inform you that NAADS that is National Agricultural Research Services is a programme of Government and it is one of the pillars of PMA -(Applause)- and now that we are entering Prosperity for All, we are transforming that NAADS to benefit everybody- (Applause) - so we are free to move our programmes forward to benefit the people -(Interruption)- can you allow me to continue? I want to give you an example of how we have used the NAADS programme in Koboko to help the people obtain Prosperity for All. 

We used the money for constructing a farm centre and at this farm centre we have a big store where our farmers are going to store their food before they can sell it and even before they can process it. In that stock centre we also have a rice huller which will provide first class rice. We are also planning to have a maize mill, oil mill and other machines so that we can do processing right in Koboko. So that is how we are using NAADS for Prosperity for All. (Applause)

The second pillar as I talked about is micro finance. That is the Saving Credit and Cooperative Societies. I am happy that many sub counties have established them according to the government policy. But my biggest concern is why are we not strengthening the SACCOS? For example in Koboko we have six SACCOS already; two are fully fledged the rest are (member time out)

5.47
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance and the Shadow minister for the statement they have given us.

Madam Speaker, I know it is not possible to make everything priority and that is why the Ministry of Finance had five specific areas for priority for this financial year. Now, my prayer is that at least in the coming financial year one of the priorities should be the health sector. It is a very important sector which should not be ignored. 

Madam Speaker, for example in my district and many other districts the hospitals we have were built long time ago. These were hospitals built to accommodate 100 beds. Now, all that time, let me say from the 60s up to now, the Ugandans are not the same; they have been producing. Our population has gone up and it does not mean that only that maybe in a month we shall only have 100 people who are sick so that they can be accommodated or admitted on the 100 beds. 

Therefore, I think if the health sector has become a priority we should see how we can expand these hospitals because we are using these hospitals as referral hospitals within the districts. Now that they are limited, it is very miserable. You see patients being admitted and they are in corridors. I do not even want to talk about lack of drugs because if you are admitted in the hospital- if you have your little money, after the doctors have prescribed for you what medicine or drugs you need, you can go and buy them so that they come and attend to your patient when you are within the hospital. But it is worse that we do not even have a space to accommodate our patients. It is a terrible situation and I think it is in many of these other hospitals and not only the hospital in Yumbe District. 

Now, the most vulnerable are the women. I do not want to talk about it. I do not want to talk about it because my colleague has already talked about it. The situation for the women is so terrible. You even see women delivering on the floor because the hospitals do not have enough beds. In some hospitals you find there are only six beds, but with more than ten women due to deliver. That is how they get to deliver on the floor yet in that process they can easily be infected with tetanus.

 Madam Speaker, let me talk about oil exploration. My district is one of those districts that have been said to have oil and you know the people in there are so poor. So, they think that because of the oil discovery, there will be a resurrection. People are eager; they want to know how they are going to benefit from that natural resource. Whenever I go to my district people usually ask me to explain something about that oil exploration, yet I do not have any information. 

Therefore, I appeal to the minister to help by giving us information or a clear statement so that we are able to tell people what they want to know.  (Ms. Bako rose _) I am not taking it because time will not allow me.

Madam Speaker, I want to seek information from the Minister of Finance on whether he knows that whenever he reads the Budget Speech businessmen automatically increase prices of commodities including those against which taxes may have not been increased? When you ask why, they will always refer you to the Budget Speech. I do not know whether it is now a policy or something that is acceptable. If not, what does the ministry have to do on that? Can the government put a price control to protect the community from being exploited by businessmen? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.53
MR IBRAHIM MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech. However, allow me to use this opportunity, first of all, to extend the appreciation of the people of Buikwe to His Excellence, the President for at last hearing their cries by granting Buikwe a district status. I would like to appeal to this House, Madam Speaker, that when this motion comes to the floor, kindly support our cries because this is well in line with Prosperity for All as we extend services closer to the people. I thank the President for that.

Madam Speaker, when I come to the Budget Speech, I would like to say that in the area of energy the people of Buikwe have been very supportive, especially in the construction of the new dams of Bujjagali in Wakisi Sub County and Nalubale in Njeru, both in Buikwe. However, it is surprising that very short-distance areas in Buikwe do not have power. I can cite areas like Busaabaga where we have a health centre with the only Government-aided USE senior secondary school in Buikwe, but with no power. The people in these places are suffering because they have resorted to using generators. 

Madam Speaker, on a sad note, I would like to inform this House that in places where power has been extended, the lines pass through non-productive areas like sugarcane plantations leaving routes that pass through places where people would be able to tap the power. I hope that in this Budget there will be money put aside to help people access power via the rural electrification programme. 

In the area of roads, it is true that in the Budget there are roads that are going to be tarmacked and Mukono-Katosi road is one of them. But the people of Buikwe hope that the mention of Mokono-Katosi road also means Mukono-Nkokonjeru-Buikwe-Nyenga road. This is so because if this is done, the people there will be happy since their cry has been long over due with His Excellence committing himself since the 1996 campaigns. So, I hope that as this road gets to be constructed that area will be catered for.

In the area of health, let me single out Kawolo Hospital. Madam Speaker, this is a uniquely located hospital - although we thank the Ministry of Health forever considering it whenever we come up with some cries – personally I approached the ministry and got at least an ambulance. That was around in 2006. But even recently they gave us one e ambulances. I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for such considerations. 

However, given its location, we have told the ministry that this hospital handles the highest number of accident victims after Mulago Hospital. In that sense we have asked the Ministry of Health to consider constructing a special unit to handle accidents, be it a trauma centre or what the ministry will feel more suitable because rushing accident victims to Mulago is dangerous to their lives. If we can handle such victims at Kawolo, I think it can be a very positive trend in saving the lives of our people. I thank you.

5.58
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the Minister for the Budget Speech, which really showed that there is progress as far as revenue mobilisation in this country is concerned. I would also like to dwell on a few issues concerning specifically efficiency and public expenditure management. 

The hon. Minister concedes that in the area of health there are so many gaps as far as management is concerned. He categorically states that there are drug stock-outs, there is none-presence of staff and that there are a lot of problems as far as corruption in the medical sector is concerned. I think we need to review how we can improve our service delivery more efficiently. It is a very critical issue because it is costing us lives and bringing us into serious embarrassment. 

As Government we need to have a stop point where we have normal business, day in, day out; year in year out; we need to get time and assess the situation. We need to determine how we can improve efficiency in all the sectors not only health; when you look at – some time back we visited the ADB funded projects with my brother in the fishery sector, we passed a loan here in Parliament in 2003, but these projects did not start until this year, 2008. There are so many delays, we pass the resources here in Parliament, but the level of implementation, the timeliness – the landing sites which were supposed to be constructed were more than 30, but at the end of the day, we have constructed not more than 14 landing sites out of that loan we passed in Parliament here. And when you look at the spirit of enthusiasm to ensure that these projects are implemented timely, effectively and neatly – I think it is some how lacking. There is need for increased supervision; the civil servants, the designs – you know the engineers were being told that for a road to reach the construction stage, it takes 13 years; why?

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Some of us who come from the lake shores and from the lakes feel that Government has really taken us for granted because first of all, they did not take time to understand what it means to stay or to be found in these water areas. The last law that we had in this country was in the 1960’s. Government only came up when it realised that there was a lot of money in the fisheries sector and they jumped into the water with all sorts of groups, the security personnel – I can count close to ten different security arrangements in the lake. All sorts of groups are there, fish touts, fish aid – they are there with no knowledge, but just to cause havocs to the public. 

The second issue is to do with understanding what a lake person is. There are two categories of people in that lake: There are those who are ordinarily water people, many of them do not even look at that lake as business, they just have it as a source of food and that is what they do. But the second group are those people who went there to do business. Those are there in a different category and they are the ones who have caused most of the menace on the lake. 

Madam Speaker, the last information I am giving is on the much awaited landing sites. For the last six years we have been waiting and nothing has happed yet. And I am quite sure even this financial year, those things will not be done because the ministry does not have the capability to do that.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you honourable member for the information. I think it is very serious and very appalling. We passed loans last year and even this year, but they take too long to be implemented. A case in point is the fisheries sector. We passed over – I think it was a US$ 38 million loan to cater for –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasamba, it was the first loan we handled in the Seventh Parliament. 

MR KASAMBA: Yes, when we had just entered here. But we visited there before I left the Committee on Agricultural – April or May, we visited the landing sites and they were just commissioning the construction of the landing sites whereas the project would have ended in 2008; it was a five year loan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has already ended and I also have a problem because some of the beneficiaries are my people and I haven’t seen enough. I am also complaining.

 MR KASAMBA: Yes; I have a landing site in Kasensero; Parliament had it as one of the areas where HIV/AIDS was first identified; I was very blessed that you visited this landing site – (Interruption)

MR MUKISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to say that my colleague is right that there was a delay and it has really affected us because we are going to get 17 landing sites instead of 30. But we are trying to make sure that all the areas that were identified will eventually get the land sites because we are negotiating for more money. 

Secondly, when it comes to the security organs, I am handling that. You know that this is an area which has been without political guidance for many years. But now I am back and less than three months, most of these organs will have been withdrawn, but I will have to do it in a very orderly manner. 

When it comes to landing sites, hon. Ochieng, I would like to inform you that actually the landing site in your area was the first to be done; that is Waka Waka – it was one of them and it was done by the Chinese. But the other ones that delayed were the one financed by the ADB.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, honourable minister. I think you can see, honourable colleagues, there are so many other sectors in the delay to secure the loan and the time of implementation – the quotation which would have been prepared during then would have almost been transformed into the price changes. 

For example, I am very optimistic and hopeful that we are going to work on the road. But do we have the absorption capacity to engage engineers to prepare and make quality work in one year? Let us look at making sure that we build the capacity for personnel and committedness and the spirit of nationalism to ensure that we implement –[Mr Byabagambi rose]– honourable minister, you will respond later, time is running against me. But I am assuring you that want we are lacking in the country is – we have trained people academically but we lack the technical people; the people who do the dirty work, that group is still missing out. 

We are talking of polytechnics, but we need to emphasise the issue of training technical people who will do the real work, humble people who will be out there, rather than having more qualified people in consultancies and designs yet we have a gap at that level for the people who would do the real work to make sure that projects are implemented timely – be it in hospitals, be it in schools, be it in schools be it in roads, we need to strengthen institutions, which will churn out more labour productive people who will ensure that we make timely implementation of the projects we are supposed to oversee as politicians in this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, on this side I have noticed hon. Obua-Ogwal, hon. Fungaroo. On the other side I have noticed hon. Kaliba, Abura Pirir, Kitatta, Ochieng, and Jowali Kyeyago. You are the people I will start with tomorrow. Please note down their names, we shall start with them tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7th August 2008 at 2 p.m.) 
