Monday, 1 August 2005

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is just over a week since we last met. I want to take this opportunity to welcome you back and to thank you for having successfully completed the constitutional programme, which I understand was peaceful. You are most welcome. (Applause)

We have to make an adjustment to our Order Paper because of the events that we will learn later on. Item No. 4 should be the ministerial statement, but the statement is going to be made by His Excellency the Vice-President. So adjust it accordingly.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MAGISTRATES COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

2.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Magistrates Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004 be read for the first time. By the Grace of God I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications accompanying this Bill, pursuant to Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

2.50
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2004 be read for the first time; and by the same Grace of God, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications accompanying the Bill and issued under Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

2.52
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2004 be read for the first time. This Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications issued under Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001 and by the Grace of God I wish to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2005

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2005 be read for the first time. This Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications pursuant to Section 10 of the Budget Act of 2001. I beg to lay this certificate on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I have noticed that the three Bills, which the hon. Attorney-General read, are over one and a-half years old. In fact one is dated 13th of February 2004 and it still bears the name of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Janat Mukwaya. I am wondering, without discussing the legality of the Bill, while in view of the length of time, which it has taken to come to the House, whether certain provisions - although this may go to the committee - may not be a waste of time to be brought at this late hour after one and a-half years, printed by the Government printer? 

The Government sat on it and has chosen to bring it to the House after this length of time. Does it not have some implications on certain provisions at this stage? More so, what is the purpose of all this delay? What is the importance of the matter?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see any problem. If there are developments that may affect the substance of the Bill, they will be addressed by the committee and the House itself when we substantially deal with these Bills.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.57
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. As perhaps Parliament is aware, we lost King Fahad of Saudi Arabia. He was a very close friend of Uganda, and a full statement of condolences from the President will be communicated later.  

I am grieved by his death because he has been such a good friend of this country in terms of development. I ask the hon. Members of Parliament to stand up for a minute of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, by now you know also that we have suddenly lost one of the gallant sons of Africa. He died yesterday, and I have here a statement from the President of the Republic of Uganda regarding the demise of the First Vice-President of Sudan, Dr John Garang, who died yesterday.  

This is the statement:

“It has now been confirmed that our dear brother –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have very high respect for His Excellency the Vice-President, but I am wondering whether it would not be appropriate, before the statement is read, to observe a minute’s silence.

THE SPEAKER: He is still addressing us; it might be the way he is going to conclude.

PROF. BUKENYA: This is the statement from His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of the Republic of Uganda:

“It has now been confirmed that our dear brother, Dr John Garang, the First Vice-President of Sudan, the President of Southern Sudan, with others died in a helicopter crash Southeast of New Cush on the Sudan/Uganda border, slightly beyond Kidepo National Park.  

Dr Garang’s party comprising of other Sudanese and a number of Ugandans were flying to a place known as New Site, one of his headquarters in Southern Sudan. He was returning from a two days’ consultation with me at Rwakitura. He was aboard our presidential helicopter, M1-172 VIP version piloted by Col Nyakairu and Capt. Kiyimba. Maj. Kiggundu was the Flight Engineer.  

The helicopter was a recently overhauled executive helicopter that has served us well for the last eight years. In fact recently some of the instruments were upgraded. It was very well equipped with the ability to show the pilots the altitude using both radio altimeter that shows you how far you are from the ground, as well as a barometric altimeter that shows you how high you are from sea level; a weather radar that shows you bad clouds ahead, as well as mountain ranges up to 100 kilometres away.  

It had an Advanced Moving Mapping System (AMMS) that shows you where you are at any particular time and the terrain features such as mountains; a powerful flood light system to avoid hitting trees, and other landing-site obstacles, and audio warning in case you are approaching a mountain ahead.  

The helicopter was also wired against lightning strikes, according to the manufacturers. It could, therefore, fly both at night and during the day, according to the pilots, although it is always our policy not to fly in mountainous areas at night or during low visibility weather conditions.  

I have decided to create a panel of three experts to look into this crash. The Minister of Transport will name the team. We have also approached a certain foreign government to rule out any form of sabotage or terrorism.  

The death of our brother and a long time comrade-in-arms is a tragic loss to the cause of patriotic Africa. It was a great shock and a source of anger to see that Dr Garang, who has survived so many trials and tribulations, could lose his life when peace was beginning to come back to Sudan. Dr Garang was one of the most visionary and incisive revolutionary thinkers and nationalists Africa has ever produced.  

However, the struggle for the dignity and progress of patriotic Africa is unstoppable. In the same way, the death of Amelika Kabra, Samora Machel, Augustino Neto, Patrice Lumumba, Herbert Kitebo, Edwardo Mandlane, Martin Mwesiga, Valerian Rwaheru and others did not stop the defeat of revolutionary and imperialistic forces in Africa, the death of Dr Garang will not derail the struggle for the Sudanese people for justice and dignity. The Uganda Government supports the interim process in the Sudan.  

I extend my condolences and those of the people of Uganda to Rebecca Garang and the children, to SPLA, to the people of Sudan, President Bashir and the Interim Government of that country. I also extend similar condolences to the families of the other Sudanese and Ugandans who died in the crash. May their souls rest in eternal peace. 

The Government of Uganda has declared a three days’ mourning period with effect from Tuesday the 2nd of August 2005, with flags flying at half-mast in the whole country.  

Signed,
Yoweri K. Museveni
President of the Republic of Uganda.”
 
As you know, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I welcomed the Vice-President of Sudan, and we had quite a cheerful discussion followed by his inviting me to Khartoum in September. This has been suddenly stopped. I would like all of you to rise up for a minute’s silence for this gallant man of Africa.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

PROF. BUKENYA: May his soul rest in eternal peace. Mr Speaker, that is the end of my statement. Thank you very much.

3.07
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr Speaker, with your permission I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Col Dr Garang, the first Vice-President of the Republic of Sudan, as under our Rules of Procedure, rule 40(b), with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: We had not fitted it in.  Can we deal with it tomorrow so that people can effectively contribute? You can move it tomorrow perhaps. 

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: I take your guidance, Sir.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MEDIA COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR 2004

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, in compliance with Section 12 of the Press and Journalists Act, I seek your permission to lay on the Table the Annual Report of the Media Council for the year 2004.  

The Press and Journalist Act provides for the Media Council as a regulatory authority for the media in Uganda. The council, among other functions, arbitrates disputes between the state, or the public, and the media. It also regulates the conduct and strives to promote good ethical standards and discipline to journalists. 

Honourable members may note that this is the first ever report of the Media Council to be presented to this House, basically because it has taken long to fully operationalise the Press and Journalists Act. Most of the activities of the Media Council that were undertaken in the year 2004 are in this report, which I beg to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The appropriate committee for this sector should examine it, and then make comments on it.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION
 (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

3.11
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as you remember with this Bill No. 3 we ended with clause 97, which was stood over. We shall be dealing with it because the clause was stood over after we had completed the process. So let us go to clause 98.

Clause 98

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 98 stands part of the Bill. We are to vote by roll call, but there is no quorum. Are we still in holiday mood?  

HON. MEMBERS: We are mourning.

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh! Let us ascertain that we have no quorum and then we shall decide accordingly.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.15
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume so that the Committee of the whole House may report thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.16
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House was scheduled to continue with considerations of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 but could not transact business due to a technicality. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. As you may appreciate we have two items since the beginning of the session that we have not handled. We have the State of the Nation Address, and the constitutional statement. We have to deal with the Budget, which was read on 8th. We have not handled it and yet the Budget is the lifeblood of every activity of the Government.  

We did this to enable us deal with the Constitution Amendment Bills, which were crucial for the transition, which we envisage; a transition that has now been built on concrete by the recent referendum, which now directs us to move to a Multi-party system. It is necessary that we use this little time we have to complete the uncompleted work and also to handle other necessary Bills that will operationalise the amended Constitution so that we are on schedule. So I appeal to you to sacrifice everything to come here and transact business so that the public does not see us as unserious, because we are failing get a quorum of 100 people out of 304.  

I quite appreciate the mood because we have lost two important people: King Fahad of Saudi Arabia and also our friend, John Garang. All the same we have to move on because we have no reverse gears for time lost. So I appeal to you to come in big numbers tomorrow. We will start at 10.00 a.m., so that we can clear what is remaining of this particular Bill and also handle the Committee Stage for Bill No.2, so that we clear it and then we go on to the Budget.  

According to the Budget Act the Budget should be completed by 31st August. I quite understand that it may not be easy, but we can do it with your resolve. I am sure we can also be on schedule. With this –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your indulgence. I am just wondering if the Attorney-General could inform this House about the consequences of the epoch making event on the 28th, which some of us thought was superfluous? Does he have a statement for us?

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait for a properly constituted House with a quorum to raise such an issue and then be answered?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, much as a lot is behind schedule, it is also on record that the Members of Parliament remain to receive an official copy of the speech given at the State of the Nation Address.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall look into that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: And we have an obligation before our people. We should be given time to study the material so that we can –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are right; you will be provided with a copy. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 3.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 02 August 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


