Tuesday 1st August, 2000

Parliament met at 2:30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we proceed, there are alterations which I want to make on the Order Paper.  After the ministerial statement, there will be a personal statement by hon. Tumukunde. 

Secondly, I note that yesterday nobody reminded me that I should have adjourned the House to this morning. You allowed me to adjourn the House to the afternoon. I am sorry if you came for a meeting in the morning. It was my mistake.  I did not remember that we had changed our way of doing things.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

MAJ.TOM BUTIIME (The Minister of Disaster Preparedness & Refugees): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am sure hon. Members have been following, with a lot of concern, what has been appearing and still appears in local newspapers, especially the New Vision and Monitor. These reports have been on the drought that has hit the country, particularly Karamoja, where acute food shortage is being reported with photographs of collapsing famine victims. 

I went to some of those reported districts last week. I accompanied Her Excellency the Vice President to Karamoja where she went to see the situation obtaining there. I must say that the situation is bad countrywide, especially in Karamoja, but it is not as bad as it has been portrayed in the papers. For instance, reports that a number of people are dying of hunger in Karamoja need to be cross-examined to avoid unjustified public statements.  

During our visit to Karamoja, we demanded to have the details of those who had so far died of hunger, but it was not easy for the District Authorities to provide it.  Concrete evidence was lacking. We were however, informed that a certain retired Chief had passed away a few weeks ago, but even then, no one could attribute with certainty that the cause of his death was hunger. Therefore, some of these reports need careful analysis before one comes out with such conclusions. 

As stated above, it is a fact that the situation in Karamoja is bad and calls for special and urgent attention, if we have to arrest it before it worsens beyond what we can afford. 

During our visit, we were told that about 90 per cent of the total population in Moroto District have no food at all. They are already depending on relief given either by Government or World Food Programme or by other agencies.  In Kotido, 66 per cent of the population is faced with acute shortage.  

Owing to the gravity of the situation therefore, yesterday, Monday 31st, Her Excellency the Vice President convened an emergency meeting of Ministers and technical staff of the line Ministries. These Ministries included, Agriculture, Water, Disaster Management (Prime Minster's office), Karamoja affairs, Local Government, Defence as well as the entire Karamoja political and administrative staff. We met to discuss and charter out strategies for addressing food security in Karamoja as an emergency programme.  

Some of the international agencies such as WFP, UNICEF, ADRA etc also participated in the meeting. It was resolved that there was an urgent need to embark on a mobilisation exercise aimed at increasing on agricultural production. This could done through training and demonstration of modern agricultural techniques to the people of Karamoja. The Vice President herself has undertaken to lead the exercise with effect from the 7th of August. That is next week.

Hon. Members, I also wish to add that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has continuously been focusing on the problems affecting Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. The Prime Minister has presided over several inter-ministerial meetings comprising of the Ministries of Agriculture, Animal industry & Fisheries, Water, Lands and Environment, Defence, Finance Planning and Economic Development, Internal Affairs, Security, Karamoja Affairs, Northern Uganda Rehabilitation, Disaster Preparedness. They have met to discuss a wide range of problems facing Karamoja like Water, Food security, security with Karamoja’s neighbouring districts etc. This was done with a view to gain consensus on strategies or the way forward.  

The premier has particularly called for urgent inter-ministerial or multi-displinary action to address, with utmost urgency, the provision of water in Karamoja and the use of water for production. I wish to appreciate the on going efforts by the Minister of Water, Lands & Environment to address the water situation. I also wish to point out with appreciation that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister's recent trip to Egypt is part of Government's determination to seek for technical assistance and acquire appropriate technology for utilisation of water for food production, especially in the famine prone districts.

Turning to the present food requirements in Karamoja and other severely affected districts, I wish to point out that the Government and some humanitarian agencies have provided relief food supplies. They will continue to extend relief assistance to the victims of hunger and other disasters. 

Members will recall that even last year in 1999, around the same time, the country was faced with a similar situation. 28 districts experienced acute food shortage, which was caused mainly by the prolonged drought that hit the country from April on wards. Some of the worst hit districts at that time were Moroto, Kotido, Katakwi, Tororo, Mukono, Sembabule, Rakai, Mbarara, Rugungiri, Kisoro, Ntungamo etc. 

Government then quickly moved in and intervened with a supplementary release of 1.3 billion shillings for purchase of emergency relief food for the worst hit families. This was followed with yet some other emergency assistance in form of seeds worth 3.3 billion shillings for free distribution to the worst affected areas for emergency planting at the earliest rain opportunity.  Appendices A and B show, in a summarised form, the distribution of the foodstuff. The figures of the seeds purchased out of the amount indicated above are also there. 

The current alarming food situation is just an extension or a continuation of last year’s. The situation did not improve since then. For those of you who might have been following the rain performance this year with interest, you might have noticed that it has been as poor as last year. In the first instance, it started rather late in April instead of March, besides that it has been so little, erratic, and it stopped after a very short period then a dry spell followed. This dry spell continued throughout the months of May and June, including July in some parts, causing an extensive crop failure in most areas.  

The Ministry of Agriculture carried out a food production assessment survey in a number of districts in May/June this year. They came out with an elaborate report indicating the food situation in the districts. These are some examples:
    • Moroto: The entire district was affected by drought, which scorched all the crops. This was compounded inter-clan cattle rustling and heavy loss of life. The crop failure is total.
 
    • Kotido: A similar scenario obtains as above, so a total crop failure was also expected. 

    • Soroti: The survey revealed that in the sub-counties of Pingire, Kateta, Kadungulu the crops got scorched early and there is therefore near total crop failure.

    • Katakwi: The district was hit by a combination of drought and cattle rustling. Some of the population was displaced and the little cultivation that took place was frustrated by unreliable rainfall. Only 20 per cent harvest is expected.

    • Kumi: The sub-counties of Kangola, Kapalis, Tokoro, Kapelikye experienced unreliable rainfall.  The cereal and groundnut harvest expected is 30 per cent.

    • Lira: The counties of Otuke and Moroto were affected by cattle rustling. This led to internal displacement of the population, so few people participated in cultivation. The average production expected is therefore only 30 per cent. 

    • Kitgum: The counties of Chua and Agago were attacked by Karimojong cattle rustlers. Most of the population was therefore displaced and are living in camps. The expected production is 20 per cent.

    • Gulu: The counties of Kilak and Nwoya have been affected by intermittent rainfall. The expected yield is 30 per cent.  

    • Masindi: The counties of Kiryandongo, Mutunda and Bulisa experienced intermittent rainfall. There was considerable crop failure of maize, beans and groundnuts.  

    • Nebbi: The counties of Jonam and Padyere did not get adequate rainfall. Only 30 per cent harvest of the planted maize, beans and sorghum is expected.  

    • Arua: The counties of Terego, south Maracha, Madi-Okolo and Ayivu have been getting insufficient rain. The crop yield therefore expected is 30 to 40 per cent.  

    • Moyo: The sub-counties of Meto, Ariba, Amura, and parts of Moyo have been experiencing intermittent rainfall. 30 per cent of the planted crops are expected to be harvested.  

    • Adjumani: The sub-counties of Liforo, Pakelle, Zaipi and Adropi experienced low rainfall. Only 20 to 30 per cent harvest is expected.  

    • Kabarole: The main problem in Kabarole has been the persistent influx of displaced persons mainly from Bundibugyo, and of recent from within the district, who have encroached on the available stocks of food without production. This has created food shortage in some parts of the district, for instance in Kisomoro, Bukuku, Hapuyo, and the entire Bunyangabu County has suffered drought. 

    • Kasese: It experienced uncharacteristic dry weather particularly in the sub-counties of Rwimi and Regendabara. Maize production is expected to drop between 20 to 30 percent.  

    • Ntungamo: The county of Ruhaama was badly hit by drought. There is total maize failure. Water sources and pasture are drying up.  

    • Rukungiri: Like last year, the district has suffered from a severe dry spell, which has scorched crops and therefore making the district highly vulnerable in terms of foodstuff.  

    • Kisoro: The sub-counties of Kirunda, Nyondo, Nyabushenya and Kanaba were affected by drought. The beans, potato and sorghum production is expected to drop to 10 per cent of the normal production.   

    • Mbarara: The sub-counties of Mwizi, Lubaya and Kinoni experienced a long dry spell. Production of maize, beans and Irish potatoes is expected to drop to 10 per cent of the normal levels. Pastures have also dried up.  

    • Masaka: The areas of Ndagwe, Malongo and Kyazanga experienced a very long drought, which continued since last year, affecting the banana crop. It is projected that only 20 per cent of the maize yield will be realised.  

    • Mpigi: The sub-county of Gomba was hit by a heavy hailstorm, which destroyed all their food crops. This was followed by a dry spell from March/April, 2000 leading to serious crop failure. Only less than 20 per cent is expected.  

    • Luwero: The areas of Ngoma, Bututumula, Kikyusa are experiencing severe drought. There has been near to total crop failure. Water sources and pasture have also dried up.  

    • Nakasongola: The whole district experienced dry weather which adversely affected pasture and water sources. Cassava, potatoes and millet crops failed in most parts of the district, making the expected yield between 20 and 30 per cent.  

    • Mukono: The sub-counties of Bbale, Galiraya and Ntenjeru were affected by low rainfall. Food production was poor, less than 30 per cent yield is expected.  

    • Kamuli: The counties of Budiope and Bulamogi got very little rain. The beans, maize and groundnut yield is not expected to exceed 30 per cent.  

    • Iganga: The counties of Luuka, Kigulu, Busiiki and Bunya experienced low rainfall. Only 25 per cent of maize, beans and groundnut harvest are expected. And this can go on to Pallisa, Tororo and Busia.  

The drought situation has further been made worse by rampant rebel activities particularly in the districts of Kasese, Bundibugyo, Gulu and Kitgum. And also, there was the Karimojong cattle rustling that resulted into massive displacement of people, which in turn has had an adverse effect on the food production in the country. 

The combination of the above problems, that is the weather, cattle rustling and rebel activities, have, in varying degrees and districts, caused the present food shortage. The worst hit districts we have on record include Kotido, Moroto, Katakwi, Lira, Kitgum, Gulu, Moyo, Arua, Adjumani, Masindi, Bundibugyo, Ntungamo, Mbarara, Rukungiri, Kisoro, Rakai, Masaka, Mukono, Iganga, Pallisa and Bugiri, just to mention a few. You could maybe say the whole country minus Kampala.  

According to the Ministry of Agriculture, the estimated crop yield in the affected districts was put at less than 30 percent on average per district. Such a situation of course calls for Government and external intervention to bridge the gap. 

Government, on its part, has continued with its intervention right from last year, since the situation has persistently remained bad in terms of food security at all levels.  

Beginning with April this year, Government released Shs. 2.6 billion, in instalments, (in April, May and June) for purchase of emergency relief food to address the rampant food shortage in the severely affected districts. Out of that amount, a total of 37,345 bags of maize flour and beans have been purchased. The figures are there. 

So far, a total of 28,400 bags have been distributed to the targeted districts. That can be seen on appendix C, which indicates the 22 districts that have so far been served with relief food. Distribution, however, still continues.  

Members may wish to note that the Government, through the office of the Prime Minister, made an appeal to international humanitarian agencies to lend a hand in this problem. World Food Programme (WFP) responded quite favourably with a food project of 9069 metric tons of foodstuff. That was worth $5.8 million and it is to feed 160,000 Karimojong drought victims from the month of April to September this year. To date, a total of 8006 metric tons of foodstuff, according to WFP, have been distributed to drought victims. The project continues.  

Over and above this project, World Food Programme is conducting yet another feeding project targeting 60,150 primary school children and the elderly in Karamoja. In the month of April, WFP, on an ad hoc basis, supplied 90 metric tons of foodstuffs to Lira District. This was done following the Karimojong attack in February and March. They also supplied 210 metric tons of foodstuffs to Katakwi and 30 metric tons to both Soroti and Kumi Districts owing to the same problem - the Karimojong attacks.  

In Bundibugyo, Gulu and Kitgum Districts, World Food Programme is running a feeding project of 30,365 metric tons of foodstuffs. This supply is targeting 110,000 displaced persons in Bundibugyo, 337,000 internally displaced persons in Gulu, and 113,000 internally displaced persons in Kitgum. This project is also still in progress.  

Hon. Members may further wish to note that the office of the Prime Minister still continues to solicit for assistance. Two meetings have so far been held with humanitarians agencies this month, July.  For their first reaction to the appeal, a number of agencies have decided to go out in the field and carry out independent assessment of the food situation. Six teams of officials have already been set up and a survey commenced Monday, 31st July, 2000. That was  yesterday.  The teams intend to cover over 24 districts reported to be worst hit. Their findings are expected to be out in a week’s time.  

As we wait for the response from the agencies, we have nevertheless, submitted a requisition for funds to the tune of Shs.4.6 billion to the Ministry of Finance to urgently address the current acute food shortage in the country covering the period of August to November this year. I hope the Ministry of Finance will try its level best to positively respond to the request so that we can save the lives of our starving population.  

In conclusion, I feel I should say a word or two about the distribution of food assistance especially at the grassroot level. While I appreciate the hard task the local leaders and administrators face, when it comes to distribution of the assistance, which is often inadequate compared to the demand, there is a need for those involved in the exercise to be strict, fair and transparent.  The reports we have often received from the field are that the assistance sent out to the districts rarely reaches the intended beneficiaries and if so, not in the intended quantity. It ends up being spread across the board to cover each and everybody in the area.  

My message to the district authorities is that this approach should be reviewed. The essence of assistance is totally lost if the people, especially the targeted victims, do not get their due share just because every person in the administrative unit, sub-county or parish must get a mug or so of foodstuffs. Attempts should be made to desist from trying to please everybody around, but to focus strictly on the real needy categories of the population. 

The responsibility of identifying and serving the targeted beneficiaries who are, in most cases, the most vulnerable victims lies with the local leaders - the LCs.  I would therefore like to appeal to LCs to stop the habit of trying to please everybody. It should however, be appreicated that our meagre resources cannot permit us to do that. We have to select and choose in the most objective manner, those who qualify to be among the targeted population. If this fails, we may have to use Article 209 and maybe 212, where the army and police can come in and go to the villages and distribute this food. According to Article 209, UPDF is supposed to co-operate with the civil authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disaster. And also Article 212 mentions the same thing about the police. 

The Office of the Prime Minister will continue monitoring the situation with interest and will be grateful if this practice stops so that the assistance goes to the intended beneficiaries. I also wish to call upon my colleagues, the hon. Members of Parliament, to continue vigorously providing us with information on the gravity of the problems as well as to assist in monitoring the process of relief distribution to the targeted population.  Our success is your success and our failure is also shared. Let us, therefore, continue working together to serve our people.  I thank you. 

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Minister bringing a comprehensive report about Uganda.  The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is about the disaster management in Uganda. You will recall that the Members of Parliament from Karamoja have made statements here. They have reported to this august House about the man made disaster in Karamoja that at times affects her neighbours drastically.  

Secondly, they have also reported about the God-made disaster, but the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is a disaster itself. The Ministry comes in late and that is why the little intervention ends up being shared by all.  If the intervention had come as early as we had been told here in the House, the LCs would have been able to distribute the food and seeds properly to the right people.  

Article 249 of our Constitution reads as follows:  
“(1) There shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural and man-made disasters.  
(2) Parliament shall, for the purposes of this article, prescribe the composition, functions and procedure for implementation of the functions of the Commission.”  

Given his report that this year there is going to be only about 20 to 30 per cent harvest in Uganda, I see a real disaster coming, and without the implementation of this Article, I do not know how the Minister will deal with the situation in the whole country. When is he bringing this Bill to Parliament so that we pass it and help him to succeed, so that we all succeed and help our people?  I thank you. 

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking three clarifications from the Minister. First, I would like to know how effective the Ministry is on the ground.  There have been reports that food relief is taken to district headquarters then the local officials share out the food without taking it to the target groups. In our case, food actually stayed at the district headquarters for about two months. In fact, the people who had been displaced by the Karimojong had already gone to stay with their relatives. So, the Minister should tell us whether taking food to the district headquarters means taking food to the displaced persons who are very far away from the district headquarters.  

Two, I do not know how the Ministry arrives at the numbers of internally displaced persons because there are so many people who are displaced among relatives. Do they count only those living in camps? Very many people are displaced and are living with relatives in the villages. Is the Minister aware of this? Have they been counted?  What kind of assistance do these people get?  

Lastly, I am not sure whether the Ministry would be happy to continue buying food for our people in perpetuity.  The recent attack by the Karimojong worriers was very devastating in Kitgum District. Actually, they collected hoes, pangas and axes from almost half of the population!  Now there is a second rain, but people have no farm implements.  So, I would like to request the Minister to consider supplying farm implements as well, because we cannot really afford to feed Ugandans endlessly; people who could be feeding themselves! Now the rain has come but they are helpless because they have no farm implements.  I thank you. 

MR. BAKU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to start by observing that when the Minister was reading out the sub-counties, which were affected by the drought, he failed to mention Difule sub-county in Moyo, which was the worst hit area in my constituency. So, I would like it to be on record.  

Secondly, last year the Minister informed us about the allocation of seeds. During that brief, he also informed us that some of the districts, including Moyo, had their seeds still kept in Kampala pending delivery sometime later. To the best of my information, the seeds, which were allocated for Moyo District, were never delivered although in Appendix B the Minister reports that 1,200 Kgs of maize seeds and l, 600 Kgs of bean seeds were supplied. To the best of my knowledge, these seeds were not supplied at all. 

To support this information, when I was recently in my constituency, I was given a copy of a letter, which was addressed by the Assistant Chief Administrative Officer of Moyo District to the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister. This letter stated that although Moyo was allocated and duly notified that they were supposed to receive these seeds, the seeds were not delivered at all!  This letter is dated 5th June 2000.  So, can we know what happened to the seeds that were allocated to Moyo? Are they still in stores waiting to be delivered while the time for planting is running out?  

MR.OSIRE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The names the Minister has been reading have confused me. I have looked at the names of the sub-counties for Kumi District, and those names do not exist!  I do not where he got the names.  So for record purposes, I would like to read the names of the sub-counties that are affected. These sub-counties are Kolir, Malera, Ongino, Kapir and Mukura. The other ones do not exist in Kumi. If they are sub-parishes then those sub-parishes should be Kangoli, Kapolin, Kodike and Kakide. Otherwise, the names that were read here do not exist.

MR. RUZINDANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the report he has given, and particularly because he has included Ruhama among the badly hit areas of the country. To be fair, however, I think even the other counties of Ntungamo District are equally badly hit. I do not know why the other counties have not been included. I think they are equally badly hit. The sun and the rain do not know boundaries and they do not just stop at the boundary of Ruhama.  

I came from Ruhama yesterday, and although the Minister only mentions maize as having failed, virtually everything else has failed. I think he should take note that beans, millet, groundnuts, cassava, potatoes, matooke and everything else has been badly hit.  

Although the Minister has mentioned Ruhama as a badly hit area, when you look at Appendix C, I would like to find out why the Minister happens not to have included Ruhama and Ntungamo District as a whole, among the areas which received food relief this year. He actually said that the drought of this year is a continuation of the drought of last year.  

Finally, I think a report like this should include long-term measures not short-term measures. Where are the long-term measures in this report? Shall we get a separate report on the long-term measures for the whole country and not only for the areas that happened to be badly hit? I think we need another report from the Minister about disaster management not about food relief. That is the report we need. We may take note of this report, but I am sorry to say that it is inadequate and we expect a lot better from our Government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MS. OKORIMOE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for his statement, but I would like to seek clarification from him. On page three of his statement, was this just an omission or a typing error where he omitted about four words in the third paragraph? In the third paragraph he says, “I also wish to point out with the appreciation that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s recent trip to Egypt is part of Government’s determination to seek for technical assistance and acquire appropriate technology for utilisation of water for production, especially in the famine-prone districts.”  

I think you omitted some words. The words you omitted are ‘famine-prone districts of Kotido and Moroto.’ -(Laughter)  

I think the problem in Karamoja is no longer an emergency because it is something, which has been occurring over and over again. In the Minister’s statement, the worst hit districts on every page are Kotido and Moroto. It has taken us a little bit too long to plan for just less than a million Ugandans who are very important to this country. 

From what I know, the first relief food to Karamoja was given in 1947. After 50 years, we are still talking of relief to Karamoja every year. For how long are we going to continue keeping the Karimojong on relief? I think it is better for us to be given a permanent strategy so that we stop continuing with this relief. We do not even enjoy it but circumstances force us.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will give three people this side, but definitely we cannot exhaust this problem with these questions. I suggest that somehow we have a full debate on this matter.  

MS. BIKORWENDA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the Government of Uganda for the good relationship they keep with the NGOs that keep us kicking as we remain in our disasters. It seems this problem is continuous and I do not believe the Prime Minister’s Office is adequate enough to eradicate the problems causing these man-made and natural disasters. It needs all the line Ministries to improve on the security of food and contain the situation. It needs Health, Agriculture and all the rest. 

Though we may say the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is to blame, he is not. He is fighting the war alone and we should appreciate his efforts. Only some few days the Vice President went there and then he just followed.  What more do you expect from him? I believe he is fighting a losing game because he is fighting alone, but we should appreciate the little he is putting in. I should thank you, hon. Minister, for the effort you are putting in. We really see your struggle.  

As I appreciate the Government’s co-operation with the NGOs like World Food Programme, I wish to mention that the people of Bundibugyo are starving in spite of the little maize and beans they get. They cannot go to the bushes to look for firewood to cook that food because the rebels are always there. So, can they go back and grind the few beans that they plan to bring to the district.  Recently, you heard about what happened to nine people, six of who were women, as they went to look for firewood. So, please help us and give us ground maize instead.  

As for the beans, which you have stopped bringing anyway, I do not know how we shall use them. The children are greatly malnourished, so please, while getting us food, think about the children, think of the pregnant mothers, the sick and the rest of the population. With those few comments, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated, this matter requires a full debate, but to cover certain districts, let us have the representative of a district to ask the question. Therefore, I will end with two Members from Masindi and Pallisa Districts 

MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister as I thank him for his statement.  

As the Minister calls upon us to identify the real needy people, is he aware that the majority of our people are really needy people? Even before the disasters come, these people need help. The disasters only compound the problem. So, I do not know how you will identify the really needy people and those who are not, because those whose crops are destroyed go back to the same level with those who were needy even before the disaster.  

Two, somebody asked whether these measures you put in place for relief distribution are temporary or permanent.  When I see the distribution of 3 kgs of maize and 4 of beans per household of 5 people, I wonder how long these households will feed on this amount of food. This is against the background that the weather forecast indicates that there will not be any improvement in the weather soon. So, we are bound to face even worse conditions. I do not even know if you are aware that when your team left Masindi we were hit by another hailstorm disaster. Even those who had planted some crops in Bujenje Bwejanga sub-county, the found basket for Masindi, had their crops destroyed by the hailstorm. This also happened in Kalujubu and in Bulisa the pastures all dried up. I do not know how you are going to assess us since we are already among the worst hit. I do not know the next stage you are going to move us to. 

I would also like to add my voice to hon. Ruzinda’s by calling upon you to give us a long-term plan because surely we cannot sustain this. And other than calling this Ministry Disaster Preparedness, which it is not, I would like to suggest that it be changed to Disaster Management until further notice. Thank you.

MRS. ALELLUYA IKOTE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are having a bit of rainfall in areas of eastern Uganda. And I would like to report to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness that the maize seed that you sent to those areas at that time was very hard, and some of it managed to survive the drought. So, if you have some more in the store, I think that is a very good way of averting some of the problems that we are facing with regard to food security.  

I would like to know if you are aware of these figures from Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, to the effect that, in 1970, Uganda was producing 14.5 million metric tones of food. And in 1999, Uganda was producing 16.5 million metric tones. That is a 17 percent increase over 29 to 30 years. Meanwhile in 1970, the population was about 10 million, now it is estimated at 20 million, and that is 100 percent increase. The other one is only 17 and this one is 100 percent. So, per capita food has fallen by 44 percent. If you had 100 units of food in 1970, now you only have 56. 

I would like to advise the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. If he is not careful, if he does not ask his colleagues in the Ministry of Agriculture to pull up their socks, he will always present a statement here every year on the shortage of food. And he will do this not because of drought, but because there is not enough production of food. The plan for modernisation of agriculture should start being implemented now otherwise you will be here every year making a statement about disaster.  Thank you.

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. According to what Members have been raising about the contents of this statement from the Minister, all evidence has it that this statement is very shallow, misleading, inaccurate and in most cases forged. It mentions places which are non existent as having received relief. How could that be when they are not there? Would it not be procedurally right to reject this statement and ask the Minister to come up with a more comprehensive statement, Mr. Speaker?  Thank you very much.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Under our Rules of Procedure, Rule 44(c), I beg to move that this matter be shelved and that a substantive debate be given, because this is a matter of national importance.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

PERSONAL STATEMENT

COL. TUMUKUNDE: Mr. Speaker, I beg to make a personal statement according to our Rules of Procedure. 

On 30th July 2000, the Monitor newspaper carried an article entitled “Museveni orders Probe of Colonel”. The article accused me, among other things, of misappropriating and embezzling public funds to acquire property. It also intimated that I had abused the public office and trust. I would like to state before this House that the contents of this article are unfounded, baseless, malicious and intended to damage my integrity and person and bring me to public ridicule.  

Every development minded citizen aspires, among other things, to acquire property. I legally acquired and own property. For the avoidance of any doubt, I would like to publicly declare to the hon. Members of this House, the properties that I have acquired in the last 20 years of my career. Our tradition is that we go transparent especially when questioned.  

I own a plot in Mbarara. I acquired it in 1999. Its value is Shs. 10 million. I have a house in Bunga, which I acquired in March 1996. This is a house under mortgage. Its value is Shs.110 million. I still owe Housing Finance about 50 to Shs.60 million. I will spell out the details later. I own a farm on a lease purchase arrangement, 18 miles on Mityana road.  I acquired this farm in January 2000. Its current value, before I complete, is Shs.80 million. I own a farm of two square miles in Nyabushozi. I acquired it in April 1998. It is worth 70 million shillings. I own a piece of land in Ntungamo. I acquired it in 1988. Its value, as I purchased it, was Shs.8 million. 

I own land or I am part of a co-ownership of land that is in Buyanja, Rukungiri. This is my family land, and I was born in this very area. I do not know the value of that land because we have never valued it since we did not purchase it. I cannot estimate the value. In any case, I own, and this was not in the newspaper but let me bring it to surface, a half-built house in Bunga. It is valued at Shs.40 million. I have cattle, totalling to about 400, and I have owned these cows, some of which are inherited, others I have got in the process of time. 

The total value here is Shs.468 million. This is only equal to an ordinary house in Kololo, which if put to full value, would even have better returns than my rather poor investments in the rural area.

Statement of income since 1986:  
Employment record: 
I served in the Foreign Service from 1986 to 1991. On the average, I was earning 2000 pounds. If you multiply by 60 months, that is 120,000 pounds. I do not want to put it in the exchange value because it is difficult to put value to such a long standing payment whose current exchange rate is difficult to ascertain.

I served in the Constituent Assembly from 1994 to 1996.  The average salary at that time or at least the emoluments we were getting were bout Shs.2.5 million. For the 30 months that I served in the Constituent Assembly representing Rubabo County, I got a total average of something like Shs.75 million.

I am currently a Member of Parliament for Uganda People's Defence Forces and I am paid salary for that. Since 1996 up to today, minus all our other encumbrances with Parliament, I counted Shs.1.4 million multiplies by 54 months. That gives me an average of less that Shs.75 million. These earnings outlined above do not include my salary and emoluments as a senior officer of the Uganda People's Defence Forces.  

Income realised from personal businesses: 
When I was serving in the United Kingdom, I acquired a piece of land in Entebbe, which I sold in 1990, at Shs.60 million. KCC allocated me a piece of land in 1995. I sold it in 1999 at 350 million shillings. As a Member of Parliament, I acquired a Land Cruiser and I struck out an arrangement with another individual who partly bought it and he paid me Shs.60 million. The above transactions exclude other personal earnings as and when I do business. My total income since 1986 is Shs.800,600,000.

Liabilities: 
I owe Housing Finance Company of Uganda Shs.65 million. Because of title claim on my farm in Mbarara, I still owe Shs.10 million. I have bank overdrafts to the rage of Shs.30 million on average. The total of my liabilities is Shs.105 million. 

With my assets and liabilities put together minus the value of assets acquired, there is a balance of Shs.427 million. I use some of this to pay for my children and I have survived on some of it up to today. This is because I cannot have an exact estimation on what I own and do not own.

There is nothing so bad like having my own child telling me a story about how he went to school and children tell him how he owns a piece of land in Rwanda just because they did not know the difference between Rwera and Rwanda.  You can imagine young children having to answer some of these rather intricate questions.

I state my name and person. I serve the Republic of Uganda for 16 hours everyday. For those of you who associate with me, you know that this is a fact. If it is a fact indeed, are we supposed to be able to survive tomorrow if we leave our jobs? Are we not supposed to own any property? Mr. Speaker, do you not think that it is very important that a degree of our private life is entirely left to ourselves? 

Since we serve the public, we are obliged to come out whenever questioned and whenever challenged to state our case, like I am doing today. For those who see this as a lot of money, I would want to use this opportunity to say that I am neither the richest Ugandan nor even the richest Parliamentarian. I came here to satisfy my colleagues. I could leave my description to those people whom I have special interests with, those colleagues whom I have served with in the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, those others who have been my friends, even to the extent of lending each other money. I could quote Guma Gumisiriza whom we were kusanyaring money with. We were gathering money during our CA days just to get some of these small properties. Some variations cannot be ruled out due to changes over time. 

The principle aim of this statement, however, is to show this House that I have earned enough money to enable me to buy all that I posses in my record of Government service and personal family effort since 1986. There is no way, therefore, it can be construed that I have acquired all my assets by the virtue of being the head of anti-terrorism operations for a period of 14 months. Over those 14 months I actually had the most incredible nightmare of sleeping awake just to have this country back to security and peace, especially the capital city of Kampala. 

I do not want to add a lot of volume to this effort, but accumulating all this in such a short time would have been a crime. That is why I cared to attach dates and values to whatever I own. This is to meet the precedent that is already coming up here that we should be transparent. I am not concerned about the volume of the properties or even the volume of the money. My concern is that those who share interests with me, my colleagues, genuine colleagues, must take the pure data that I am putting here to be able to judge me correctly or otherwise.      

There is no way, therefore, as the record shows, that the said properties could have been acquired by stealing and misappropriating public funds. There is no way this property could have been acquired in such a short time, as the image has been portrayed, as I took those painless times to return order to this capital and also to this country.  

Furthermore, accountability for the expenditure of funds that I have handled, by virtue of being the Chief of Military Intelligence, can be verified by records. We account to our Permanent Secretaries. I account to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs and this is a monthly routine. If anybody doubts my view, I call upon him or her now to access this data and satisfy their minds.  

I am convinced that in this world where we all dwell, we can never be at the same pace and footing. There will always be those with some initiative, there will be those with better capability, and I count myself as somebody with minimum capability compared to what some of our friends own, even in this House. 

I re-affirm my commitment to serve the country diligently and I implore the media not to abuse the prevailing freedom of speech. I can only deduce, from what was published that all this was just intended to destroy my name. I wish to assure my family, especially my young children, officers and men of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, my distinguished colleagues in Parliament, especially my very close partners and friends for a very long time, that I have no intention and I have not misappropriated any public funds. And I have no intention of doing it in the future.

I wish to conclude by saying that even in these kinds of situations, you are so embattled that sometimes you find yourself in the newspapers unable to raise sufficient mortgage. This would sound a joke, but it is a fact.   When we introduced democracy here - and I say I did, without any apologies - we expected everybody to handle democracy for what it is. This covers freedom of speech and freedom of the Press. 

Values must be established.  The rules of the game must be drawn. When am I able to be attacked and when am I not? When people attack others, what is done?  Is the law sufficient to help us? Otherwise, I would have replied in the newspapers, but I am sure that this would not even have been published. Assuming I was not a Member of Parliament and I took this opportunity, which I thank you for, Mr. Speaker, maybe it would have been very difficult to explain my case.  

All that I have stated here could have inaccuracies just because over time, it gets difficult to start counting the coins and the shillings that you have had in your pocket. However, I brought out the headlines so that whoever doubts should consult me as an individual or consult the Republic I serve. I am still committed to serving the Republic of Uganda, not at any cost. Should it become very inconvenient to continue serving this Republic, some of us may find it inevitable to leave.  

I thank you so much for having allowed me to find time to express myself on this rather grave matter that has affected me, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Members for listening to me and I reiterate my commitment to the Republic of Uganda and the leadership that appointed me.  I thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO SET UP A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE ALLEGATIONS OF MISMANAGEMENT, ABUSE OF OFFICE AND CORRUPTION IN THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 39.

MR.KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish a Select Committee to investigate allegations of mismanagement, abuse of office and corruption in the Ministry of Defence.  I move under Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

Whereas there have been repeated allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of office in the Ministry of Defence, and; 

Whereas Government has established a number of probes into the said allegations, and; 

Whereas the said attempts have not stopped the occurrence of continued allegations of the said corruption, mismanagement and abuse of office, and; 

Whereas it is the stated desire and determination of Government to rid its institutions and all its departments of corruption, and; 

Aware of the strategic importance of the Ministry of Defence in the sovereignty and stability of our country Uganda, and; 

Particularly cautious that Defence and security matters are sensitive and need careful handling, and; 

Noting the spirit of accountability as stated in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, chapter XXVI, and; 

Further noting the 15 Point Programme as approved by the National Executive Committee of the Movement, on corruption, and; 

Cognisant of the powers the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 has placed on Parliament under Articles 79 (1), 90 (1), 90(3) and (e), 90 (4), 164 (3), and 208 (2) and others;

Now therefore, it is resolved by this Parliament of Uganda that: 
    1. In accordance with Rule 144 and 145, a Select Committee of Parliament be established to investigate persistent allegations of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of office in the Ministry of Defence and its department. 
    2. The Select Committee shall investigate the following allegations: 
    (a) The salary scum.
    (b) The helicopter saga.
    (c) The rotten food purchase
    (d) The undersize uniform purchase
    (e) The purchase of unusable military tanks
    (f) Payroll inefficiencies
    (g) Procurement procedures
    (h) Gratuities/pensions of soldiers
    (i) Death gratuities and other related matters concerning widows, widowers and orphans of deceased army personnel.
    (j) Compensation of war debts

    3. The Select Committee shall determine its own procedure and shall conduct its hearings in camera where necessary.
    4. The Select Committee shall report its findings to Parliament within 90 days.

Moved by hon. Karuhanga and seconded by Lt.Col (Rtd) Chris Mudoola.

I now wish to speak to my motion, and because of the importance of this motion, I have requested the Speaker to allow me to extensively refer to some of my notes so that the matter can go properly on record. I would like to be remembered for these words as I move this motion, ‘who will protect the State when the armed forces violate the law by omission or commission?’(By Elly Karuhanga)  

The Ministry of Defence Policy Statement was released yesterday and the Ministry has put forth a request for approval of a total sum of approximately Shs.180 billion and another Shs.10 billion in development expenditure this financial year. Last year, Defence spent Shs.177 billion and Shs.22 billion in arrears. But there was no system that was paid for to increase accountability and transparency in that Ministry to any significance, yet rumours of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of office are found year after year. 

The print media, as we have just witnessed, and the talk shows have made a fortune in publishing these rumours. They sell as hot cakes on the streets of Kampala and all over the country. Our adversaries revel and relish and thrive on these unsubstantiated rumours. Parliament, through its relevant Committees, has repeatedly found large gaps on accountability and transparency. Like the Committee, the Movement caucus has addressed these issues and the relevant political leaders have been to the caucus. The Government has established various probes, whose reports have not yet reached this House. A new probe was recently established again. 

Notwithstanding, rumours of corruption, mismanagement and abuse of office continue to feed the financial fortunes of our desperately hungry and zealous media. I would like to quote a colleague, hon. Augustine Ruzindana, Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee from a paper he gave at the 8th International Anti-corruption Conference. The paper was entitled The Part Played by Structural Reforms of the State in Fighting Corruption: The Case of Uganda. In that paper he highlights the genesis of corruption in Uganda and he says:
“At independence, Uganda had no model of transparent accountable government upon which to build the foundations of a new democratic state. The British Colonial regime was by definition, unaccountable to the Uganda people, and this colonial business was not conducted according to the democratic norms of openness, transparency and accountability.”  

It is our duty to do something about this accountability, transparency and openness, albeit after 40 years. If it is any consolation, we are not the only country in Africa with such woes, there are a few that we actually beat, and yet we have come from very far.  But it is not enough to be number 89 in a list of 99 countries, as was identified in 1999 by Transparency International. I attached that perception index for Members to look at. 

Let me demonstrate how Uganda is looked at in the eyes of our very close development partners like the IMF. This is from a document published in May 1999, entitled Governance matters by Daniel Cofman and others. colleagues can find it at the IMF website –www.imf. org.2000.06.  I invite hon. Members to take a look at the following charts that outline aggregate governance indicators and country percentile ranking regarding control of corruption, rule of law, regulatory framework, government effectiveness, political stability, lack of violence, voice and accountability. 

I wish to demonstrate to this House using these charts. For the hon. Members, who can see, this is Cameroon. To get 100 percent, you go up to there. That is where Cameroon stands for the hon. Members.  You will have a look at it.  This is Kenya, making small steps. This is Botswana, another African country almost completing, getting almost 100 percent in many areas of control of corruption.  This is our former colonial master, United Kingdom, almost at 100 percent. This is United States, almost in the same way. I will circulate these to hon. colleagues. This is Denmark, which gets 100 percent almost in everything, control of corruption, good governance, rule of law, and the rest. And this is Uganda, and how our friends think of us.  We are much better than Cameroon and definitely much better than the others I have shown.  

Which model of governance would you like to bequeath to your citizens? Today leadership is scientific. We cannot accept any lethargy and sit on our rows hoping that things will work themselves out somehow. The road is difficult, but we must move on that road with courage and determination. We must live up to our name, the Movement.  Do we have the political will and commitment? 

Point number seven of the Ten Point Programme was retained as point number seven of the Fifteen Point Programme by the Movement Government as approved by the National Executive Committee of the Movement in Jinja. This point espouses the elimination of corruption and misuse of power.  

In his book, Selected Articles of Resistance Wars, first published in 1985, Yoweri Museveni, as he then was, highlights the meaning of point number seven on page 68. On page 68, he says:“Africa being a Continent that is never in shortage of problems, has also the problem of corruption, particularly bribery and misuse of office to serve personal interests.”  

He further states: “In development planning or trade, a cheaper option can be ignored in preference to a less efficient one, because the officials concerned see a chance of making a ten percent illegal commission by adopting a less useful option. These types of decisions can cause a distortion of great magnitude.”  

He concludes emphatically: “Therefore, to enable the tackling of our backwardness, corruption must be eliminated once and for all.”  

That is Mr. Museveni, as he was then, in 1985. The clarion call by President Museveni to the people of Uganda, on this matter, leaves no doubt in my mind that this Parliament must have the political will and commitment to match that of President Museveni, footprint for footprint. The President must not turn a second corner before we catch up with him in the struggle to implement point number seven of the political programme.  We owe this to our people who elected us, to the Movement, to our liberating forces, defence forces, to those who shade blood in the process of liberation and to good governance of mother Uganda. 

A World Bank official, Sir Coudhe, working with the governance team, has said that political will and political commitment must not be superficial and designed only to bolster the image of political leaders. There must be substantive efforts to create real meaningful change. Many well-intended regimes have engineered their own destruction through inapt or ineffective strategies. Exploitative rulers have successfully hidden their motives behind a façade of consultative measures. There must be a genuine effort to build coalitions from within the country rather than from outside.

Let me thank the Executive, the President of Uganda, and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for reaching a consensus with the Legislature in building a coalition to tackle the problem of corruption, with the full co-operation in the Ministry of Defence. 

Confidentiality and secrecy versus transparency: We have to be cautious, as we highlighted in our motion, because defence and security matters are sensitive indeed and they need careful handling. We cannot afford to be reckless with our security and stability concerns. We are fully aware of the strategic importance of our defence forces in the political and security fabric and in guarding the sovereignty of our country Uganda and also our image towards our neighbours. National security is the most important area of policy making for any Government.

This official from the World Bank criticised this blanket of confidentiality in Defence in the following words: “Security is the province primarily of the military, in which passion for secrecy is a professional deformity. It is administered by civil servants that are no less sinisterly deformed by instinct, always preferring to operate out of sight of the public that they serve. Decisions are taken by people unadvised, and sometimes unsuspecting heads of states or isolated professionals or self-servicing cliques and elites.” And he refers to these cliques as “iron triangles who may have the agenda to pursue and very often cannot be called upon to account for them”. 

Therefore, the Members of the Select Committee, whom you will kindly select, must take an oath of secrecy equal to that of Ministers and other civil servants exposed to classified information in security and intelligence areas. This is in order to balance the right to know against the military's interpretation of the need to know. Consequently, the Ministry of Defence has an obligation to provide information, records and any other relevant data, classified or not, to the Select Committee of this House.

I thank the Executive again and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces for the assurance and co-operation. I have no doubt that Members of Parliament are equal to this task, and are as patriotic as any other member of Government involved in other military probes or working as civil servants in the military.

It must be clearly understood, by all Ugandans, that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, imposes a duty on Parliament to supervise Uganda People's Defence Forces through Articles 79 (1), (3), 91 (3) (e), (4) and 164 (3) and 282, and other Statute Acts, etc. I, therefore, urge the Select Committee to determine their own procedure. They should hold the hearings in camera, if deemed fit and proper. They should have the freedom to extend amnesty, if possible, through the Amnesty Act, to whistle blowers, be they in defence forces or civilians. They should have the latitude to have assistance from researchers and to set up a technical team so that they may be efficient and effective. And they could also co-opt other members. 

They should use modern and latest methods of gathering evidence and other relevant information. They should be allowed to visit any military installation of place in or outside the country, to make appropriate recommendations to address these concerns to this Parliament. They should report their findings to this House within 90 days.  

In conclusion, I trust this important probe, if done diligently, shall help to elevate Uganda from a country categorised by IMF and World Bank among the countries in governance crisis, where we are now, to a category above, which is called ‘countries not at risk’.

You have seen the good governance charts I have revealed to the House. If all goes well, it will prove that human nature is not corrupt in essence and that this vice can actually be confronted and actually adequately curbed.  For example, the sun is the source of light. You may illuminate a dark room with light, but you cannot darken an illuminated room with darkness. The sun that emits light may be obscured by other elements. I urge my colleagues, in this august House, to support this motion and remove these encumbrances that work to obscure the light in the Ministry of Defence.  

I thank you for your guidance, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleagues in the Committees of Defence and Internal Affairs, Presidential and Foreign Affairs, and the whole House. I also thank the Leader of Government Business, the entire Executive and the people of Uganda who entrusted us with this responsibility and challenge. I thank our development partners who are the eyes of the world watching our political commitment as we rise to this occasion. We must not be a House of shame but a House of virtue and integrity. I moved the motion in the name of our Constitution and for God and my country, Uganda.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA (Kigulu North, Iganga) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to second the motion. I do not have much to say because the Mover has pointed out quite a number of points, but I would also like to bring some points to the Member’s attention.  

Hon. Members may recall the helicopter saga very well.  This was about three years ago. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs asked the Ministry to set up an internal investigation, but up to now, we have never received that report. This necessitates Parliament to go in and find out exactly what happened in this helicopter saga.

When these helicopters were bought, it was a matter of urgency because that time there was a problem with Kony in the north, but up to now, for almost three years, these helicopters have been idle on the ground. We lost money and we have even lost lives. So, as Parliament, we cannot sit back, look on and wait, we have to take action. That is why I stand to second this motion that Ministry be investigated.

The salary scum: You have read in newspapers that more than 20 paymasters have varnished. Some have run away and others have been killed under dubious circumstances.  Again, this is really a cause for Parliament to investigate the payments. Just recently, you heard about someone vanishing with Shs.1.6 billion. So, as Parliament we cannot sit back and relax. 

The rotten food: This is very vital for our forces. This is their packed ratio. When they are at the frontline they need this food badly because they have no time to cook. But as you might have read in the papers, there was a conflict of reports. Some test experts said that the food was not worth for human consumption. Other experts claimed that the food was worth for human consumption.  So, really, that is also a controversy which Parliament should look into and find out what exactly happened, because up to now we have not had a report on this particular issue.  

I also want to talk about the tanks. It was the same problem. I think it was hon. Aggrey Awori who once suggested that a Committee be selected to investigate whether these tanks were not usable. Up to now, no report has ever come to this House. So really, with all these points, Members are concern that definitely there should be a probe into the Ministry of Defence. We are not saying that the Ministry cannot set up its own investigative machinery or inquiries. They can do that. Even those who do business do internal auditing and external auditing. So, we as Parliament have come in as external auditors but the internal auditors can continue with their work.  

Many officials have really used this ‘classified information’ excuse to conceal a lot of things. Whenever you ask a question in the Ministry of Defence, almost all the information is classified information. They do not depart with any information that will lead or give you a clue to money that was somehow spent in an unproper way.  I hope that the Committee members who will be selected will keep the secrets to themselves, as it is a major concern of the President, and actually of everybody. The security of the country is very important to all of us.  If the country is insecure, all of us are affected, it cannot choose to be secure for Mudoola and insecure for hon. Karuhanga. So, we must take this seriously. If you get this information and it is crucial to the country, we ask you to preserve it and keep it to yourselves as Committee members because it is very crucial to our country.  

At this juncture, I would like to even ask that we look at Article 41(2) of the Constitution, which says that Parliament should make laws to give classes to information. I think it should really be looked at and brought to this House. That is how we shall know what classified information is. And when we ask for information from the Ministry, we will not be taken for a ride that all the information is classified.  

I do not have much to say, but with this, I urge all Members to support this motion. This motion was brought in good faith and we are doing it for the good of our country. I thank you very much.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is to point out that the Government supports the motion and wishes to assure you that we shall give you the requisite support. I thank you.

MR. PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Mr. Speaker, the circumstances have been clearly elaborated by the chairman of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee and by the chairman of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. They have told us that the President supports this, and the Prime Minister has given us assurance. I see no further cause for debate since the matter is going to be debated!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the motion that I should put the question?

MR. PINTO: I was going to put my motion, Sir, that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion, as you have heard, that in view of what has been stated by the mover, the seconder, and what has been stated by the Leader of Government Business, I put the question. So the question –(Ms. Byanyima rose_)- well there is a motion, why do we not dispose of this motion?

Ms EGUNYU: Is it in order for my sister, hon. Winnie Byanyima - (Laughter)- to continue insisting on a point - (Laughter)

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Fiona Egunyu to carry gadgets, which are not permitted by our rules, into this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is obviously out of order for her and for any other person.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker I was raising on a procedural point.  I very much would like to support hon. Pinto’s motion, but I had hoped that we would have a few minutes to raise some issues regarding this very important motion. There are several issues surrounding this Select Committee, for example, how it will work, how it will be constituted, how it will report and we may wish to express ourselves on some of these issues very briefly.  Could we be given an opportunity to make some comments?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the problem is that our rules permit the hon. Member to move a motion if he thinks that the matter is not recognised, which he did. The other point is that this motion was actually to set up a Select Committee to investigate, and after it has investigated and has brought the report, definitely you will have the freedom to discuss these matters in detail. Presently, we assume we do not have the information and that is why we are setting up the Select Committee to dig up the information, which it will give us, so that we debate this matter when we are informed. So, that is why he brought that motion. Therefore, I do not see how I can now ignore a motion, which has been proposed and seconded. So, I have to put it to a vote. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, these are our rules. The Member competently moved the motion and now it has been carried. Now, I have to put the question to the motion moved by hon. Karuhanga. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the motion that we have a Select Committee has been carried. Actually, the Speaker had requested that, in case this motion is carried, I would read out the names he proposed in anticipation of the passing of this. 

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your ruling, and I am grateful for the decisions that have been taken with your guidance. But some of us wanted to contribute because we wanted to air our views, not on the substance of the motion, not the issues of the Select Committee, but on details about how we would like to see its composition, for example. This is because we had discussions in our Committees and we also had discussions with Members of the Executive –(Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Listen to the Member, please. Give her audience.

MS. BYANYIMA: We have had a discussion with Members of the Executive, and it is an on-going discussion, about, for example, how to make sure that we have witnesses who feel safe before the Committee and who would divulge all the information they would like to divulge. There are certain assurances that we might need so that these people can bring forth the evidence they have.  

We also wanted to express some other views. For example, I feel strongly about that list. I hope that Members who are serving as officers of the UPDF are not on it because they cannot probe themselves. So, if you read the list now, you would put us in the unfortunate situation of rising on the Floor to object. So, maybe you could give us the opportunity to give you our concerns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: While you have very good points, I am dealing with a motion here and I have to follow the Rules of Procedure. If a person moves a motion under a Rule, there is no way I can tell them not to move it unless I have other reasons that allow you to do so. And this motion has now been carried.  You have heard the text of the motion. It is about a Select Committee. As I read a name, you may say ‘no, do not put that one’, because the Speaker will only appoint the Chairperson. But, if you think a particular name should not be there, then you can delete. Or maybe before I read out the names, if this House has some people that you think should work with them, then that is the motion that has to be brought.  Otherwise, I will read out the names. I think you should have confidence in each other. 

MR. MAO: Mr. Speaker, I seek your guidance. Shall we have the opportunity to object to certain names, because that is what I read in your statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR. MAO: Because, from our rules, the Speaker has the final word on who constitutes the Select Committee. But if the Speaker has amended those Rules by his word of mouth now, then he should let us know. Because we wanted to debate the constitution of this Committee, but we want an opportunity to be able to help the Speaker in constituting this Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mao, what you can do is read out the relevant Rule on this matter.

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Speaker, since this Parliament started, we have had quite a number of Select Committees, but there has never been a time when we debate the names. It is the Speaker who has the right to choose.

MR. MAO: Mr. Speaker, it is Rule 145 (4), which says: “The Speaker shall nominate the Chairperson of every Select Committee.”  
And Rule 145(1) says: 
“Every Select Committee appointed under rule 144 (Select Committees) shall consist of at least five Members”.  
And Rule 144 provides that the Speaker shall nominate the names.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honestly, it seems that this matter has generated a lot of interest. Maybe we should agree on what the number should be. The Rule says at least five. When they say at least five, then five is the minimum.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, Rule 145(1) and (2) says:“(1) Every Select Committee appointed under rule 144 (Select Committees) shall consist of at least five Members.

(2) Three Members shall form a quorum if the Committee consists of five members and one third if the Committee consists of more than five members.”  It is at least five.

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, if you are seeking our guidance on the size of the Committee, I am willing to give my opinion, and it is an opinion we shared in the Committee on Defence and the Committee on Foreign Affairs.  These were the issues we wanted to raise before the motion. 

We thought that the scope of work was very wide. When we were discussing in the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committees this morning, we felt that the scope of work we had drafted in that motion is wide and that three months is a short time. So, we thought that it might be wise to have a fairly large Committee that can split into sub-committees in order to expedite the work. So, we had thought of a Committee of up to 15 members, because we thought there could be three sub-committees of five Members each, so that the sub-committee is not denied quorum when it wants to sit. So, we had thought of a much larger Committee than normal in that direction.  

If I can also add that we felt or at least I felt that this Committee is going to handle such a sensitive matter. We have discussed issues of sovereignty and secrecy so I thought that for it to give a credible vote, it has to be non-partisan. It needs to reflect the views of not only those who support the Movement but even those who do not support the Movement, so that it is credible to the population.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the suggestion is that the figure should be 15 because of the gigantic job that has to be done.  It appears that is the consensus. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, as you realise, although really I am the mover of the motion, together with hon. Mudoola, in our capacities as Chairpersons of our Committees, we took the motion to our Committees in order to gather their support before we came here. Now, at the end of meeting this morning, the Prime Minister declined to participate with us, and quite rightly, in determining the number. Since this is a full House and it is the one that appoints our Committee, it is important you are put in the right thinking framework. 

When the Committees stayed behind, we generally agreed that the Select Committee should be enlarged. Now, as you have seen, Rule 145 provides that it shall consist of at least five Members. But Rule 145 (3) states as follows:
“At any time after the nomination, the Speaker may appoint one or more additional members and if for any reason a member of a Select Committee is unable to act, the Speaker may appoint another Member in his or her place.”  

Before we recognised this Rule, I went together with hon. Mudoola to the Speaker, hon. Ayume, and told him that Members were thinking about 15 Members. He told us that for security matters that might be unwise and could bring about confusion. He said that the nine Members proposed could be sufficient and if we wanted to co-opt more Members we could bring the names to him and he would add them on the list. He said as many as reasonable. So, initially he said we should appoint nine and then he said he was going to liase with you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to get your guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, there has been a suggestion of 15 Members. I will put the question to that number –(Interjections)- yes, because the Members made a suggestion.  The Members of the Committee approached the Speaker. They were only trying to extend their view, but the decision has to be made by the House. So, I will put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from you because the motion, which was on the Floor, was about numbers. I thought we were going to debate on the numbers. We have now decided on the numbers –(Interjections)- can I be protected, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: The number has been 15. I am seeking clarification from you on how those 15 will operate after the Speaker selects them. The motion has said that they will handle their own rules of procedure - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will have their own procedure, they will swear to secrecy and so forth. That is how they will operate.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I would like to say that I was not given an opportunity to express my views on the numbers because you put the question before we contributed - (Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due to respect to your ruling, two proposals were floated. One proposal was for 15 and the other was for nine members. Noting that you have said nothing about the nine, how do we determine that the 15 - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I started with the biggest number and that is all. Anyway, these are the names: 
    • Lt. Col. Chris Mudoola 
    • Hon. Ogalo Wandera 
    • Dr. Malinga 
    • Hon. Kule Muranga 
    • Col. Omaria 
    • Hon. Bakoko -(Interjections)- it seems there is a problem here? Okay, I will put the question to hon. Bakoko’s name. 

(Question put and negatived)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I would like clarification on how we are proceeding. I would like to know whether we are going to approve each name proposed by the Speaker, because by that we might be changing the rules. The rules do not say that the House will approve the names. So, I would like clarification as to whether that procedure is correct. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked you, Maj. Gen., to read out the rule for constituting this Committee. This Committee has to be approved by the House. I will continue with the names:
    • Dr. Matovu 
    • Hon. Wilson Otage 
    • Dr. Nkuuhe 
    • Hon. Gobba 
    • Dr. Nyeko 
    • Dr. Mwebesa 
    • Hon. Balemezi 
    • Hon. Chebet Maikut and 
    • Hon. Bakkabulindi.  

MR. MAO: Mr. Speaker, this is why we wish we had made some contributions when the motion was proposed. This Parliament looks in a certain way and this Committee also resembles a certain thing. Is this going to be an inquiry or a whitewash?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Member, if you say it will whitewash then you are implying that you do not confidence in the honourable Members that I have named. But when one name was read, you objected to it and we dropped it. It seems the House has approved the other names, and going by Rules, I appoint Lt. Col. Mudoola the Chairperson of this Committee.

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I wanted to raise some objections. Defence is one Ministry that two committees have tried to make accountable, the Defence Sessional Committee and the Public Accounts Committee. Those two Committees have attempted, they have had difficulties and they have come back to the Floor of this House and reported their difficulties. I think that is why we have this Select Committee because it is one sector that has resisted Parliamentary oversight. So, I am concerned that people who have a little a bit of experience in probing Defence, by virtue of their long standing membership in these two committees, are absent on this Committee. On the other hand, I see hon. Members who are my very good Friends, and who I think are excellent Parliamentarians, but who I know have almost zero knowledge on defence, such as my Sister, hon. Mwebesa, and my Sister, hon. Balemezi- (Interruption) 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you said that members of the committees approached the Speaker and they discussed this matter. You realise that may be the most competent people in this House on defence would be the members of UPDF who represent the army. But you realise that the Speaker must have considered this aspect and said that they could not really investigate themselves, therefore, they were excluded. But for us now to come and say that these are experts when we are ordinary members of Parliament, I think, may not cultivate a good working relation. I would advise us to go along with this Committee. If the Committee finds out later that they require the assistance of any other person, they will approach the Speaker and that particular person will be co-opted. So this matter is completed.

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, just not to appear like I was leaning heavily against the women, I had also wanted to mention hon. Kule Muranga, I was just interrupted. I have not heard him speak on defence here. But if you are saying that we are going to add –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue of the Select Committee was closed. What we can do, hon. Members, is to pray for these hon. Members, who have been selected, to do a good job. Let us give them the confidence they deserve. I think they will produce some good work.

MRS. MPANGA:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for any Member, after the Speaker has decided, to continue with a subject? If we go on like this, it will be contempt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unless a Member moves under certain specific rules, as far as I am concerned, we have another item on the Floor.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADDOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY.

(Debate continued)

DR. NYEKO PEN’MOGI (Kilak County, Gulu): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was expressing my disappointment on the way some encroachers were removed from forest reserves in Busoga and yet at the same time, in another forest in Busoga, Kakira Sugar Works were allowed to continue destroying a forest and plant sugar cane. In the same vein, another encroacher in Luwero was given five square miles of land for grazing. I was wondering about the double standards we have seen in this report. How about these people whose huts were burnt and who were beaten and given only three hours to leave a forest reserve. How would they feel when they hear that Kakira Sugar Works has been authorised to continue encroaching on the land, and that land finally is going to be degazetted for them? 

How would those people feel when they hear that a certain Ernest Bagarukayo was given five square miles of land and this land had been degazetted for this particular person? I think this could give us a lot of problems. I am surprised that there was a letter from State house written by Mr. Fox Odoi to the Solicitor General that this land should be degazetted. And finally, a letter was written to the Ministry of Natural resources directing that this land should be degazetted. Nobody else raised any question because, apparently, the directive, they said, was from State House. 

When you look at the Land Act provision, which the Committee had given, it also reiterates the constitutional provision which vests powers in the Government or local government to hold forest reserves in trust for the people. Now, if this forest reserve is being held in trust for people and at the same time we degazette it for one individual or for a corporation like Kakira Sugar Works, which has the capacity to buy land elsewhere, then the rest of the people will later on find it very difficult to allow any land to be gazetted. People will find it hard to allow land to be gazetted either as a forest reserve or as a game park when they know that at a certain stage this land can be degazetted and given to some individuals. 

When I looked at the appendix, I was happy to note that there was one officer called Deo Byarugaba, Acting Commissioner of Forestry, who wrote a letter to the PS expressing his disappointment or his professional opinion.  I will read one paragraph: 
“It appears that State House is not aware that this issue was forwarded to you. As a result, Mr. Fox Odoi of State House has spoken to me on telephone inquiring about the action we have taken. 
The forest department still believes that Mr. Bagarukayo should be given a permit like other investors although in this case it would be a permit to graze as provided for in the Forest Act.”  

This officer was expressing his professional fears that this person should not be given land and the land should not be degazetted, but the PS replied as follows: “Let us not go backwards. There is only one option for Bagarukayo and that is for him to plant trees. The lease of permit should be for that use only or else he quits.”  

So, the PS is saying that there is no more option. He is saying that this squatter or this encroacher should plant trees, when it is very clear in the letter from this officer that this land is for grazing. This makes it very difficult for me to understand how some officers work. It should have been the responsibility of the Minister and the PS to advise State House that gazetted land cannot just be degazetted for one person but this forest officer, in the name of Deo, really tried his best. But because he is not a politician, he was not able to proceed beyond what he did.  

Secondly, the Committee also talked about charcoal burning, commercial firewood cutting and several other activities. They stated that 96 percent of the population still depends on firewood. Although they recommend the rural electrification programme, we must also note that even here in Kampala and major towns, where we have electricity, there are very few people who use electricity for cooking. Even if you take electricity to rural areas, the present rates or tariff charges of electricity are not going to help a single tree in the rural areas. Even here in Kampala trees are being brought in for charcoal all the way from Kigumba and different parts of the country, and we are using charcoal here in the city where we have electricity. So, this rural electrification is not going to be the answer to saving the trees. 

Those who are in charge of UEB should look at this very critically. The electricity charges are extremely high.  Power is generated by water and water is free, it flows by itself. Nobody pushes water into those generating plants. This equipment has been bought using loans whose grace period is something like ten years and the payment period is 40 to 50 years or even more, close to 100. Why are these electricity charges high? If we want to save our environment, rural electrification is not going to save it because power is mainly used for lighting. Even here in Kampala and rural areas, nobody uses firewood for lighting. Firewood is mainly used for cooking. Even here in Kampala, very few people use electricity for cooking.  It is a reserve for diplomats, major NGOs and for people whose conditions of service entitle them to free electricity. These are the kind of people who use electricity for cooking –(Interruption).

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. I would like inform the hon. Member that Government very recently rejected an offer from the Italian Government, of about six million dollars towards the development of the rural electrification sector in Uganda. And it was at concessional terms.  Thank you.

DR. NYEKO: Mr. Speaker, as I said, as far as I know, rural electrification is not going to be the answer to saving our trees or forests. Forests will continue to be cut down, burnt into charcoal and ferried to major towns where there is electricity. So, the only way out is for somebody to work out affordable electricity charges, which will be accessible to many people for cooking.  Otherwise, electricity in Uganda is for lighting. As far as lighting is concerned, everybody who has access to electricity is using it.  

Lastly, in most of our reports, we recommend the removal of an officer or some kind of punishment for some officers. In this particular report, I would like to recommend the promotion of Mr. Deo Byarugaba because according to appendix I, he really tried to save the gazetted forest in Luwero. I would like the Committee chairman to consider recommending this particular officer for promotion, so that we also show that if an officer is doing his work well and is resisting political pressure, this officer should be rewarded when the case comes to Parliament. I thank you very much.

MR. KWIZERA (Bufumbira East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this chance of contributing to this debate. If you look at the mandate of the Committee, they had general terms and that is the outcry of the population on the retrenched or interdicted public officers. I do not know the limit of political interference because we are also politicians and if we recommend that some people be demoted and others be suspended, is that not political interference? Members of Parliament could also recommend that these issues be taken to Public Service, if these are traditional public servants. For the Ministers, as they do not seem to be co-ordinated, we could take serious action on them, because it is within our mandate. 

Of course there is lack of co-ordination in the Ministry and it seems as if these civil servants are victims of uncoordinated systems of management in the Ministry itself. We are aware that among the civil servants, who were recommended, there was a Permanent Secretary supposed to go but we have not seen any action being taken on any Permanent Secretary. So, I think that there should be a limit to where political interference can stop and where we can allow some institutions of Government to operate like the IGG or the Public Service.   

I know that degradation of our environment and forests is mainly caused by lack of seriousness on the part of Government, because there is no clear policy on either forestry or wildlife. At times you find only contradicting policies.  You find that there is a policy on wildlife and then you find a policy on wetlands and a policy on forestry. But we do not take into consideration that more than 70 per cent of the forestry sector is within the private sector. So, much of the degradation may not be in the gazetted forest areas. Much of the degradation is within that 70 per cent under the private sector.  So, what has Government done to reduce the level of degradation on that 70 per cent? 15 per cent of the forest area is under Wildlife, but then the forestry department is not allowed to go and give even technical information on how to manage the forests, which are under Wildlife management. So, unless we have an authority that will encompass Wildlife, because we have wildlife in the forests and we have the forests under the management of Uganda Wildlife Authority, then we shall remain with this conflict. So, we feel this thing should be addressed.  

The forestry department was managing a number of forestry gazetted areas and the Government has removed forests from the forestry sector. One of such areas is Mt. Elgon, which is now under Wildlife Authority. The Rwenzoris are no longer under the forestry department. Mugahinga forest park and Bwindi are now under the Wildlife Authority.  So, even the mismanagement in the Wildlife Authority is because these people are more of authorities on wildlife and not authorities on forests. So, Government should come up and have some co-ordination.  

About degazetting, I think, it is very dangerous for the Government to put this issue in the hands of a person. I do hope that the hon. Minister will come and defend himself. I do not think the Minister should have degazetted, even if the President told him that he wanted this piece of land to be degazetted. Maybe you should consult your technical officers and give the President the right information. You should not just say that the President wishes to do this so you do it. We know that the President is not God so he can be advised. So, on the issue of degazetting Kamusenene, I think the President got the wrong advice from the Ministry. Maybe the Minister will be responsible for that action, because he failed to advise the President accordingly. I know of a sub-county –(Interruption). 

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is this that kind of authority, where a person will say, someone who has contributed enormously to the existence of Government should be given a small piece of land, especially someone like me, Member for Chekwii County, Moroto District, just for cows to merely graze and you enjoy their meat? They do not even break the trees!

MR. KWEZIRA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the hon. Minister that he should go back to the Constitution and see what it says about the prerogative of mercy. There is a committee that technically advises the President on the prerogative of mercy. Likewise, we are saying that the President can do it, but with the advice of the sector advisors. And I want to tell you that it is the President who directed so. I think they evicted people from a certain sub-county called Mpokya sub-county in Kabarole District. People were removed from the whole sub-county and they actually suffered but Government paid only after court action. So, if the President could do it for an individual, why couldn’t he do it for those people who were in the whole sub-county of Mpokya in Kabarole District -(Interruption). 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Kwizera for giving way. The speaker holding the Floor has been referring to the President, saying that he assumed that the technocrats from the forest sector did not give him advice. The President, whom the speaker is quoting, is on record to have caused forest depletion in this country. A case in point is Namanve. It has gone because of his orders.  

My second point is related to the very elaborate enquiry conducted by the Committee. The report referred to the notice issued by the State House, causing open depletion of our forests.  That information should open your eyes. 

PROf. NSIBAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, it was my intention to make a substantive contribution, but I derailed because of the fact that the role of His Excellency the President is being persistently misarticulated. It is my duty, as Leader of Government Business in Parliament, to clarify the role of His Excellency the President in this matter.  The first point to note is that Mr. Bagarukayo was not an encroacher. He had, actually, occupied that land before 1956, before it was gazetted. He had carried out several developments, including constructing two valley tanks and a permanent house. So, when gazetting occurred, he made an appeal to His Excellency the President and the -(Interruption)

MR. WAMULONGO: I want to correct the record, Mr. Speaker.  Records have it that Mr. Bagarukayo occupied only 500 acres. He occupied only 500 acres in the 80s. The development that the Prime Minister is talking about is a very recent development because when the Committee visited Mr. Bagarukayo’s land, the soil that had been scooped out of the valley tank was still wet. It was still fresh so these developments were not made in the 50s, 60s or ‘80s and not even in the ‘90s! Mr. Bagarukayo was not occupying the five square miles of land, but he was only occupying 500 acres.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to reiterate the point that the 500 acres he talks about are those outside the reserve. In other words, his information is not correct. These are matters, which can be verified, and we do have the requisite record, but let me now complete my submission. This was a bona fide occupant and, therefore, not an encroacher when gazetting occurred. That point must be made very clearly, and the amount of occupancy should be distinguished between that occupancy within the reserve after gazetting and that one outside.  Let us not confuse the points.  

The third point I would make is that he had made some developments, whether you like it or not. By the time he appealed, it was more than an individual. It involved at least several members, even his family, and, therefore, the question of removing him and compensating him was a matter to consider. Therefore, when the President said that, ‘okay, degazette and an equivalent amount will be given to you from UPDF at Kaweweta,’ all these matters had been put into account by His Excellency, the President. So, I would like us to have a correct debate because if we go on having an incorrect debate, it will eventually stick and we may eventually make a wrong conclusion. I thank you. 

MR. KWIZERA:  Mr. Speaker, we should separate the two issues.  There is the President taking away or gazetting and the right procedure not being followed, and there is the gazetting in the right way. So, we are not talking about the President having powers to do a, b, c. We are asking, ‘how was it done?’ I have looked through the document and I find a blank cheque, so I am talking about how it was signed. Is it the Minister who was supposed to put a signature before the details were filled in?  Will the Minister say it was an oversight? So, I am not saying the President was wrong in doing it, because I know Mr. Bagarukayo contributed alot to the struggle. He gave cows, and maybe his children were there like any other Ugandans. It is the practise I am questioning. If Mr. Bagarukayo could be compensated land as an individual, what about the Mpokya people? What happened to Mpokya people? What happened to Namanve people? These people were paid more than two billion, the hon. Prime Minister knows that. 

People in Kisoro, in the Mgahinga Mountains, were displaced, and those are communities not individuals.  We know that Col. Otafiire was handling the field of compensating those who contributed in the struggle and I appreciate. Maybe Bagarukayo’s case was being handled in hon. Otafiire’s committee, but what we are talking about is, as you are concerned with the protection of the name of the Presidency and we cannot bring the President here to debate, even if the President said degazette, was the right procedure followed? –(Interruption)  

MR. BAGALANA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the Prime Minister and the speaker holding the Floor that our point of contention is not the powers the President holds in degazetting or authorising or directing, but in the distribution of shares in this company called ‘the Movement’. If that happens in Kamusenene, why can it not happen in Bunya South? If they say Bagarukayo was there in the 50s -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought you made your contribution yesterday.

MR. BAGALANA: I am clarifying, Mr. Speaker. There were people staying in Bunya South way back in the 1940s and sleeping sickness chased them, but they gazetted this area and people have been evicted. Why should Bagarukayo take a whole four square miles? This is the point of contention. Thank you very much.

MR. KAJURA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps I will be making a longer exposition but let me say at this stage that no land in Kamusenene has been degazetted. No land as yet has been degazetted so let us not talk about land being degazetted and given to Mzee. This could happen later but it has not yet happened. 

All these factors that have been mentioned by various speakers, and the various proposals that have been made were under consideration. I did inform the Committee that consideration of these issues was still going on and that I will be reporting to the Committee. When I went away for four days, accompanying the Prime Minister, I came back and found that the report had been written. I had not been given the opportunity to give the gist of the consultations that had been going on because these are not at an easy level. It takes time to have them carried out, and indeed it is still at that stage. No land has been given, as yet, to Mzee Bagarukayo.  

MR. KWIZERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I looked through the appendices and I found a Statutory Instrument to degazette land and it was signed by the hon. Minister.  So, maybe the Minister, in his substantive defence or response, will tell us what he was degazetting. 
About the illegal livestock grazing -(Interruption)

MR. KAJURA: What happened, Mr. Speaker, is that a Draft Instrument was sent to us with a covering letter from the Solicitor General and it was urging for expeditious delivery. Since I was going to travel and the matter appeared urgent, I signed it and left it with the Permanent Secretary and the Commissioner so that should the need arise and should all these requirements be met, they would fill them in and return it to the Solicitor General. After all that it would then appear in the gazette and that is when it becomes law. Now, we have not been able to go through all these stages. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if it is a Statutory Instrument, it would be operational. It has to be in the gazette and be given a number. The number follows the year in which it is published. In any case, at the top of the gazette, they will indicate the Statutory Instruments gazetted in that particular gazette, so we can really check on that, I think.

MR. KWIZERA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much, but what I was referring to is document number 6 in the appendix, where the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment signed. He appended his signature and that is why we are saying, maybe in his substantive response he will explain if it is a normal procedure to sign before the details are filled in. 

I would like to conclude my remarks by talking about legal livestock grazing. I support controlled grazing in the protected areas because it is a normal practice, but even selective grazing should be recommended.  

About the Forestry Authority, I think we are going too far in forming too many authorities in our modernisation programme. We think that by forming too many authorities like the Forestry Authority, Fisheries Authority, Wild Life Authority, we shall be modernising our country. I think that we should first consult and harmonise our positions. It is useless to have a Forestry Authority and also have a Wetlands Authority, a Fisheries Authority, a Wildlife Authority, which could all be under one authority like the Renewable Nature Resource Authority, for easy and efficient management. 

As I conclude, I highly appreciate the work done by the Committee, but on the recommendations on technical officers, I would ask the Committee to review them. The report should be sent to Public Service and Public Service should take action, it should not be Parliament to say that we are going to demote the other one and promote the other one. I thank you.

MR. KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for a good report but call upon them to give us a comprehensive report covering the whole Forestry sector.  

The weak policies in the Forestry Department are the ones causing most of the ills in that sector. For example, we have been talking about famine, but when you look at the areas where there is famine, you will see that these are also areas where there are no trees. So, you can easily connect famine to lack of trees. Trees are very important in the environment, they are important in holding the structure of soils to fight against soil erosion. Trees provide strong sheds, a nature cover, and they are even helpful in water conservation.  So, if we do not embark on afforestation of this country then we shall continue to lament about famine and its associated ills.  

In Europe there is a law that requires every farmer to put aside two percent of his land for forest cover. We need the same laws here. There are people with big chunks of land, there are landlords with 5 square miles, if we had a law like that so that 2 percent of the 5 square miles was put under forest cover, how many big forests would Uganda be having now? 

I would like to inform the Government that they cannot stop people from using trees. You cannot stop people from using firewood, but what we have to do is to plan for the trees. All our hills and mountaintops are completely clear and clean. When you look at the western part of the country from Masaka, Mbarara up to Kabale, the hilltops are empty. There are no trees! Why don’t we climb these hills and mountains and plant trees? Allow people to use trees in the valley. A eucalyptus tree only takes three years to mature. After three years, we can climb the mountains again and start using the woods on the hills and then we leave the valleys to regenerate. 

The problems of our policies in this country start with the weaknesses in LC 1. In 1994, when we were reviewing the LC system, I was a mobiliser in Mpigi. I recommended that LC 1 members should not deal with LC 1s. LC 1s should petition LC 2s if they have problems with their fellow LC 1s and then LC 2s look into the matter and if necessary allow LC 1s to overthrow their chairman.  Nobody can injure his voters. When you tell an LC 1 to guard the forests and to manage the policies at that level, they will not do it because they are going to confront their voters. And this is where most of the Government policies have failed to take root. No chairman, including myself, will injure his voters. So, we need revision in that area if we are to have any form of policy that will be effective at that level.  

Compared to Kenya and Rwanda, Uganda is very poor in artificial forests. Kenya has got many artificial forests. In Rwanda, between 1981/85, they had a deliberate programme to afforestate Rwanda and they had what they called muganda every Saturday. I was once removed from a taxi to plant at least five trees before I continued my journey. And this muganda has to be done by everybody in Rwanda.  Now Uganda cannot beat that small mountainous country in forestry. The rain patterns are changing from favouring Uganda to Rwanda just because of trees.  

In 1993, during the coronation of the Kabaka, we planted trees and I want to talk about the political trees we plant. At that time we planted trees around Wankulukuku in Lubaga South, and this area is just near the renowned environmentalist place, hon. Lukyamuzi. We planted trees just next to his house, and I went there yesterday, but there is no tree growing because nobody took care of those trees. And it is true –(Laughter).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way. When hon. Kityo talked about Wankulukuku I got touched because the ground he is talking about is supposed to be open grassland encompassed with limited forestation. There is certainly limited forestation or flowers and shrubs unless you have been colour blind. 

On top of that, if you have been attending the activities in that area, schools like Tebi Secondary School and Aggrey Memorial School were mobilised, by the speaker, to plant trees on the hill near Mpanga and Walugembe's places. So, you should be mindful about that. I hope you know what you are talking about.  

MR. MWANDHA: Since hon. Lukyamuzi belongs to the LC system in his area, is it possible that he feared to injure his electorate and allowed them to cut down these trees which were planted in 1993?  Is it possible?

MR. KITYO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for the information he has given, but the point stands. At that spot, there is no single tree growing, and many of us participated in planting that little forest at the coronation of His Majesty the Kabaka.  So, there is no tree and nobody cared for them. We always plant trees as politicians. You go to a function and you plant a tree, but you go away and nobody cares for the trees. So, nobody cut the trees, but the trees were never nursed and they never grew. That was the problem. 

This is similar to many ‘political’ forests we grow. Kezimbira Miyingo launched a planting day early this year, I want him to go back and check on how many trees are still growing. This is a pattern!  We plant trees but nobody cares about them. May I now ask this country to take afforestation very seriously. 

I would like to end by saying that we cannot stop people from using trees, because trees are there to be used. We need good timber, we need wood fuel, and we need to build houses. For two years I have been asking the hon. Minister in charge of Environment for only 200 trees for timber for basic schools in my constituency, up to now, I have not been permitted. Because I am law abiding, I am not going to the forest to cut down trees. I am still waiting for permission. I do not know when it will come.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have exhausted the subject.  I see only two people standing, apart from the Minister. Maybe   we can adjourn now so that tomorrow we start with the hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, hon. Member for Bugweri, and then we hear from the Minister and then we conclude, but -(Interruption)

DR. NYEKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification in respect to a small correction in my talk.  I thought, before you close, it would fit in if I made that correction. I talked about a letter by Deo Byarugaba to the Permanent Secretary about the fear that the Ministry still believes that Bagarukayo should be given a permit like other investors. I read some comment, but I would like to make a correction that this comment was actually made by the Minister of Environment, hon. Kezimbira. I have checked from the signature.  This was a note to the PS, where he stated, “let us not go backwards.  There is only one option for Mr. Bagarukayo and that is for him to plant trees. The lease/permit should be for that use only or else he quits.”  I had made a reference that this was a note from the PS, but I checked the signature and found out that this statement was the Minister’s. I wanted to have this correction so that it goes on record that it is not the PS who is expressing that there is no more option. It was the Minister who was saying that there is no option. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Fine.  Hon. Minister, did you want to make your contribution today or tomorrow?  Because, as I have said, we could adjourn to tomorrow morning and then hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, hon. Member for Bugweri, will speak followed by the Minister, then the Chairperson, and then we shall see how to go on. With this we come to the end of today's business, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2nd August 2000 at 10.00 a.m).

