Thursday, 4 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-PERFORMING ASSETS RECOVERY TRUST BILL, 1994

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put a question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment in Clause 3(a). Clause 3(a)(i) reads: any advancing respect of which the principle or interest on scheduled soon it has remained overdue for any periods specified by the Bank of Uganda.  

Now, many people do not know this period specified by the Bank of Uganda, I have therefore, made a proposal that the period specified by the Bank of Uganda because I have found out and I am now changing - I had put down three but I found out that it is actually two years.  I would rather we put down two years so that people who are affected know what this means, so instead of the word three it is two years.  So, it should read that, any period exceeding two years instead of specified by the Bank of Uganda that is (a) (i) and then (a)(ii) or do we deal with that one first.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, the Bank of Uganda is by Law the supervising power of a bank and it is not according to the number of years that the loan can be bad, there are other circumstances for example, Sir, if an investment was made in a property and after six months there was n earthquake and property even if it is only 6 month.  So, we left it here because in the law for financial institutions we said Bank of Uganda should regulate the supervision of the banks.  We thought that the bank there has enough people now to understand that the way this loan is, chances of its recovery are very minimal and, therefore, Bank of Uganda can decide what that loan can be written off. Because, also, the Bank of Uganda supervises to make sure that the banks do not use any loopholes like writing off debts and so on and get away with it.  

So, I prefer I understand the matter stated by hon. Tiberondwa but, Bank of Uganda has not come out with a law saying, that the loan to be bad must be two years. The bank explores the circumstances of the loan on many grounds, so I would beg that we leave this provision as it is generally, so that if the Central Bank thinks that, that loan is bad then we take them as an authority for that loan to be included in the Trust other than saying two years.  So, I am requesting hon. Tiberondwa to agree to leave this Clause as it is.

DR TIBERONDWA:  After an explanation from the hon. Minister I would like to agree but to go on with the other amendment in the same Clause which does not talk about how much money  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which Clause now?

DR TIBERONDWA:  It is 2(a)

THE CHAIRMAN: Sub-Clause (ii)?

DR TIBERONDWA:  No, it is actually 2(a) itself before you come to one, that - a loan on advance exceeding 2 million Uganda shillings -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: I think for the purposes of record hon. Tiberondwa should withdraw the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tiberondwa you agreed with the Minister’s position?

DR TIBERONDWA: Sir, I have agreed with the Minister’s explanation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then withdraw.

DR TIBERONDWA: Although the hon. Member seems to be interested in the word withdraw, I have agreed with the Minister. Mr Chairman, 3(a) does not point out how much money you must be owing to the bank for your debt to be a bad debt -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  But. hon. Tiberondwa, which sub-clause are you on now?

DR TIBERONDWA:  I am adding words on (a) at the top you have this one in front of you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: 3(a)?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Yes, 3(a), a loan or an advance exceeding 2 million Uganda shillings I am putting the word 2 million so that before you can be sent to the Trust there should be some limit in the entrance to the Trust, you may have a loan say 100,000 shillings which I think can be recovered by the bank without going to the Trust.  So, I was proposing that we have the maximum feelings in order to protect particularly the small farmers who borrow small money and then you are going to send everybody to the Trust.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman I wish to oppose that kind of amendment.  If you took a loan of half a million and you had 30,000 borrowers you will be talking of 15 billion shillings and, therefore, all non-performing assets are non-performing assets regardless of the size and the cost of recovering it should be borne by the defaulter.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, the concern of hon. Tiberondwa is that small borrowers like the small farmers scheme, that they will be bothered if they borrowed hundred and twenty thousand and then they are put under the Trust and so on.  The aim of the Trust is not only to recover the money, the aim of the Trust is to remove from the balance sheet of UCB sums of money they have been unable to collect within the period they should have collected it, whether it is hundred twenty thousand shillings and if this cannot be collected is going to be put back in UCB as capital, the minute you leave this hundred twenty, two hundred, three hundred thousand with UCB, UCB will get less capital to the extent of those small loans you have left there.  

Secondly, his concern for the rural farmers is a - concern but we hope that the people who will be put on the Trust will be such responsible people to know how to handle these small farmers with their small loans and in its recovery they will use appropriate mechanism that can go to reach them without incurring more costs.  So, I think we have had discussion with hon. Moses Ali about amendment concerning farmers. I think that amendment can cover the fears of hon. Tiberondwa how the Trust should approach the small farmers.  But here we should not limit the sums because as hon. Manzi has said people can borrow small sums of money but come to big totals so I think we better leave this one as it is but we shall accept that amendment which will take away your fears.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tiberondwa do you accept and withdraw?  

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I accept the explanation from the Minister and I am waiting for hon. Moses Ali’s amendment, which seems to take care of my concern as advanced by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4, agreed to.)

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I am proposing an amendment, which comes before 5(d), and I am introducing actually 5(d).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Moses Ali did your circulate your amendment?

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Yes. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Brig. Moses Ali you can go ahead.

BRIG.MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, before I go ahead there are small typing errors if we can correct that, the second line of the proposal immediately after the word good, that two becomes article (d), that in making good debt owing immediately after owing you can insert on account of and remove the word to and the rest remains, and down to section 13 -(Interjection) Sorry, we shall come to that later. 

Now, we want to introduce a new 5(d) which reads as follows: that - attitude objective of the Trust that the Trust will as the tribunal to examine the circumstance leading to the farmers default in making good the debt owing on account of loans received from rural farmers scheme USAID/RPE and EEC Programme in order to redress recommend and take corrective measures so that the farmers loans schemes whatever financial institution can benefit the farmers and the country in future programmes.  So, the (b) becomes (e) and (e) becomes (f), for reasons I advanced yesterday. I am sure my colleagues can still remember what I said.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, repeat so that you refresh hon. Members.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: We are saying that the farmers had been given food although they are hungry it is a poison food, in the sense that the managing director of UCB at that time had a good intention to give the rural farmers scheme loans without guarantee, and these loans to these farmers actually did not benefit the farmers because in my district the money is given directly to a tractor owner who goes and ploughs the hectare about 2 or 3 second plough again the money is given to the tractor own then the seeds are planted and money for weeding is not given.  So, the farmers do not have enough money to weed and to harvest, so all these complications has been put on the farmer, and the USAID people with EEC we said; had also given - conceived package and due to irregular procurement schedule which was done overseas and which for these people the farmers had not participated in making this programme it made to point that these farmers had been left helpless they get a tractor today and they had to wait for 6 months when the LC was opened and when that LC was opened that is when the interest started accruing even the farmer had not got the plough so he could not use the tractor.  By the time he gets the plough it is one year and the interest is being compounded, this farmer at the end of two years which is a grace period has not planted even an acre and yet his loan has accumulated more than half or even more than one half already of his loan.  

So, we are saying this - conceived loans should be looked into and the reasons of why the farmers are not able to pay it should be looked into at the tribunal, so that collective measure is made that farmer should not be left or be punished for mistakes which are not theirs.  Mr Chairman, I have been able to thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, by indicating the objectives it has been of course, expected that the Trust will examine when you read the Bill the feeling that the Trust will call these debtors and examine why they are not paying and what action must be put in place for them to pay and we have given it power to reschedule even to change interest rates in order to ensure that the capital is recovered.  

But, hon. Moses Ali is saying on top of that they want to be specific to be told about credit of farmers that they should examine those cases he has said which led to problems of the loan, even if we did not put in the law they were bound to do it.  But, if farmers want to be happy and feel that they - to give their reasons before the Trust decides on the fate of the loan the Government has no problem because the Government is a friend of the farmer.  Therefore, we accept his amendment that in doing its job the Trust should list in and consider the problems of farmers before it makes its decision so I accept the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, on Clause 6 I have the following amendments to make. The reason why I am making these amendment is because the writing up of this law is a bit mixed up, when you come to the tribunal the Bill states that the Minister should consult Cabinet when appointing the tribunal and they do not say the same about appoint the body of Trustees and about appointing the other members of the board. 

So, I would for the sake of uniformity want to add that the Minister should consult Cabinet on the names to be appointed as trustees. Either we put it there or when we come to the trustees we remove it because by normal procedures of collective responsibility this is normally what is written down.  The Minister is supposed to consult Cabinet. But since they have indicated it, I thought that we should also put it here for the sake of formality or remove it from the other area.  After, I will continue; I have got other amendments in the same clauses.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I would like to accept hon. Tiberondwa’s later proposal, that when we come to the tribunal, we shall delete the inclusion of consultation in the main body of the Bill.  Because they way government operates, a collective responsibility government, is because Ministers consult each other’s Cabinet Members. I do not think we need to make it a law; otherwise, I do not see how they will operate a government and succeed if they do not share responsibility.  So, since it is not in this clause, we leave the clause as it is, and when we come to the tribunal, we delete it.  Because the practice is, that cabinet is consulted on appointments of all these bodies, which are put up, are necessary to be put in the main board.  So, I will accept his amendment on the tribunal clause, say this one is not there, we leave it.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I am very happy about the Minister’s guidance, I want to go ahead with the next amendment. In Clause 6, it is proposed that, in addition to the chairman, not less than 4 and not more than 6 other members be appointed to the board.  I would like to be more specific; especially because the number of the people to constitute the quorum is specific.  It is state 4, and it seems we have 4 as a quorum, while the members of the board are 4 or 6.

I would rather constitute the number of other members to be 6, and then we fix the quorum, at 4; so that we are very specific.

The amendment I want to add, because the whole thing is written in a very unusual way. If you look at schedule number one, all that is in schedule number one is normally in the body of the day.  And if you leave it in the schedule, it can easily be manipulated.  The procedures of the board, and I wish should transact it to business in this particular law, is put as schedule number one.

I would like to propose that, schedule number one; including the quorum and all other things, should be shifted from schedule number to clause number 6; which deals with the board.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I oppose that amendment because the schedule comes from a law, which is already in the body. And the procedures of the board meeting must be changed by the board itself and the ministry, with a servative instrument, we do not need to amend the whole word.  So, I would like to request that, we remain with a schedule.  Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Well, I agree with hon. Tiberondwa that, in the past, they have drafted these things in the main body of the law; but now with an lightened parliament, with also an improvement in the education of the lawyers, they have found that, we should make an improvement on the quality of legislation.  Because, for example, on Schedule 2(6), it says, ‘subject to the provision of this section and the other provision of this Statute, the board shall regulate its own proceedings.’

We are saying, they will be in order; it may do that.  And I think we should leave only in the main body, the Trust of the law, which is to be changed; one has to come back to Parliament.  And we provide three schedules; administrative guidelines.  So, I think we should leave this schedule as a schedule.  But just put in the main body the Trust of the law, which cannot be touched until parliament agrees.  But these are administrative regulations, which I think the minister, through statutory instrument, can amendment if he finds their problems of implementing the main body of the law.  I want him to have this.  To be part of this improved legislation.


DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, as much as I respect the Minister’s guidance, really I have spent yesterday and today in the library, and I have looked at all the legislations we have passed, including the one we passed in the last Session; things like the minutes of the meetings of the board; all these are inside the main law.  And in the original law, the whole of this schedule 2 was part of the main body.  And this is a normal procedure, of the laws that I have been involved in, since I became a Member of this august House, Mr Chairman.  I therefore, want to say that, we discuss my amendment, Mr Chairman.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I have a small amendment in Clause 6(5), and I am proposing that, we delete the last words in the sentence reading ‘the minister may dissolve the appointment of any member of the board from failure to perform the functions of his office on the ground of infirmity and mind or body.’ Now, I want for ‘any sufficient cause’ be deleted.  Because it gives a range for the minister to smuggle private things into the law.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: This morning we had a long meeting with hon. Moses Ali over this clause; I would like to oppose his amendment, for one thing.  As of now, we think that a man from his conduct, publicly acceptable misconduct or for inability to perform the functions, the minister should be dropped.  But we cannot predict now, that these are the only two reasons for which the public may take objection to believe in the service of that man.  The honour is put on the minister to justify, why should drop a man? And the law says, that Minister must have sufficient cause; not just wake up and drop someone.  Since now, the country is getting more particular on how they appoint ministers, in any constitution I hear, they will be elected by parliament; these should be semi-men, who do not just wake up and do things, but you cannot tie the minister’s hand to say that since we did not mention that in the law, but the public is objectionable to that provision, I cannot do anything; you continue to service, you will harm the Trust.

Lastly, these people will be recommended after Cabinet consultation, be appointed by the Minister.  So, the minister cannot wake up and hate a man so much that, for no reason.  He says you get off.  And a minister is supposed to be a reasonable person; otherwise Parliament can impute him.  So, I prefer as hon. Tiberondwa has won, on the ground that, first legislations have provided for these.  All legislations have provided for this room, in event of things we have not foreseen, if they constitute a sufficient clause, the minister can through consultation take this action.  So, I would like to oppose this amendment, Sir. 

MR SIBO: I am particularly thinking of a case, where  -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I am imagining a case, where if I am an appointed Minister for Finance, and I happen to be on the list of the letters, and my Friend hon. Kafumbe Mukasa is on the board, and I feel that he is going - he will not take care of my interest, I may remove him for some reason.  And I would like to protect the minister for finance from doing this kind of thing, and being suspected that he is acting behind the interest of the Trust. So, I would like to appeal to the Minster to accept Brig. Moses Ali’s amendment.

REV. ONGORA: Mr Chairman, I would like to oppose. Mr Chairman, I think the Minister is right. Because here it says only two things, infirmity of mind or body.  Now, supposing this member -if he is a drunkard, you find him loitering everywhere, he does not really appear like a hon. Member; so I think we should allow - it is misconduct.  Okay, but in development, okay.  So, for me should give allowances to the Minister to also decide, I know Minister cannot fully resort to dismiss people because of miner issues. So, as far as I am concerned, I feel, Mr Chairman, that it will menace the Minister’s proposal.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I think the amendment by Moses Ali is okay.  Because in our context, our people are not yet correct in the way they do things.  And therefore, it is not right to give wholesale to such powers, which are going to be abused.  Today, when I was reading the New Vision, they are saying one of the ministers moved one of the worker in his ministry to a position of a Assistant General Manager - I mean deputy of acting general manager of Fresh Foods - Foods and Beverages, while this very post was advertised and people have applied for it, they have not got the results, so really, what guarantee do we have or a Ugandan have to such people who are changing like chameleons.  So, I think there is really a great need to have this clause pushed out, so that, a Bill cannot leave the minister free to do whatever he wants.

MISS KADAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I oppose the amendment, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Members of this House to think a bit more deeply about the implications for removing this clause. I would like the House to imagine to a situation where one of these fellows in convicted of a criminal offence, sentenced for imprisonment may be of one year.  Under those circumstances, is the Minister bound to defend that person? I am talking about somebody, who after being appointed, commits a crime, and goes to Luzira.  What do we do?  So, for that reason, Mr Chairman, I oppose hon. Ali’s Amendment.

LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also oppose the amendment in addition to what hon. Kadaga has said.  Supposing the member of the board runs in exile, what does the Minister do?  So, I think the Minister should be left time to manoeuvre.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to support the amendment moved by Ali, for the simple reason that, an attitude is already given to the hon. Minister, under misconduct.  Misconduct is broad enough to allow him accommodate this one which we are going to delete.  So, that is just a repetition. So, I think that can be deleted as proposed.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, very much Mr Chairman. I stand here strongly to support hon. Moses Ali’s amendment.  Mr Chairman, we have had a number of things in our country, especially in the appointment of top executives in parastatals.  You find that, a person like Mr Zimbe, who is a good manager was dropped for no good reason; the Diary Corporation, and I can sight a number of things whereby -(Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify over these matters. Some of them when they are mentioned, and I am holding a ministry where I am responsible, I think it is not very fair, if I do not clarify.  I think when we are given responsibility, to run the ministry and some parastatals, at least we have some levels in which we are to say certain things.  And in the previous rules and procedures, running the Parliament, it was not always fair to talk about people who cannot either defend themselves in the House here, and is not also fair for hon. Member to come the House, and start saying, so and so is very good, he has been switched, this has happened.  Certainly, you are not giving us any room at all. Because here, you are asking me to discuss the character on non-circumstances, Mr So and So, had to be discontinued.  We really put in place a committee of inquiry on the person you have just mentioned here hon. Wanendeya.  And we found that he was guilty of a number of things. So, kindly, let us be allowed to operate.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The point is that, a number of things have happened as far as appointments are concerned.  If the Deputy Minister for Trade and Industry, could have briefed the country, over what had happened; it would have been much far better. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Wanendeya.  Order, please.  Can you, please, speak to the Bill and leave that matter?

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, what I am saying is that, it is better that I support hon. Moses Ali’s point because of past experiences and one of the point in question - a committee was set up, chaired by hon. Mulondo; a report was produced, that was put aside, and some of these things, unless they are reported to the public, how do we know? And, therefore, in order to prevent even ministers from doing wrong things, this clause should be included in.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NDEGE:  I also support the amendment by hon. Moses Ali.  The reasons given by the Learned lawyer - Lady hon. Kadaga; is that, if you are imprisoned, you go under the bars; another one says, you should run away.  Really, if we do not attend so many meetings, you are automatically, disqualified.  So, we have a Member of Parliament here who went to the states, he did not come, he has been replaced.  So we should not bring clumsy excuses, and give ministers blank cheques; if they want, they come back here.  Thank you very much.

(Question on Amendment put and agreed to.)

(Question put on Clause 6 as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to.)

(Clause 7, agreed to.)

Clause 8

DR TIBERONDWA: Clause 8; Mr Chairman, the administrator and other staff of the Trust.  This Bill proposes that, the administrator of the Trust, should be appointed by the Minister.  My amendment is that, the administrator should be appointed by the board of trustee, so that they can supervise him, much more easily, and if he is appointed by the minister, he will not respect the board.  I would like to propose that, the administrator and all the other staff be appointed by the board of trustee.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I accept that amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

(Question put on Clause 8 as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to.)

(Clause 8, agreed to.)

Clause 9

DR TIBERONDWA: Clause 9 states that a Member of the Board shall not be paid any salary, but shall be paid such allowances, as the Board may determine. I would like to propose that, the allowances of the members of the Board of Trustees, be fixed by the minister, rather than, by the members themselves.  The reasons are really obvious.  Because many of the Boards that we have, the allowances are determined by the appointing authority.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to accept this amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

(Question put on Clause 9, as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to.)

(Clause 10 agreed to.)

(Clause 11 agreed to.)

(Clause 12 agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR NDEGE:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am proposing that we delete 13 (1) (a); directors and officers.  The reason for this is that all these irregular drawings, if they are there can only be found in the debtors account, not in accounts of officers or directors because if you borrow money, it goes to your Limited Liability Account.  If there is any investigation on any irregular drawing, that is the only source where they can find it.  So, I am suggesting that without witch-hunting our people’s accounts and etc. I think this is a repetition of what can be found from the actual account where money was borrowed.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I happen to have served on this committee and this is one of the issues, which took us a lot of time to discuss.  We wanted to strengthen the tribunal so that it is able really to recover as much money as possible.  We understood that money borrowed for certain business purposes could be diverted and in order to ensure that as much money as possible is recovered, we made this provision and on that basis Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, as hon. Mwandha has said, in the committee, this took a lot of time because the Members were very anxious for the money to be recovered but on the other hand, what we are transferring to this Trust is the legal contract between UCB and that borrower.  So, I do not think we can really provide for a legal provision beyond the contractual provision that was made between UCB and the borrowers.  There are some lawyers here, and they can guide us.  

So, what we are doing Sir, is that instead of UCB executing the contract it has with its debtors who are defaulting, we are shifting these contracts from UCB and put these contracts to the Trust to executive. I do not know how fair it is for us now, to start adding on that contract things, which were not between UCB and the borrowers.  But where a borrower has borrowed money to put it in a farm and the Trust finds that the money did not go to the farm but went to the House, I think the law regarding the principles of piercing the veil would be used by the Trust to look for where the money actually went because that is where you can follow it in order to recover it. 

So, I would like a position to appear that we are inheriting in this Trust the contracts UCB made with the borrowers.  But in the courts as it is, you cannot hide between the shade of the company.  They will be reached.  So, that is why I want to accept Ndege’s amendment that we would not like to have a law which looks as if we are witch-hunting a bank.  If UCB borrowed on those terms, we want to execute those terms ourselves.  (Interjections)  

No, no, what I am saying, the current provision says that you can go beyond the contract, which UCB has with that debtor.  As a non-lawyer, I am saying that is not the intention of the bill.  The intention is to shift that contract between you and UCB into the Trust and let the Trust execute it because UCB now will be a new animal.  So, that is my explanation.  That is why I said the lawyers could advise to have that view; what is your position.  That is why I say -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, as I did explain, this tribunal has got to be given special powers.  Otherwise if we write down the powers of Tribunal -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mwandha, what is your point of order?

MR MWANDHA:  I am developing the point of order.

THE CHAIRMAN: Come to it straight, please.

MR MWANDHA:  Okay, Mr Chairman, is the Minister in order when he knows very well that this law has been prepared by lawyers to come to the House and again ask the lawyers in the House to interpret the law when he knows very well that the purpose of this particular provision was to strengthen the powers of the Tribunal in order to recover the debts which have been incurred, which have become non-performing? Knowing very well that money could have been diverted by directors and officers of the borrowing institution and therefore, we must provide in the law so that as much as possible, the Tribunal can reach these borrowers.

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister is in order.  The lawyers are free to contracts.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I just want Members to understand the purpose of this law and put it in the language it can be used to achieve.  Now in some borrowing contracts, directors and whatever, they give guarantees; personal guarantees. In some cases, they mortgage floating something whatever charges, on top of that they give this and because of that contract, UCB gave them money that has not been paid.  We are saying, can this contract be executed by the Trust?  So the aim was not to come to make additional laws, which are not in the contract between the borrower and the bank.   And I am saying I am looking for an amendment to accept if it reflects this intention of the Bill.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Being a Member of this committee, we had quire a lot of discussion. We knew that some of the loans were character loans for which there were no collateral and for which there were - the assets were so low compared to the loans and we know, some of the borrowers were not using this money for the company for which they thought the money was going and because of seeing the reality of the situation, and we had the lawyers on our committee who approved this idea of having this law.  So, our reason for having this clause was basically because the situation required that we go and look t the directors directly as it were.  Otherwise, if we do not, we shall end up with the law but get very few people to prosecute. That was what was behind this one and it was confirmed by the lawyers from the Attorney General that what we were doing at that time was in order.

(Clause 13, as amended, put and negatived.)

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, I am still on 13(1). First of all on the Preamble of 13(1) -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Which Preamble?

BRIG. MOSES ALI: No, it is 13(1), sorry Mr Chairman.  I want it to read that the Tribunal may upon proof by the Trust that the agricultural loan was diverted for other unrelated or unapproved purposes order an investigation. I wanted the Trust to find out that the loan, which was meant for agriculture, was actually diverted. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you proposing another sub-Clause?

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  I am proposing an amendment.  This is another amendment to 13(1)(b).  Because as it is now, it is just general that the Tribunal may upon an application made to it by the Trust - just the Trust will ask the Tribunal go and investigate so and so which I think is too dangerous.  Now I am saying, the Trust first of all before it asks the tribunal, it must prove that debtor X has actually misused the money meant for agriculture and built it with the House or made another home or married another wife and so on.  Then that one, the Tribunal should be asked to investigate.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I oppose this amendment. The Trust is going to be given all documents, all contracts relating to these non-performing assets and you are giving now this power to this Trust to recover this money.  These people will be guided by the contracts existing between UCB and the borrowers, which they are taking over.  In so doing, I do not think by law you must take them that when he took the loan, he married more women.  For them they will want to know and re-examine and find out why are you not paying the loan?  If you give that reason I married a wife, they will insist that you pay the loan.  So, I think this amendment may make more confusion than clarity.  That is why I oppose this amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived.)

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, I am proposing to delete 13(b) completely because this is where actually witch -hunting is going to take place.  There is no reason why 13(b) should be there.  The purpose of this Bill as it has already been said, which will become later on law, is not to witch-hunt people.  Now where it appears to the Tribunal appropriate, this is a vague law.  What is appropriate? Who is going to determine that the Trust or the Tribunal is taking appropriate decisions and how are you going to protect those people who are beggars?  They are going to pay we agree but I do not think you are going to get them out. They are going to run way from 13(1).  

So, 13(b) as has already been said by the Members actually they are bringing in a law which will later on cause misery rather than actually collect money from the people because it is embodying witch-hunting in the law which I think is a bad law.  And this law, we are not making it for ourselves now.  We are making this law for even future people.  so, we must be careful.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to oppose that amendment. These debtors should not be protected and the purpose of the Trust is to go full length and recover money from them.  It is not witch-hunting. It is recovering what they should have paid.  I urge Members to support me and oppose this amendment.  Secondly, let me inform hon. Moses Ali that the Tribunal is going to be headed by a high powered - somebody who will be to the level of a judge of Supreme Court and if we have trust in the Judiciary, judges pass judgement using opinions, the way cases have been presented.  Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment.

MR KATUREEBE: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I oppose the amendment because this is not a case of witch-hunting really.  (b) Seems to be a logical follow up of (a) In (a) you have had an investigation, and then what do you do with the results of the investigation?  If from the investigation, it appears that this and this has done, then you do the following.  This is a logical progression from (a).  It is not a question of witch-hunting.  Thank you.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived.)

(Clause 13 put and agreed to.)

(Clause 14 put and agreed to.)

Clause 15

DR TIBERONDWA: Clause 15, Mr Chairman, I am only following up an earlier agreement between me and the hon. Minister for Finance that the question of consultation between the Minister responsible for appointments and the Cabinet is a normal government procedure and therefore, we remove in consultation with Cabinet and consultation with the chief justice; both in 2(a) and in 2(b).

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I always keep my promises but I want us to compromise on this one.  The Minister should consult the chief justice.  Whether the character of the people to be on the tribunal and so on as such men and women whom the public will believe have given fair judgement.  So, we can put a full stop at with the chief justice because the other one is superfluous.  That is what is always done; consulting the Cabinet.  So, we can share fifty, fifty.  We put a full-stop t the end of the work justice and delete the rest.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I accept the sharing. (Laughter)

(Clause 15, as amended, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 17, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 18, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 19, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 20, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 21, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 22, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 23, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 24, put and agreed to.)

(Clause 25, put and agreed to.)

Clause 26

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, Clause 26, page 15; I would like to move the Amendment as circulated to delete 26(2) which says that the regulations in the second Schedule to this Statute shall in respect of the recovery on Non-Performing Assets, I want to delete (4), Sir.  There is 26(11) which says the Statutory Instrument made under Sub-Section (1) of this section shall not be effective until approved by the legislature.  I want it to be deleted because it defeats the purpose of a Statutory Instrument - a Statutory Instrument is used by the Minister to carry out proper regulation and functioning, and normally, the Minister would not issue any Statutory Instrument on matters regarded in the main body of the law, but on the regulations in the Schedules. But now, if every time, he has to issue these instruments, Parliament must be called first and approve it and then it is made, then we are reversing the whole administration; it will be very difficult.  That is why I want this to be deleted.

MR NDEGE: Mr Chairman, what he is saying is logic.  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I wish to oppose the Amendment because, although the Minister says, Statutory Instruments are left to the Minister to carry out day to day duties; this is an unusual case; somebody somewhere owes us some 60,000 million shillings; that is Shs.60 billion and that is why in fact this has had to come to Parliament. It should have been solved by the Minister for Finance and the UCB that falls under him. This is why the Committee of this House saw it fit that this House and any House after us, should assist Government and UCB and the Trust and all those institutions, to recover whatever can be recover so that we do not stand a chance of born agains and not born agains misusing any such powers.  Mr Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Minister because we are running a race of making a law, which is not going to be practicable; already the Schedule has been removed to the main body of the Statute.  Even this one, we are saying it has been removed from the Minister and you know how long it takes at times for us to get out of a situation where we debate, at time we start attacking the Press - the matter should have something to do, otherwise, why appoint him there, after sitting there, he must come here every time he needs something.  I think this one should be allowed.  I support the Minister, Mr Chairman.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I thank myself for opposing the Minister.  The reason is, in the consideration of the Committee, I know that Schedule I has now been moved to the main body of the Bill; Schedule II and Schedule III, which I consider equally crucial, if Schedules are going to be amended or changed by the Minister and they are so important to getting this thing done and done quickly, after all this law is just for a situation; it is for three years.  After three years the whole thing gets out, we are not interfering with the normal running and procedures of Government.  

I am saying, the reason why this Bill is here is because the other Bills, the systems failed to work and we are making these conditions to enable us to collect this money and it is allot of money; and I can also say the Minister may not be an involved party or some of us may not be an involved party.  What happens when some of us become involved parties and we are the same people who are going to issue these schedules; there is that human element which I want to protect - which I thought the committee felt it should be protected and that is why wee wanted the changes in these schedules to be subject to you, the House; so that we are sure that no stone is left unturned.  It is a situational legislation and -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Point of clarification.  The Section we are talking about talked of Statutory Order, but the Member is talking about the Statutory Instrument is what we are talking bout; Statutory Instrument doe not mean Schedule only.  So, it looks like the Member is concentrating on Schedule when we are talking about Statutory Instrument.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, Clause 26 says that; the Minister may by Statutory Instrument make such regulations as may be necessary or expedient for the effective and full implementation of the proposed and provision of this Statute, alright.  So, you are saying the Minister responsible for Finance should be the Minister responsible for this Statute. In the process of implementing this Statute, if the Minister wants to direct regulations here you are saying to him, in 26 he can do it, but in 26 (II), it will have no effect unless he brings these matters to Parliament.  So, what he was saying has no purpose, you can as well say that this is going to be the first Bill and Act to be executed when the Minister is not responsible for it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  You see what I mean.  But once you say a Minister is going to be responsible on your behalf, execute this Statute, how will the Minister now implement it when you are saying we are the ones as Parliament to implement the Statute?

Lastly, Sir, is that true, hon. Gasatura should not exaggerate. The Minister for Finance is not responsible for Shs.52 billion shillings, the Minister for Finance is responsible for all the public monies in this country and it comes to about shs.700 billion.  So, I do not think that is the reason you think 50 billion is too much for a Minister for Finance but 800 billion is alright, but the purpose, Sir, is a Statutory Instrument has a purpose.  This Statutory Instrument is the one that you give the Minister to supervise your implementation of your Statute; but now, you cannot eat your cake and have it. Since we have approved in the definition that the Minister responsible for this Statute was the Minister for Finance, we give him authority to execute the Statute.  

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I do follow the argument than saying if, for example, in that Statutory instrument the Minister we give him a black card and in issuing those Statutory Instrument, he touches the very regulations which we think are necessary like amending the whole or canceling the spirit of the Bill or canceling the whole Schedule - it will not be legal, because it will have given him powers to issue those Statutory Instruments.  One of the Statutory Instruments he may issue is to say, Schedule II comes out why not?  It is in order.  Mr Chairman, I am saying that, that is the reason why we want him to bring this.  Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, I was rising to support the Amendment as proposed by the Deputy Minister for Finance.  I support it because first of all, I do not agree with the argument of hon. Kanyomozi, that the Minister by Statutory Instrument can violate the Articles or the Clause of this Statute; because it is clear in 26(i), that the Minister, by Statutory Instrument makes such regulations as may be necessary for the effective and full implementation of the purposes and provisions of this Statute; that is one point.  So, the Minister - there is no way he can infringe or violate the clauses of this Statute. Secondly, 2(i) gives the Minister powers by 26(i) and then takes the bowl in the right hand by 26(ii).  So, Mr Chairman, I support the Deputy Minister for Finance that we delete 26 (ii).

MR TURYASHEMERERWA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to oppose the Amendment made by the Minister.  When you look at the second Schedule, Part II, it says; where collateral security given in respect of a non-performing assets is not sufficient to cover the principle, the Trust shall have the right to attach other personal assets of the defaulter.  Now, you are giving the Minister powers to actually go around this Schedule; this is why we are saying the Minister can issue a Statutory Instrument but later on, present it to Parliament.  This is why they are saying in case Parliament finds out that there is something the Minister is trying to hide, and then it becomes ineffective.  So, you can remember how we tried to actually to correct the Schedule, which was in the CA Statute, which was used by Commissioner for people to vote at the last minute; you know what it did to us.  Now, to accept this one, would be to do Uganda another harm.

MR OKWERA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose the Minister’s Amendment.  When we were working on this paper, our committee together with the Minister, we agreed in principle and that is now our paper, the Committee paper and the Minister paper; they work together and why is he saying this now? Why did he not bring this matter to the committee during the time -(Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.   These procedures we go in to make a law, is for us to end up with a very good law; that is why we go through all these steps. We would have stopped at the preliminary, but now we are going to the committee, we are going back to another report; it is for us to be looking at the regulations we are making.  Since I was on the committee, I have carried out consultations and hon. Members should also learn from me, I have learnt what is the purpose of a Statutory Instrument.  When there is a Statute, the Statutory Instrument is used to implement the Statute by the responsible Minister for that Statute.  

So, now I am saying, if the Minister uses Statutory Minister as the main body of the law, and whatever he wants correct to be done, we wait to come to Parliament and you have known how difficult it take us to attach all the problems we have; the administration of this Statute is going to be complicated.  So, now that I am wiser than I was last week, that should not be taken to be an offence, I admit my -(Interruption)

MR OKWERA:  Mr Chairman, that thinking of being wise now, maybe for some special purpose, but I am saying, this is a very sensitive matter because Uganda - public has lot over Shs.52 billion and in fact, as I am talking now, it may over sixty billion and we cannot trust anyone with the collection into Government shortage this Shs.60 billion; let the matter be brought here because the Ministry of Finance together with the UCB have already failed this country.  So, the House must have a stake in the matter from the beginning up to the end.  I oppose him.

MR KADAGA:  Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate that this position has caused a lot of excitement.  In fact, I would like to blame ourselves, we the NRC Members for failing to exercise our rights. Under the Parliamentary system, the Minister tables a Statutory Instrument in this House; if within 90 days, we have not objected, it becomes law.  So, it is actually our fault, it is not new here it is not new at all.  Let allow the Minister to table his Instrument, if we have an objection, within 90 days, we object, that is our role, and we have not done it.  So, there is nothing we are talking about Mr Chairman.  I support the Minister. (Applause)

MRS MUGARURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the Minister’s Amendment.  Reasons; we have said that this Trust should last for three years; this House is expiring any time, we are in transition, suppose -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS MUGARURA:  Mr Chairman, I beg your indulgence.  Suppose this instrument is ready in January or February when the House is on recess, does the Minister wait for six months for the Parliament to convene in order to carry out a normal routine?  So, with this I support the Minister Amendment.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I oppose the Minister’s Amendment.  First of all, we are making a law not because there is no law to recover loans the law to cover loans ordinarily is weak; we are therefore making a special law to deal with a special situation and we are saying that his law, because it is special it is not going to be permanent; it is going to be for a very short time or three years renewable.  This is one of the issues we dealt with at great length and we knew that it was important for this House to actually approve the Statutory Instrument. The current Minister for Finance may be an interested party in the tribunal matters, but who knows whether sometimes, there is a Minister who may be actually involved in the non-performing assets.  Humanly, he can actually pass a Statutory Instrument to protect himself.  

Therefore, we want to save that kind of situation, we are making this law, not for the Minister who is there now; we are making the law for a situation which may arise in future so that in fact, what we intended to achieve, we do not achieve it.  Therefore, we cannot create any more loopholes in this law; so that some people in future can away these non-performing laws and therefore, I oppose the Minister’s Amendment.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

(Clause 26 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 27

DR TIBERONDWA:  Clause 27(i), (ii) and (iii) are superfluous, because they state what the Schedule states and all they are stating is already there in the schedules themselves.  I do not know why it was written like this, but I would like to propose that we delete 27(i), 27(ii) and 27(iii).

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: I would like to inform hon. Tiberondwa that this is a part of the amendment, and we do not have a cause to tell when you go - this is what he is gong to say.  I think I support his Amendment.  Some of these things were put there for fears and for good administration I had proposed an amendment relating to the principle of Statutory Order.  If a Minister gives a Statutory Order, it is irrational to require him to come to Parliament; where you do not want him to issue it; you put this in the main law and the Minister will come here for an amendment if he wants to do anything.  But it sounds untraditional in administration that the Minister, you make a Statutory Instrument, which you cannot gazette, because that is their procedures on how a Statutory Instrument is drawn, how it must be gazetted in the open Gazette and so on. Now, to say Minister on your desk, draw Statutory Instrument, keep it, until Parliament will have time to approve it then you, implement it.  You are weakening the administration and now that in Section 26, you have amended it not to be necessary, to bring Statutory Instrument to the Parliament is now superfluous here to say in this case you should bring it.  What you can do, you can say, a Minister shall not issue a Statutory Instrument on the Schedule but in law, I am not a lawyer, you bring that Schedule as you have done for Schedule 1 into the main body of the Bill, then the Minister will not do anything on that provision.  

What I want to say briefly, we want to reflect 10 years later on, when they read where the law makers, Mwandha, Kadaga, Kato, they made this law, say, yes.  What did they think they were unchasting; we want to make a law which will say, those guys, those women and men were great legislators, hon. ladies and so on.  This is why I say we must legislate cleanly.  So, Sir, I want to move my Amendment -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Please, put your Amendment.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: My Amendment is to delete; ‘the Minister may by Statutory Order with approval.’  In fact, it is to delete the whole provision. After you have approved that the Minister can issue a certain instrument to regulate the performance of this Statute and the Schedule is part of the Statute.  Now, you are repeating yourself again to say; now, we take away the power again.  So, I want this to be deleted as unnecessary in light of the provision we have passed earlier.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you proposing deletion sub-clause (iv)?

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Yes, Sir, because that is the only provision left in that Clause.  So, 27(iv) should be deleted.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I would take part of the argument.  The part of argument I am taking is that if we delete it, then I would like an Amendment to read as follows: ‘The Minister shall not change or amend the Schedules to this Bill without approval of the Legislature.’  Why am I saying that?  I want to support - if that is acceptable to the Minister, I will feel a bit comfortable and that Clause 27 will stay that way.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Kanyomozi’s Amendment, the Ministry is not interested to amend this Statute. The Ministry is ready to implement this Statute. 

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I would like to explain the reason why I am saying this.  I have here -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister has already accepted the Amendment.  

(Clause 27, as amended agreed to.)

(Question put that Clause 27 as amended, do stand part of the Bill, agreed to.)

Clause 28

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I am glad I did not circulate something on Clause 28 but for me I think it is necessary to limit the power of Parliament as to how long it can extend the duration of the Trust, if convinced necessary.  So, I want a full stop to end at the word period and cancel ‘not exceeding one year’ because we are saying here that Parliament if it is extended it cannot go, it must be one year.  It could be six months, it could any period Parliament things should be given to the extension depending on the work of the Trust.  So, I want to put a full stop at the end of the word ‘period’ and delete ‘not exceeding one year,’ so that Parliament after listening to any reason for extension can decide the period it can give.  That is my Amendment.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to support the Minister because if we leave that Clause there and God forbid, the Trust has not completed its work in four years -(Interjection)- I am assuming there is an extension of one year and if we fix it there with no flexibility, we must put provisions as to what would happen if the Trust has not completed its work during that period. So, it is better to give Parliament any way rather than restricting with that phrase.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, while I support the Minister, I would like to add between the word Statute and Board - all of them last three years.  It is a task force prepare for one particular job.  In other words, I am trying to work against the possibility of appointing another Board.  This Board should continue together with the Statute to do a particular job.  So, I am saying that we should say ‘The Statute and the Board of Trustees shall continue in force and so on.’  So, that it is one task force rather than appearing like a parastatal.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, the Board is established by the Statute.  For as the Statute ends, the Board also goes.  So, whether you put the Board, I do not see any requirement for this thing.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, what hon. Tiberondwa was saying is that if a Board with a body on Trust had made some achievement and experience in hardening in this case, because in Law we say, a Board should be there for three years.  Meaning that if we make an extension for two additional years, within the Law you can appoint another Board.  For me, I had wanted continuity; that is why I had expected you would have supported me to say that for any sufficient reason, a Minister can recommend the dropping of a Director, a Board Member because they are going to be there now until they do the work.  But that was defeated. So, now I accepted defeated and that is the Law now. But if the Law says that you cannot make it law that the Director will be a Director for the duration of the life of the Statute, because he may think it is a given case.  So, I think these people could say their Membership is renewable, if they want to be renewed but I think you must give a time limit for them to do a job, be judged by that time, if they have done well, they can extend their term. So, I oppose that Amendment.

(Question put on the amendment and negatived.)

(Clause 28 as amended agreed to.)

(Question put on Clause 28 that as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to.)

The First Schedule

DR TIBERONDWA: The original proposal that the First Schedule be moved to Clause 6 of the Bill -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: That is already done.

The Second Schedule

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, since Schedule 1, has been moved to the main Law, it is Constitutional that Schedule 2 becomes Schedule 1, and Schedule 3 becomes Schedule 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Marwas, you had put the point that Schedule 2, therefore, becomes Schedule 1.

The First Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: The First Schedule is what was the Second Schedule.  So, now we look at the First Schedule.

MR NDEGE:  Mr Chairman, I have two Amendments on the First Schedule which was the Second Schedule in this Bill.  The First one is that Number 1 is suggesting that - if the Board and Members of staff irregularly grant the loan, they now will be responsible for this loan. I say that normally, anybody in a position, especially in the bank, you lend somebody money in good faith. If you lend me John Ndege money in good faith and defaults, I think it would be really - normally you say good faith -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, put your Amendment hon. Member.

MR NDEGE:  Can you protect me, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: You go ahead, please.

MR NDEGE:  So, I am suggesting that we amend - that if these loans were granted to themselves or institutions where they have an interest, then we can hold them responsible. The Board - Number one in other words.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ndege, please make your Amendment clear first.

MR NDEGE:  In other words, what I am saying is that it should read ‘The Board and some members of the bank who grant the loans to themselves or where they have an interest, in these non-performing assets, should be held individually or solely responsible.’  Now, the difference between this and the other is that, these loans would be where they have an interest and not where they did it during the course of their duty.

MR KATUREEBE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to differ from hon. Ndege’s interpretation of this regulation.  No one is trying to punish a bank staff for lending money in the course of their duties. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Is it right for the hon. Ndege to waste the precious time of the House?  Has he circulated his Amendment to the House?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, the Member is in order.

MR KATUREEBE:  I think the operative phrase in this regulation is that which says - in disregard of established regulations.  If a banker lends money in good faith, in the normal course of business, according to established regulations, he is not covered under here.  It is only when he lends money in disregard of established regulations and that would take care of the worries hon. Ndege has.

(Question of the amendment put and negatived.)

MR NDEGE:  My second amendment was that they may write off loans of peasants.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are adding another sub-Clause?

MR NDEGE:  Yes, I am suggesting No.6.  On the First Schedule now, I want us to add No.6 - ‘That the Trust, with the approval of the Legislature, may write off loans of peasants lent under the Rural Farmers’ Scheme. I am doing this because I think we want to be very specific.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of Procedure.  Sir, I think as a matter of procedure, we should go sub-section by section of the Schedule because he is now on No.6 but some of us had some Amendments -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Very well, let us go on to Section 2.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, on Section 1 of the Schedule, the reason why I am going to bring this Amendment - If you look at Clause 14 of this Statute, it is assumed that member of the Board of Trustees, as well as the administrator and other people, can do thing in good faith and it is not assumed really in this sub-section 1 that members of the staff and Directors of the bank  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, hon. Tiberondwa bring out your Amendment before you start debating it.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Now, my amendment is this; Schedule 2 - Now Schedule 1 - I want to add at the end of those words because the phrase reads like this, ‘The Board Members and staff of the bank who granted loans which are listed s non-performing assets in disregard of established regulations, shall be held individually and solely responsible.’  I want to add these words, ‘Provide that, no act of a member of the Board or an employee of the bank, shall, where that act wad done in good faith in the course of his duties subject that Member, employee or any person acting under his direction, personally to any action, liability or claim.’  

I have copied these actual words from Clause 14 - the protection for members of the Board of the bank as well as employees of the bank; I am saying this because many of these officials and Directors of the bank did their job in good faith and it may be these people who have defaulted.  So, really to think that a person who has granted a bad loan - a loan that has not been paid should be followed without considering that can also do these things in good faith.  I think it will be very unfair.  I am particularly bringing out the question where politicians and in some cases, even Heads of State would just write a chit to a Bank Official and they say; ‘can you please solve so and so’s problems and this Bank Manager has no chance to say, No!  He gives this -(Interjections) Mr Chairman, let me finish. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

DR TIBERONDWA: Let us be very practical.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, in the First Schedule, I do not see why we should waste a lot of on Number 1.  It is very clear that the staff and Board Members who granted loans, which are listed as non-performing assets in disregard of established regulations, this business of saying chits and what have you.  If they are falling under this small section, I think this is the guideline that we have to use; either somebody to confide that what he did was through the right channel or not but this business of saying - in humanitarian, good faith and what have you, then it means we are going astray of the operations.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I do appreciate this legal approach of in disregard of established regulations but we should also have provision if that is going to be the case of following up other persons who are holding responsible positions and who made this poor officer do what he did; because somebody is a Head of State and he writes a chit and you follow what he has told you to and now you are being followed.  What do you do? Sir, will the Trust be in position to follow the Head of State or a Minister? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member raise your voice, please.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Mr Chairman I would like to oppose the amendment for two reasons. (1) If you look at Clause 14; ‘Taxation of Trustees and employees of Trust’ I thought that could cater for part of what he is saying - which says ‘No act of a member of the Board or employee for the Trust shall’ and so forth.  Now, I am saying partially it protects those people but secondly and more importantly, the Law provides machinery and that machinery, a former staff or present member of the bank who has issued a loan under circumstances, which he is talking about, should present his case.  Let him present his case to the Board; and in case the Board cannot satisfy him or her.  Then the tribunal is there to look at those circumstances.  If we go providing over protection, then, in the end there is no reason why should even provide such a law.  So, I oppose this Amendment.

(Question on the Amendment put and negatived..)

CAPT. GASATURA: I want to seek the indulgence of the Chair, Mr Chairman.  Sub-Section 1, starts ‘the Board Members and staff’ and I do not have any circulated amendment, but you just realised the confusion it can create. Board Members, in definition says the Board is the Board of Trustees.  So, if you agreed Mr Chairman and the House we would specify the Board member of the bank and staff of the bank. Because it says Board members and staff of the bank.  The Board members and the staff - now -(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Please, I heard you just allow me; but Board members can be Board members of the Trustee because by definition, we have said the Board is Trustee - Board of Trustee, not Board of the bank.  So, I would, if the Minister permits, I would want just an in-fill after the Board members, we say, ‘of the bank and staff of the bank’ so that there is no confusion, as the Board can be -(Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, it is only hon. Gasatura who can read this and understand. I do not understand what we are talking about.  This is very clear; we are qualifying which Board members and which staff of the bank and not only being staff and Board member but also what they did. You do not read the half sentence, read and complete the sentence, you will get the meaning.  So, it is not necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not necessary?

The First Schedule

MR NDEGE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. My second Amendment on the First Schedule which was the second Schedule is that ‘The Trust with approval of the Legislature, may write off  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Which number are you on?

MR NDEGE:  I am suggesting we add on No.6.  ‘The Trust with approval of the Legislature may write off loans of peasants lent under the Rural Farmers’ Scheme.  Mr Chairman, I am saying this because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, put the wordings in full.  Let us hear the wordings of the amendment which you are moving.

MR NDEGE:  The Trust, with the approval of the Legislature, may write off loans of peasants lent under the Rural Farmers’ Scheme. I picked on the Rural Farmers’ Scheme because first of all, they do not understand the scheme.  Two; they were not given any money in cash.  Everything was done in kind and I have four people in Luka who borrowed money in 89 and the price of maize went as down as Ushs 15 and these people are just helpless.  So, I suggest that since we are not allowed to see the list with this Trust, they should list these farmers whose percentage of the total loan is so small but write off these loans under scheme and start a proper scheme.  Thank you very much.

MRS MASABA:  Mr Chairman, I support the arrangement.  In that many of these, rural farmers were basically women and some of these in puts were given out late by the authorities; and in the end the women lost everything, actually, it is serious situation in my district.  Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I think we will be causing problems to classify these people in the North. We have put there a Trust, we have told the people go to the Trust; explain yourselves why you were not able to pay. In the wisdom of the Trust, if they find the peasants got a loan, such circumstances that they cannot pay, we have given it power to let them go. I do not think we can really classify what about traders, what about whom?  So, I think we leave this to the Trust.  Sir, I oppose that Amendment, because the next one will be now for lawyers who borrowed, another one for accountants who borrowed.  No, let the Trust look at all of them and take appropriate action. I oppose the Amendment.

(Question put on the amendment and negatived to.)

The First Schedule

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule

DR TIBERONDWA:  Second Schedule, Mr Chairman.  I am not very sure as to why this Schedule is put there.  Because I think we need a clean balance sheet of the bank, whether wee are going to privatize it or not.  So, I do not think that we should over play this idea of privatisation; I would like to get this schedule really removed.  Because there are so many organizations which are going to be privatized under section 25 of the public enterprises reform and the divestiture statute.  Why do we have to put - do we have to write everything; that thing is going to be privatized! Do we have to do that?  Why is this especially, put there for UCB, as if the purpose for what we are doing is to privatize rather than to have a clean balance sheet.  So, I want to propose that we delete Schedule 3 or Schedule 2 now.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, this provision here, for me is a total surprise.  This Parliament has passed a Law, regarding divestiture of public enterprise.  It has made a Law on who companies can shift from one category to another category.  But the Law we must amend or change or do anything when we talk about privatization. But adding a schedule on whatever law we are going to pass here in order to affect full law, which exists, will be difficult to pick these laws, for all places.  So, I think in this aspect, it is superfluous is the wrong place, Parliament can demand, bring that Statute and we amend it to the effect on the privatization of UCB the way we want it.  Then we are amending one law, which is together.  I want to support hon. Tiberondwa that to be here it is meaningless because these people who are going to handle recovery of Non-Performing Assets, they have no power to handle divestiture of UCB.  So, now you put them to know what their duty is to recover these assets; finished, and they go.  We want privatization we go to the PERD Law and amend it the way the Parliament wants.  We shall be seen to be better organized legislates.  So, I support hon. Tiberondwa.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, we know we pass this law, and it is for sometime now and privatization has been going on.  Members of this House have already expressed concern about the application of the law as it is.  Because of the importance of UCB in the financial sector of this economy, we want to emphasise it again that in case, after all we are going to clean the balance sheet with Ushs 60,000,000,000.  We are borrowing money to do this work.  Now, in case they are going to privatize this bank, then this law should apply.  We have a reason for it, because I have also documents here which, actually, make it more less a foregone conclusion.  We do not want, and I think in the report of the committee I did spell out those problems and issue and options. These options, knowing this place as we all do, the Nile Complex is gone.  Did it follow the PERD Law? There are so many other things, which have gone, yes, because  -(Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, hon. Kanyomozi has been picked by this Parliament to represent us in the disposal of these public assets.  Mr Kanyomozi has sat with his Colleagues we empowered, they have disposed of this Nile.  Now, really is he in orderly business for the same man, without even telling us how it came to disposal of divestiture, for him to disassociate himself from his action on which Parliament sent him to do? Because this gives a wrong impression.  The members of the Board wondered whether if there were a problem in the divestiture of the hotel? Was it done outside the law? Hon. Kanyomozi as a Member what has he done? Because you can undermine all decisions of all committees of whatever we do, if we take part in their decisions, we wake out and now deny what we have done before; and I hate this system of operation. Is hon. Kanyomozi in order, Sir, as a Member of the Committee which disposed of Nile Hotel to tell us that there are worries which he has not told us about that disposal?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. members, Dr Tiberondwa moved an Amendment seeking to delete schedule 2; and that Amendment was acceded to by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR COUNCIL TO RESUME

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee reports there to.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, the Committee of the Whole House considered the ‘Non-Performing Assets Recover Trust Bill, 1994’ and passed it and made some amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, ‘The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill, 1994’ be read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill read a Third Time.)

(The Title settled and Bill passed.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the House to Tuesday next week.

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned till Tuesday, 9 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)





