Thursday 3rd August 2000

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

P R A Y E R S

(The Deputy Speaker, Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)
The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS.

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr. D’ujanga Simon Giw

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On behalf of the entire Parliament, I wish to congratulate the new Member for Okoro County for having been democratically elected Member of Parliament. At the same time, I want to congratulate the people for having carried out a successful election –(Applause). 

Hon. Members, you are aware that at the beginning of this Session, we constituted Sessional Committees. Now we have a new member who does not belong to any of the Sessional Committees, which are supposed to start work on the Budget tomorrow. The office of the Clerk has, in advance, received an application from the Member though. This was before swearing in, but now that he has been sworn in, he has indicated he would like to serve on the Natural Resources Committee. And since this is his application, it has to be confirmed by approval of this House, so now I want to put the question to this application.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, hon. Member, you belong to the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources. I believe you are acquainted with what is being done there.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NON-PERFORMING ASSESTS RECOVERY TRUST (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Opio): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I was discussing this Bill with the Chairman on phone and he had said that they needed time to discuss this Bill further. I would like to find out again whether he is ready so that I move for the Bill to be read the Second Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is really yours, if you are ready, you move your motion. If the Chairman of the Committee is not ready, when the time comes, he will let us know.

MR.OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Non-performing Assets Recovery Trust (Amendments) Bill, 2000’ be read for the Second Time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded, proceed.

MR. OPIO: Mr. Speaker, the Non-performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART) is a body corporate established by the Statute No. 11 in October, 1994. It was established to expeditiously recover certain loans and investments made by Uganda Commercial Bank whose recovery was overdue.  Last time we requested Parliament to extend the time of operation of NPART for another two years, with effect from 10th October 1999. 

Our amendments to this Statute are in two areas. The first area is to increase the membership of the Non- performing Assets Recovery Tribunal from three members to five. When we have only three members of the Board or Tribunal, when one falls sick, we automatically have only two. One becomes chairperson and the other a member. We cannot do much with that type of membership. So, we have found it necessary to increase the number to more than three. And in keeping with tradition, we wanted an odd number. That is why, instead of four, we ended up suggesting five members. Those who have sat on committees know the problems of having only three members and that is why we want to amend the membership of this tribunal to more than the current three members.  

The second amendment is to extend the operations of the Non-performing Assets Recovery to include recovery of certain loans and investments made by the Uganda Development Bank whose recovery is overdue. When we look at the loans, which were extended by Uganda Development Bank, we find that the non-performing loans total about Shs. 56.32 billion.  

The non-performing loans are divided into two. There are loans which were guaranteed by Government, and that is the money which came from outside Uganda and was put in Uganda Development Bank, from which Ugandans borrowed. Government automatically guaranteed this money. And this category consists of Shs.50.93 billion, of which the principal totals Shs.20.23 billion and the interest Shs.30.71 billion.  

There is also that set of loans from the funds Government puts in the bank known as trust fund loans. The breakdown is as follows: principal is Shs.1.86 billion and the interest is Shs.3.53 billion, totalling to Shs.5.39 billion. 

The grand total, as stated above, is 56.3 billion shillings, which is overdue. This is over and above the loans that are still operating, those that the borrowers have not defaulted. So, it is the Government’s decision that these non-performing loans be transferred from UDB to the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. This will enable the structure, which is already created, and the specialists who are in this area to make sure that they collect this amount of money on behalf of UDB.

I would just like to go back and say that the Non Performing Assets Recovery Trust has performed relatively well. Out of the 65.4 billion shillings net portfolio, which was transferred to the Trust, the Trust has done relatively well, we are now left with an outstanding amount equal to 26.2 billion shillings, which should now be collected. Out of this outstanding portfolio of Shs.26.2 billion, over 92 percent is at various stages of recovery. These amounts are within recovery. 

When the new Constitution, the 1995 Constitution, came into play, it increased the layers of appeal to three. If the borrower is not satisfied at the tribunal, he or she can appeal to the Court of Appeal, and then if they are not satisfied there, they can appeal to the Supreme Court. Before, we only had two layers. From the tribunal, the appeal would only be taken to the Supreme Court. Now many borrowers would like to have their cases treated at all levels, if possible. So, many of these outstanding loans are at various levels within these courts and therefore some of them will be resolved soon. The loans were about 2080. We are now left with about 100 loans, which constitute Shs.26.2 billion. So, the point I am raising here is that the Trust has performed relatively well. The amount left to be collected can be collected, but because of the processes, which we have gone through, this has been delayed.  

Also, the Land Act, which we passed here, brought in changes, which make it very difficult to resolve land cases. So, apart from the layers, which you have to go through, this is another constraint. In spite of that, I would like to state here that the Non Performing Trust Fund has done relatively well. I would like to urge Members here to agree to transfer the amount, which is overdue, from the Uganda Development Bank to the Trust, so as to enable the Trust to collect this amount from the borrowers.

I would like also to state here that we in Uganda lack an institution that can lend medium and long term loans.  UDB was created purposely to lend long term and medium loans to the people in this country. Today, the bank is encumbered by this amount of non-performing assets. Government’s intention is to clean up the balance sheet of UDB and take these non-performing assets to the Trust, which is capable of collecting this money. We want to allow the Uganda Development Bank to have a clean balance sheet and continue to perform its functions of lending to Ugandans money for long term and medium term loans.

It is also Government’s intention to make sure that the restructured UDB operates as a professional body free from Government and political interference. The Government would therefore, like the bank to have a core investor, who would bring in the private culture into the bank. This would enable the bank to perform its role of lending money to the people of Uganda, which can be paid within a medium term or/and long term period.

With these observations, I would like to recommend that the House approve these amendments to the Non-performing Assets Recovery Trust. There are only two amendments, to extend the number of members on the Tribunal from three to five and to allow the transfer of non performing assets from the Uganda Development Bank to the Non Performing Recovery Trust.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. We will listen to the Vice Chairperson of the Committee.

THE VICECHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: (Mr. Abura Kene): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members, as you have heard, the Committee met the Minister and discussed this report with him. The report, which I want to present now, is an interim report because the Committee felt that there were certain issues, which should be clarified first. This will not take long. The Minister should not worry, because we think if we can meet him, even within one hour, all this will be cleared. The NPART Statute of 1994 –(Interruption).

MR. NOBERT MAO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek guidance from the Speaker on whether we have provisions for interim reports. It seems that this is going to be time wasting. Why do you not get your act together and present something serious and final?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe he is just reporting. Let us listen to him and then we shall see what to do.

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that decision. As I said, there are certain issues which we want clarified.  

The NPART Statute of 1994 covers the non-performing assets of the former Uganda Commercial Bank only. This august House extended the Trust’s mandate in October 1999, for another period of two years. This extension was on condition that it would be the last one and that the operations would be cost effective and streamlined. 

This Bill is seeking the mandate of this House to amend the above Statute, in order to widen the scope of the Trust to include Uganda Development Bank’s non-performing loans. In accordance with Rule 93(3) of the Rules of Procedure, the NPART (Amendment) Bill, 2000 was read for the First Time on 4th July 2000. Under Rule 99(6), the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is accordingly submitting the interim report on the above Bill.  

The Committee met the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investment and NPART –(Interruption)

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In his opening remarks, he was not seeking for the mandate of this House to extend its period. He clearly stated that as far as they were concerned, they had not yet come up with the final report. Now, since he is not seeking for the mandate of this House to extend the days on these crucial issues, which are supposed to be justified, is it now in order for him to proceed to tell us what is happening before we get the final report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, on behalf of the Committee, the Member is trying to give us reasons why they have not been able to make a final report on this matter. I think he is doing that with the understanding that maybe we will agree to adjourn so that they complete. He has to give an explanation, because this Bill was read for the First Time on 4th.  He has to tell us why they have not been able to deal with a Bill, which has just two clauses. That is why he is trying to labour and tell us in detail why this happened. 

MR. ABURA KENE: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the Committee met the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investments, and NPART board members. The Committee evaluated the performance of NPART in relation to the amount collected.  A total of Shs.65 billion was identified for collection and then referred to NPART in October 1995. NPART has so far collected Shs.24.2 billion, which is only 37.5 percent of the 65 billion shillings. A total of Shs.1.4 billion had been collected since the extension of the term of NPART to October 1999. However, these collections need to be compared with the costs incurred on NPART. The committee was worried about how much we are spending out of the money we are collecting. That was one of the issues, which the Committee felt should be clarified.  

The Committee wondered how much more they would be able to collect, if they could take several months to collect only 1.4 billion shillings! How long will it take them to collect it? That was an issue that was raised. It was however noted that there are a number of cases before the courts of the law and this is said to be one of the causes of delay in realising better collections so far.  

The Bill seeks to transfer the non-performing loans of Uganda Development Bank to NPART and also to amend the loan title of the principle law. The Committee agreed that there is need for financial institutions which provide medium and long-term development loans, in order to promote investments. This is very important if we are to develop faster. 

The following issues need to be clarified before the Committee makes a final report: 
    1. What measures has the Minister taken to strengthen NPART? Since we extended it, we were supposed to get a report in this House, but so far, we have not received any. So, we are asking him to give us the measures he has taken to strengthen NPART.
  
    2. Whether UDB needs a core-investor. The Committee thinks that UDB is supposed to give loans. Now, why do you bring some other person to again start giving loans to UDB, which will also give them to another investor? This is one of the issues, which the Committee felt the Minister should explain. 

    3. Need for a Policy Statement on UDB. The Committee is saying that we need clarification on what Government’s position and Policy on UDB is now. This is one of the issues, which has caused the delay of the final report.

    4. The Committee wants a comprehensive list of UDB bad loans and the possibility of their recovery. This was of great concern to the Committee.  

    5. The loans to be transferred to NPART. The Minister has already mentioned this.

The Committee seeks the indulgence of this House to allow more time to meet with the Minister and consider the above important issues before the amendment can be incorporated within the principle law. We think this could help the investment in this country. Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, we have a motion on the Floor from the Minister who brought the Bill. He has justified why the amendments are necessary, but before we have a debate, there was need to get a report from the Committee, which dealt with this particular Bill. You have heard that they are not in position to immediately recommend the adoption of the amendment because of issues they need to clear with the Minister.  

Although, of course, as you see from the report, what the chairperson of the Committee has reported as having been recovered differs greatly with what the Minister reported as having been recovered. The Minister has said that over 40 billion shillings was recovered and the remaining 26 billion is at different stages of recovery. But the Committee is saying that only 25 billion shillings was recovered.  I do not know whether the information passed or not, but this is something, which you will note from this report. So, maybe before I make a decision, I do not know whether anyone of you wants to make a contribution on these excuses, which have been brought by the Committee, as to why they are not in position to produce a full report.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Looking at the importance of NPART and the issue of bringing the bad loans from UDB to NPART, I would like to call on the Minister responsible for this sector and the Committee to rationalise their positions. I would like them to expeditiously have this law passed, because a lot of money is at stuck out there with borrowers who must pay back. 

The point I am raising is with regard to what the vice-chairperson of this Committee stated. He said that if they were given one hour, they would have rationalised their positions. I would not like to agree to that position, because what he enumerated as the issues on the second last page, are very important issues, which cannot be rationalised within one hour. So, in the interest of making a good law, I would like to propose that more time is given to them, but more specifically we give them six days from today. We request that next week on Tuesday or Wednesday, they should have rationalised their positions, and they should bring this Bill for amendment.  Otherwise, I support the Bill.  I thank you.

DR. MALLINGA STEVEN (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think we all realise the importance of NPART and what they have done. We realise how useful they have been to the Uganda Commercial Bank in collecting the debts, which would otherwise have not been collected. 

It has almost been a custom in this House to thank the Committee for producing a good report. But looking through this report, this time, I do not really thank the Committee. It seems they did not do their work well.  What we have heard from the Minister is comprehensive and justifies transferring the loans, which are not recoverable from UDB, to NPART. This report from the Committee asks questions, which they should have answered in the Committee. For example, this extension was on condition that it would be the last one if the operation was cost effective. This should have been found out in the Committee. They should have talked to the Minister. They should have talked to the representatives of NPART, who would have shown them the figures, so that they see whether the operations of NPART are justified. They should not bring this kind of thing to the House. That is the job they were given to do.

Secondly, there is really no justification for bringing what they call ‘an interim report’ here. We have heard from the Minister and the Committee raises questions, which have been partially answered by the Minister.  Question number one –(Interruption)

MR. RUZINDANA: Thank you, honourable Member on the Floor, for giving way. I am a Member of the Committee and the Committee was informed yesterday that it should present a report today. We were not yet ready to present a report, but because there would have been no business today, we actually brought this report - (Laughter)- that is a fact.  So, indeed, I agree that we were not ready, but because we had to come to the House, we have come to the House in order to ask for more time.

MS. KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member. I also want to thank hon. Ruzindana for the information that he has given us, but this makes me wonder whether our Committee on Business and Welfare is doing good business for us. 

There is a report by the Committee on Works, which is ready. You know very well that the public has been yearning to have the Condominium law in place. The Committee did its work very well, they tabled the report and they have waited for it to be debated in this Parliament. The Minister said that he will not be there, but that Ministry has got about four or five Ministers. He said he is not around so the report cannot be debated. I am very shocked that the Committee on Finance was forced to bring a report here, when they are not ready, and when we have business, which is ready, and we cannot discuss it! Mr. Speaker, I wonder what this country is going to be or to do with such inefficiency. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have to answer the first observation made by hon. Ruzindana, a Member of this Committee, that they were told that they have to present a report. I do not know about that, but what we must now realise, from the interim report, that the Bill was read for the First Time on 4th. Any Committee would know that after fifteen days there should be a report on the Bill. So, if you count fifteen days from 4th, it is not justified for somebody to say that they have been caught by surprise with the Bill coming for the Second Reading. In any case, this is not one of the reasons that was highlighted by the chairman when he was presenting the report. So, they cannot say that they were prompted yesterday to bring a report. When was it drafted? Was it being drafted today? So, I think let us just accept the fact that they have certain queries, which they want answered, not that they were surprised that the report should be presented today.  

As for the observation by the hon. Member for Ntungamo, you quite remember that the Condominium law was supposed to come soon after we had finished urgent business. Because the Business and Welfare Committee re-arranged the work of this House to make sure that the Budget is dealt with and finished this month, that report has not been considered. But we are aware that the report is there. We shall not do anything with it because it is a Bill which would require about five Parliament days. And this cannot be done. Whereas this particular Bill, with just two clauses, is something which we can handle one afternoon and finish. So, I think, that is why the Speaker, using his powers, and together with the Committee, decided that this very small Bill, which is not controversial, should come first. He did that so that we could finish it and then Committees could go on and deal with the Budget, but anyway, this is what we have.  

The Committee is not ready, as you have heard. They want one hour. I do not know whether we can give them one hour.  Hon. Okumu Ringa’s assessment was that they cannot do all that in one hour, but according to the Committee, they just need one hour.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF ECONOMIC MONITORING (Mr. Kweronda Ruhemba) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think the chairman of the Committee may be right, but actually, some of these issues do not even have to take one hour. We can clarify on them, here on the Floor, to the satisfaction of Members. And if you can allow us, I am sure we would clarify, because they are very simple –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, if you can allow me to offer some clarification. 

On point number one, as to whether the principle of UDB should be transferred to NPART, the answer is yes. I think they should, because, first of all, if we do not transfer them to this very NPART, we shall have to create another NPART -  (Interruption)

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier on, you said that the normal procedure has been to have a report before business progresses, and you gave the opportunity to the chairperson of the Committee to put his case as to why they need more time. Indeed, he said they need more time, and I imagine that this time they are seeking will be time to clear these things with the Minister concerned and when they come here they will report accordingly. I, therefore, wonder whether it is procedurally correct to continue and have the Minister explain what he ought to have explained to the Committee so that when they come here they tell us what the harmonised position is.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a point. My reading of what the Minister was trying to say is that the points which really require clarification can be cleared here. I think he was saying that there is nothing that requires an adjournment. That was his position, but you are right, they are not ready and they have said so. 

Dr. Mallinga was saying that they have not done a good job, but instead of tearing our Committee apart on this and then at the end of the day we adjourn, I think we should just leave it there. Hon. Mallinga, you will have an opportunity to contribute, now we can really say that the Committee is not ready, and therefore, there is a huddle that prevents us from having a general debate on the motion before us.  

The Minister has done his part, he has moved a motion and we are only waiting for the final touches on the Committee's report then we can have a full debate on the principles in this Bill. Therefore, I think, we rather say that we leave this matter at that, the Committee should be given time and we shall adjourn the House now. 

Before we do so, I want to remind you that you have been given the schedules of our work. This House will adjourn to enable the Committees work on the Budget Estimates. It was also made clear to you that instead of taking much time in the Plenary dealing with the Budget, let the Committees seriously work on their reports. So, when reports are brought here and discussed and passed, we do not have to spend a lot of time again on the same issues that have been covered in the reports. If you are not a Member of a Committee but you think they dealing with a Ministry which you are interested in, our Rules are very clear on that. Any Member can go to any Committee and make a contribution and research will be carried out so that when the report is brought here it is well researched, and we will not waste our time, because we have a lot of legislation to do. 

We have very many Bills to deal with, including the Condominium Bill, as the hon. Member for Ntungamo has said. We have the Presidential Elections Bill. We have been working on an interim one. We have the Parliamentary Elections Bill, the Political Organisations Bill, the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, and so many others. And the time we have before the end of the year is ver little. After the year you know the other activities that will come. So, that is why I am appealing to you to attend to your Committees and to go to those Committees where you think you have keen interest. Air out your views so that the Committees benefit from them. 

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Speaker, the Executive would like very much to co-operate with the Parliament and to ensure that business is concluded expeditiously. So, we are appealing that the schedules for our appearance should be circulated quickly, so that each Ministry knows which day to come. We would like this so that we do not have to come here to seek adjournments. So, it is just an appeal. Please issue the timetable for our appearance. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to announce to members of Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee that the meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and First Deputy Prime Minister has been changing because of his schedule. But we have agreed with him now, so he is coming at 3.00 p.m.  on Monday. It has been difficult to find members to give them this information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think we can utilise this time. If you have any information relating to a Committee, it can be made here before I adjourn. 

MR. STEVEN BAMWANGA: I am just seeking simple clarification, Mr. Speaker. The work of Parliament is not to govern but rather to make the Government govern better.  When we came to this Parliament this afternoon, I looked at the Order Paper and when I read through, there was precisely no business at all to transact. And I think that it is the role of Government to bring Bills before Parliament to discuss. Blame is being put on Members of Parliament and the Committees, but I do not think we are responsible for really organising Bills for debate and the business in this House. So, in future, we should not be blamed for delaying Government work. It is the Ministries which should be blamed for not bringing business to this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not know whether you are accusing the Ministry, because the Minister is ready. He brought his Bill, it was read, it was sent to the Committee, and he has now come and moved, Maybe not successfully, but he has moved a motion. It is now open for us to debate, but our Committee, which is supposed to have given us a report, has a problem and they have explained why they have that problem. So, I do not think we should really go back over this matter. We should deal with the next business, namely the Committee work for the days I am going to announce.  

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My Chairman and Vice are not here, but I heard you say that there is the Presidential Elections Bill. Just this morning, members of the Committee were asking themselves whether this Bill was there. So, I just want to be clarified whether this Bill is really there because this morning we were talking about it and everybody seemed not to have it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was saying what I know, first of all, the Parliamentary Elections Bill is there. But it is very well known that the Presidential Elections Bill has to come here before the end of the year. It will come may be before we finish the Budget or just soon after. It will definitely come. But I was just telling you that according to us, in the Business and Welfare Committee, we anticipate that the Bill will come. Therefore, I was only telling you that it will come.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Mr. Speaker, I am just seeking some guidance. You are aware that these days we are so committed, morning to afternoon. Now, according to the motion on the Floor, while the Chairperson is saying we give them one hour, the Minister is ready to see that he finalises with the Bill. I wish you could tell us now whether this will be put on the Order Paper tomorrow, so that we can come ready to debate effectively on what is going to be on the Order Paper rather than ambushing us.  We come in the morning, in the afternoon we look at the Order Paper, we see something very new, and we cannot contribute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will tell you, when we conclude the business. I will definitely tell you when it will come.

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Youth MPs and some Members of Parliament here have written a letter to your office requesting to move a motion in this House to reduce the retirement age. Now it is being said that there is no business -(Laughter)- and yet we made that request over three months ago and we have not got a reply. When shall we have our motion Moved?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you give the notice or you just wrote a letter?  

MR. EKANYA:  We gave notice of the motion to your office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the motion is there. It will be fixed - (Laughter).

DR. AKENY: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification on a procedural matter, which could be used for the current debate on the Sessional Committees. You know that we are currently occupying the other wing and this wing. It is very difficult for us to know when a certain Committee is sitting so that we can give good ideas, which affect our Constituency. So, will it be in the order for the Speaker to give some kind of written information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be looked into and you will be informed.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, since we started, we appear to have overlooked the importance of question time. Some of us have given in a lot of questions for oral answer in this House. In spite of appeals to the office of the Clerk, nothing appears to be happening. Can I appeal to you, Sir, that when we come back, at least, let us have the first hour of the proceedings, according to our rules, devoted to question time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point well taken.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you, much as what I am going to talk about has already been echoed, I am also concerned about the issue of question time.  We are representatives of the people and question time can be used on a number of occasions to motivate discussions, debates and even to challenge certain mistakes committed.  

My impression is that in the Clerk's office, there is no Co-ordinator in charge of questions. When you present questions for oral answers, you cannot be told when the question will be answered. There are a number of occasions when a question can stay in the office of the Clerk for two or three weeks unattended to. May I propose, with due respect to the Clerk's office and to the Speaker, and noting that we have so many Clerk Assistants, that a specific Clerk Assistant is charged with the responsibility of attending and co-ordinating questions for oral answer.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your suggestion will be taken into account.  Now, hon. Members, in view of the report, which we have received from the Vice-Chairperson of the relevant Sessional Committee, this motion, will be considered after we have finished dealing with the Budget. It will be considered at the end of this month, and during that period, the Committee should ensure that it clears all the queries they have been raising so that debate on the motion before the House can be finalised. 

The Plenary will be adjourned from today to 18th August, to enable the Committees deal with the estimates. On 18th, which will be a Friday, we shall reconvene to hear reports from various Committees, so that we can beat the deadline of 31st August 2000. The House is adjourned until then.

(The House rose at 3.25 p.m. and adjourned until 18th August, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)


