Wednesday, 3 August 2005

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I want to inform Members of the Committee on Finance that we have a meeting tomorrow to consider certain urgent business related to the Budget. I have allowed them to sit for an hour everyday until that work is completed. It will make our work easier when they consider what they intend to consider.  

I also want to appeal to members constituting the Appointments Committee that we shall have a meeting on Friday to consider the appointment of a Supreme Court Judge. This is an urgent matter. Therefore, I appeal to each of you to come so that we can –[Hon. Members: “What time?”]- 9.00 a.m. We shall have one nomination to consider.

And again I want to repeat what I said yesterday that we have to work diligently. You must have seen an editorial today in the newspaper commenting on what I said. They said I was lamenting; I was not lamenting. I was just appealing to you that you attend to business of the House in big numbers. Those who are away without my permission are doing it in contravention of our rules. I do not intend to take the action, which was suggested. My duty is to appeal to you to act responsibly by attending to our work –[Mrs. Matembe: “We cannot hear you, Mr Speaker”]- you cannot hear me? Do you want me to repeat it?

I regard you as very responsible people who know your mandate and mission. Therefore, you should come and attend to parliamentary work. It is only those who have got my permission to be away in writing that should have a good excuse not to be here. You should not let other people prompt us to attend to our work. Let our responsibility call on us to attend to our work.

2.45
MR SITENDA SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of public concern. Yesterday boda boda cyclists from Kampala invaded my constituency in a place called Bukasa in Kirinya parish, Kira Town Council adjacent to Akright Housing Estate. They were in search of the dead body of their colleague who perished in a manhole during the recent downpour of rain in Kampala.  

This site in Bukasa is where Kampala City Council buries the dead bodies that have not been identified or collected by their close relatives from the mortuaries. This site has been poorly managed by city council. The dead people are sometimes buried in mass graves and yet the graves are not deep enough. The tractor that brings these dead bodies from Mulago is not covered and always attracts flies. At times the drivers deliberately leave the tractor in the midst of the road near Namboole Stadium and a stink is unbearable.  

What is more worrying today is that most of these dead bodies, which were exhumed yesterday, were not properly reburied. The dogs at night, scavenging dogs, removed some of the limbs of these dead bodies and they were playing around with them in Kireka and Kira. Some of these people who are living in the Akright Housing Estate are trying to relocate to other places. We are scared that once we get a downpour some of these dead bodies will be washed down and yet we do not have piped water in this area of Bukasa.  

At this point in time I would like to implore the Ministry of Health to take immediate effect otherwise the situation is alarming. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I hope your concerns have been noted.

2.49
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. After being defeated to join the Committee on Local Government, I am seeking the mandate of members to go back to my original committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go back. (Laughter)

2.50
MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a comment on what hon. Sebalu has said. The Government should come up with a statement about this tragedy -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, talk through the microphone.

MS NAMAGGWA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. I want to request the Government to come up with a statement on the disappearance of the dead body. Hon. Babu and hon. Margaret Zziwa who are members of this constituency should brief us on this incident. About two months ago I noted that entering the taxi park is a tag of war. You can spend two hours trying to enter the taxi park. If a woman was expecting and she is seated in this taxi, she will deliver in the taxi. What is happening in this constituency? These two honourable members should brief us about the performance of their constituency. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There are laws in this country of conducting inquests. What we can do is to invoke other provisions so that an inquest is carried out and a report on what actually happened in this particular case produced. Otherwise, everybody will be throwing responsibility from here to there. It is high time we used the laws of this country to inquire into this particular matter.

2.54
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some of us are disturbed by the behaviour of the Executive not respecting the decision of the Parliamentary Commission. This House was notified that as a result of the meeting of the Parliamentary Commission and the Executive, a Bill to cater for the democratisation process in this country would be brought to this House on the 16th of last month. 

Hon. Wacha extensively debated the Constitution amendment as regards the provision related to that Bill and you were in the Chair. The Minister of Finance assured the members that the Bill would be brought on the 16th of last month, which has now passed. May we know from government when that Bill will be brought here? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You are not clear. Are you talking about the Bill on the democratisation process?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the democratisation process refers to the pension of Members of Parliament; it is about democracy.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we deal with other matters first? As of now the matter is being handled. Why don’t we leave it at that? But democratisation –(Laughter)– I thought you were talking about transition.

2.55
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have one concern. When you look at the oath of Members of Parliament it reads: “I … swear in the name of the Almighty God and solemnly affirm that l will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution. So help me God.”  

From the comments you made I would like us to be very clear because when there is generalization of absenteeism some of us who are consistently here, and who you know very well as being here, we are lumped up with the rest. So there may be need to do some differentiation, not to roll call but to know really how we can handle this issue of quorum. Otherwise it would reflect badly even on those who are consistently here, whom you know very well.  

Maybe we need some other guidance on this matter because at this point in time if it is consistently reflected that we are absent, it may be very dangerous for us in the coming period of elections. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: At this juncture I must thank WBS for the initiative it made because the public is able to see who is here and who is not. I have been constantly reminding you that you have to attend. I think people will know those who are not here. We may have to examine our Rules of Procedure to deal with those who are not here.  

Unfortunately the position is that we do not have permanent seats although informally people have established permanent seats. It may not be easy for the Speaker to say, “Today I did not see so and so”. If the facilities are improved we shall assign seats to members, but we may have to examine the rules and see how to do it.  

Once again I thank WBS because it has opened our voters’ eyes. They are able to see your performance. As I told you yesterday, honourable members, we have to clear –(Interjections) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Omodi Okot. 

3.00
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter involving the issue of paying auxiliary forces, and it is a very bad development. We have in our place the auxiliary force of Amuka that have been doing very well. It is because of their contribution that we have been able to make some improvement but of late there has been a lot of foul play in paying them their dues. High-ranking officers in the Government have made a lot of promises to the extent that it has become a joke. 

Just yesterday I witnessed a case in my area where Amuka boy, because of want to live, took a gun and killed a teacher by the name of Akwal. This House has listened to other stories from the authorities concerned. I want to know the position of people who are concerned with paying auxiliary forces. Right now as we sit here so many bad things are happening. People who are living next to Amuka detaches are no longer safe. They have to run away in the night to sleep where is it safer. Property is being grabbed just because there is no way these people can live without money. So this is a serious matter. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Omodi Okot for raising this matter. Outside Parliament and in the corridor I had raised the same matter with the hon. Prime Minister and the Minister of State, Finance. I rather all it luck for people who stay around Kampala when one body of a boda boda disappears it is very easy to demonstrate and cause hell but for people who are not near the capital of this country, a lot of terrible things are happening. We do not have that luck of being able to come to the streets of Kampala and demonstrate and have our Members of Parliament come to the House to make all sorts of queries about it.  

If we had tapped the policy where the Minister of Defence is supposed to give a statement in the House every two months on the security situation then I think we would be more consistent in evaluating the situation and trying to see how the security situation in the country is moving; but it seems we have other priorities and some of these priorities may not coincide with the priorities of those whom we think do deserve our attention.  

What hon. Omodi Okot is saying has already been raised by some of us outside this Parliament and we have given the benefit of doubt to the Government. We have talked to the Minister of Defence, the President was recently upcountry and the memorandum of the people of Lira and Apac - a full page - was dealing with nothing but the payment of the people who have sacrificed and volunteered as auxiliary forces called Amuka. Mr Speaker, I am extremely pained that you have a government in power that pays us a lot of lip service. We have people who have sacrificed their lives and time as auxiliary forces in Lango; we called them Amuka. Since February this year they have not got their Shs 60,000 per month. We are lucky that here in Parliament we have got our six to seven million shillings very regularly every month and even if only one week passed, I think the accounts department would be flooded.  

I want to appeal to your conscience, Members of Parliament that for some of us who come from insecure areas where without auxiliary forces we cannot even reach home and the Government cannot give these people their Shs 60,000 per month for the last six months, I think it is beyond total inefficiency and out of a bad heart. I do not know what sort of heart some people in the Government have but if these people were to abandon - because they can leave the Army. They are volunteers; they can even leave today. They may desert. And now from 10,000 Amuka boys who had volunteered originally, I think we have hardly a half that number who have remained. The number of soldiers we have in the UPDF cannot contain the situation in Teso, Lango and Acholi without auxiliary forces.  

My suspicion is that government wants auxiliary forces to desert and the security situation to worsen for their own political interest. Yes, I think government does not want peace to come back in the North. I know it is in the interest of some people that peace does not come to the North. Yes, it is in the interest of some people in this country that peace does not come and that is why they do not want to pay these auxiliary forces. So I really want the Government to come to this House and make a statement on this.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we can end this issue this way: let government come up with a statement by Tuesday detailing the arrangements that are in place to pay these people. There is no question of debate. 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important issue, but the hon. Omara Atubo has been irresponsible to say that the Government does not want peace to be restored in the North; it is a very unfortunate statement.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is very aware that the situation of non-payment of the auxiliary forces, the Arrow boys and the Amuka, is very worrying. It is even worrying government itself and the Prime Minister is now shying away from the truth. Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo is expressing how bad the situation is. Is the hon. Prime Minister in order to downplay the gravity of the problem and thus regard hon. Omara Atubo as irresponsible when he is actually expressing how bad the matter is on the ground? Is he in order to mislead this House and downplay the matter?

THE SPEAKER: No, no, we have seen the seriousness of the matter but I think the Prime Minister was simply giving a encounter conclusion to what hon. Omara Atubo had given. He was going to give reasons. Let us end this matter here. The statement will come out giving us the arrangements that are put in place. This was just his assessment.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Omara Atubo may be aware that even as we were coming he expressed this concern and I had asked hon. Rukutana to ensure that the matter is addressed. So I have no hesitation to repeat my directive to hon. Rukutana. He must of course work closely with the Minister of Defence and other agencies and he is going to make a statement on Tuesday. I want to assure all members of this House and the entire body politic that government would like to have peace restored; I repeat. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I appreciate the guidance you have given following a statement made by hon. Sitenda Sebalu. However, being one of the members of Parliament representing Kampala, I would like to express greater concern from an environmental point of view with regard to what is happening in Bukasa and Kiteezi.  

I did expect the Leader of Government Business to have officially directed the minister concerned to give some explanation on how the environmental standards would be kept with regard to dumping, and we are here dealing especially with dead bodies. It is common practice here in Kampala that whenever they are removing or transferring garbage to Kiteezi, they do it at random. When they are transporting dead bodies to their burial places, there are a lot of environmental hazards related to the process and this is in open negation of the Environment Act 1995.  

The point I want to make is that is it not prudent that before we go away from this point the minister concerned gives a statement to this House in regard to how he will ensure standards of an environmental nature being protected.

THE SPEAKER: In the same way I direct that the minister in charge should give a statement on this issue raised by hon. Sitenda Sebalu and raised by hon. Lukyamuzi. He should tell us what action is being taken by the appropriate body, namely Kampala City Council, because I think this is the work of the city council. The statement should be given on Tuesday by the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Health.  

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a request for a resolution of this House authorizing the Government to guarantee a loan of US $2,100,000 from Japan Bank for International Corporation (JBIC) for Messrs Phoenix Logistics Uganda Limited. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: I direct that the Committee on National Economy handle that matter. Who is the Chairman or Vice Chairman of this National Economy Committee that will consider the matter and report promptly to the House?
 
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL

3.12
Clause 98

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 98 of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 stand part of the Bill. We shall vote by roll call.

Oh sorry, honourable members, there was supposed to be an adjustment to our Order Paper to allow the minister make a statement on the death of the late King Fahad of Saudi Arabia, I think we better hear it and then constitute ourselves into the Committee Stage again.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.13
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume so that the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.14
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, the Committee of the Whole House was scheduled to continue consideration of the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill but has suspended consideration in order to take up an urgent matter of the Whole House. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as you appreciate a few days ago the Vice-President reported to us the tragic news of the demise of King Fahad of Saudi Arabia. This was the same day we received a statement on the death of Lt Gen. Dr John Garang but the statement on the death of King Fahad was not there. We expected it any time and now I understand the statement is here. Let us dispose of this business before we consider the other. That is why we interrupted our business in the Committee of the Whole House. Let us hear from the hon. Minister of International Affairs.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Okello Oryem): Mr Speaker, honourable members, thank you very much for your indulgence and permitting the Government of Uganda to make this statement a bit late. I would like to make a statement on behalf of the Government of Uganda on the death of His Majesty King Fahad Abdullah Aziz, the King of Saudi Arabia and the custodian of the two holy mosques.  

The Government of the Republic of Uganda has learnt with great sorrow and sadness of the death of King Fahad Abdullah Aziz, King of Saudi Arabia and custodian of the two holy mosques. As you may be aware, Uganda and Saudi Arabia enjoy an extremely warm and cordial relationship. The late King Fahad bin Abdullah Aziz was indeed a true friend of Uganda who always had the interests of the welfare of Uganda and in particular the Moslem community, close to his heart. During his wise leadership the King of Saudi Arabia made pertinent contributions to a number of important projects including those pertaining to the Islamic University of Uganda.  

The kingdom of Saudi Arabia has always played a role in ensuring peace and stability in the Middle East. Their contribution of solidarity in the organization of Islamic countries has been a major contribution to the process of peace not only in the Middle East but also the world at large. 

The world, therefore, will miss a very dedicated leader who has ruled his Kingdom since 1932. The Government of Uganda conveys its heartfelt condolences and sympathizes with the whole family and the people of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  His Excellency the President designated the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Disaster Preparedness, Lt Gen. Moses Ali, who represented the Government at the burial, which took place yesterday at 4.00 p.m. May I, on behalf of Parliament and the people of Uganda, pray that the Almighty Allah, in his mercy, give peace and may His soul rest in eternal peace.

3.20
MR UMAR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that statement. I also join the whole world that has mourned King Fahad bin Abdullah Aziz who has been bedridden for a long time. It is true that the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz has been the custodian of the two holy mosques and the leader of the Islamic faith. Therefore, the Islamic faith lost a very important person.

I would like to emphasise the point the minister has alluded to in his statement that King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz has been a very great friend to Uganda and the Ugandan people. This relationship has grown stronger ever since His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni came to power. There has been tremendous support from King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz, which has been coming to Uganda through various ways. We should remember that the establishment of the Islamic University in Uganda, Mbale was a brainchild of King Fahad. He recently donated to Uganda through the Islamic University the newly constructed building, which is named after him, that is King Fahad Plaza that is a stone throw away from us.

Mr Speaker, King Fahad will be remembered for his tireless efforts to unite the Moslems in Uganda. He has done quite a lot and it will be remembered that the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz also spearheaded the OIC of which Uganda is a member. Therefore, Uganda has really lost a great friend and indeed a man who loved peace.

I will agree with the minister when he says that he is a man who loved peace and has worked tirelessly to see that peace comes back to the whole of the Middle East and he has time and again spoken very negatively about anti-Islamic activities. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I join the rest of the world in mourning King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz. Thank you very much. May his soul rest in peace.

3.25
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand to join the rest of the world in mourning one of the greatest leaders, the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz, who was buried yesterday.

We are all aware that Uganda has benefited from many interest free grants and loans from Saudi Arabia. Just recently we passed an interest free loan to the Islamic University in Uganda, which is greatly contributed to by Saudi Arabia. King Fahad, through the Government of Saudi Arabia has helped many projects in Uganda including Kibuli Hospital, Kibuli Primary Teachers’ College, and there was a contribution of US $350,000 to Ssese Senior Secondary School. He also helped orphanages in the North and Central regions, which have greatly helped our people.

The Government of Saudi Arabia through its leadership gave a donation of US $100,000 as a resettlement package for those who are returning to Uganda. Needless to mention, the King Fahad Plaza, which stands on land donated by His Excellency the President of Uganda worth close to US $10 million, was put up by funds donated by the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz. Mr Speaker, the coming to Uganda of the late King Faizal bin Abdul Aziz in 1972 was a turning point to the relationship between Uganda and Saudi Arabia. Since then Uganda has benefited a lot from the wise leadership of the custodian of the two holy mosques, the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz.  

Many scholarships have been offered. On average ten scholarships are offered to Ugandans to study in the Royal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia per year. We believe that this is a great achievement and it is a relationship, which has come as a result of the good leadership of both Uganda and the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Mr speaker, we are all aware of a non-governmental organisation, IIRO (Islamic Rabita) based at Old Kampala. It has tremendously helped to put up schools, clinics, mosques and many other things. So Uganda will greatly miss the services of a great leader; may his soul rest in eternal peace. Ina lillahi wa ina ilaihi rajiuna.

3.30
MRS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz of Saudi Arabia.  

With great sorrow on behalf of the people of Arua District I would like to recognise the great contribution King Fahad made for us particularly when he kept our son the late Idi Amin Dada during his last moments when he was very sick, and thereafter offered him a burial ground. When the people of Arua heard of his death, they were really shocked. On behalf of my people I would like to congratulate him for the humanitarian heart he showed to our son during the time when he was needy.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to remember King Fahad for the contribution he made in the educational sector. Many of my colleagues have talked about the university but I would like to commend him for supporting the girl child education. Before the Islamic University came into existence, the Moslem girl child was lagging behind. With his great support you now find many girl graduates coming from the Islamic University, of which I am a product. I really need to stand up and recommend him for that. We are going to miss him a lot.

On the point of this country, it is with great sorrow that Uganda has lost a great friend who has been supporting us financially. Recently we were trying to pass a loan in support of the construction of a very big project, which will improve on the financial status of the Moslem flock and this House indeed recommended the loan to be passed. This was support from the late King, who we really need to recommend and I believe if he were alive, he would have given us more financial support than what he has done before.

With the comments I have given, I think the people of Uganda and Arua in particular will miss our beloved King. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Ina lilahi wa ina lilaihi rajiuna. Asalaam Aleikum.

3.32
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the statement given by the minister on the sad demise of King Fahad of Saudi Arabia. This House will agree with me that Saudi Arabia has got a strategic position in the politics of the world. Peace in Saudi Arabia means peace in the Middle East. Stability in Saudi Arabia means stability in the Middle East. The point of moderation and good relationship between Saudi Arabia and world bodies like America has contributed a lot in bringing peace in the world.  

Mr Speaker, you and anybody who watched the burial of the King through the mass media yesterday can bear me witness that President George Bush did take part and showed his interest in making consolidation of a position of a new Saudi Arabia after the death of the King. This, therefore, means that Saudi Arabia has got a strong position in the politics of this world. After the death of King Fahad and having seen what Saudi Arabia is doing in Africa with special reference to Uganda, I have got only one or two remarks to make. 

One, the authority of the Islamic community should work towards expanding the Islamic culture to penetrate even into areas that do not appreciate Islam as a whole. I am saying this because we have got Islamic faith holders spread all over this country who are yearning for support. Support for putting up prayer houses, putting up educational institutions and bringing development in their various areas. 

Two, I only have one appeal to make that instead of having only a few areas where such a big country like Saudi Arabia is supporting programmes for development, let them expand so that the culture, trade and education of the Islamic community can also expand with it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Sir. On behalf of the people of Lubaga South including the Moslem community in the Kingdom of Buganda, I rise to pay tribute to King Fahad of Saudi Arabia and to extend my dear condolences to the people of Saudi Arabia and the whole Arab world.

The Arab world has lost a very important person. The little I have known about the King is that he was a peacemaker and a peace lover and because of that commitment to peace, he was the pillar of the leadership of the Arab world including those who do not subscribe to Islam. Mr Speaker, the Arab world has a lot in common with the Kingdom of Buganda so people should not be shaken when John Ken Lukyamuzi is paying tribute to this gallant son of the world.

Mr Speaker, I did not know the King but I met him in London about 12 years ago where one friend of mine in London showed me that, “That is the King -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean you saw him at a distance? (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I did not go very close to the car because there was a lot of security. Otherwise, I am personally grieved since I have always been a great admirer of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

The King was the 11th son of the founder of the Saudi Arabia Kingdom, King Bin Saudi who was a great leader, soft spoken, as is characteristic of many a king. One thing we have to learn from the kings of Saudi Arabia, especially that particular King, is that much as there is insurgency in a number of places in the Arab world, areas which have retained kingdoms are still peaceful. Therefore, those of us who harness kingdom governance are not doing any disservice to the international community. Kingdoms all over the world are characteristic of stability, joy and love. Wherever there are kingdoms, peace and security are guaranteed. When the people of Buganda continue to yearn for the kingdom, you know why.

What Uganda should emulate from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is this: unlike the Kingdom of Buganda where losing a king we have to wait until a new one is groomed, in Saudi Arabia there is always a new king and a crown prince. That is one way of democratising the institution so that people have no doubt about the leadership of the kingdom. The king was very instrumental in maintaining the security of the Holy Land when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait. He was forced to invite friends from the Diaspora to come and protect the Holy Land. If what occurred to Kuwait was to occur in the Holy Land, it would have been a disaster. I pay tribute to a man who was dedicated to the survival of his land. He did not hesitate to create a divide between him and fellow Arabs, Bin Laden and Saddam Hussein, for the good of the entire Arab World.  

He was however very controversial at times. For instance, his fighting for the protection of Palestinians and their dignity is one of the important achievements we should remember. He should not have died now when the world saw in him the stability of the Arab world.  

We should learn that kingdom governance in the Arab world still has a very important role. Almost all the republics that have abandoned kingdoms in the Arab world are in turmoil. This is the time for them to reconsider their decision to do away with their kingdoms. Thank you very much.

3.43
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I convey our condolences to Saudi Arabia on the loss of this great king. He pursued correct global policies as a result of which he invested the oil resources for the benefit of his country and other countries. Some countries, which have oil, have misused it and they have come to grieve. So when you have a king who takes charge of his country’s resource, he must be commended. He also stood firm against terrorism.

Those of us who cherish the monarchy culture feel happy when a king elsewhere leads a country in a prosperous manner. In this country, under Article 246 of the Constitution, the traditional leaders are not allowed to participate in partisan politics. If they do they divide their kingdom and hence their country. Therefore, in this country we have ensured that traditional leaders do not participate in partisan politics. We believe that if you follow this model they will persist.

In Saudi Arabia on the other hand, the king participated in shaping the destiny of his country in a very positive manner. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved.

3.45
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Government for coming up with this motion so that we pay tribute to the late King Fahad bin Abdul Aziz in addition to another great friend, Lt Gen. John Garang. I join the rest of the world and my colleagues in mourning the death of the king. I convey my condolences to the bereaved family and the people of Saudi Arabia.  

I pay tribute to the King for the good work, not only to the Moslem community but also to the whole world especially in the field of education. We have accessed various universities of Saudi Arabia and have had a handful of graduates from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Deputy Mayor and I are two of the many alumni of Saudi Arabia universities. The kingdom is also the major contributor to the Islamic Development Bank, which is a financial organ of the Islamic Conference. We also managed to access loans and credit from that bank. 

They are undertaking construction work of community polytechnics, which were sponsored by the Islamic Bank, supported by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Mr Speaker, the kingdom contributed in so many other developmental and economic projects in Uganda, including Kinyara Sugar Works. When this Government came to power in 1986, the kingdom was one of the countries, which contributed a lot in terms of emergency relief. 

A lot of relief was sent to the people of Luwero, West Nile and many other parts. More recently the organs supported by the Kingdom gave relief to Yumbe, Kyangwali, and even supplied foodstuffs and other materials to Ugandan prisons. These were all good deeds of the late King Fahad Bin Abdul Aziz.  

As earlier alluded to by the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the King was also very instrumental in fighting terrorism all over the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which was one of the targets for terrorists. Although the majority of those who participated in the September 11 2001 attack were from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Kingdom was not in support of terrorism. I thank the Kingdom for its right policies, especially the world economy in regulating the price of petrol. By so doing the Kingdom has also helped in stabilising the world economy.  

The King may not have visited Uganda as his predecessor, the Late King Faizal bin Abdul did, but he was a very good friend of President Museveni. Because of this cordial relationship, many Saudi Arabia businessmen come to Uganda for investment. For instance MIDROC investing in Sheraton, and more recently one of the richest people in the world, Prince Al-Walid bin Talal bin Abdul Aziz, was in Uganda. He showed interest in investing in a huge project here. He met the President and I am sure we are going to continue to benefit from our good relationship with that Kingdom.

Finally, I pray that God rests his soul in Janah, comforts the bereaved family and the people of Saudi Arabia. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Yumbe and the Moslem community, I send condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. I thank the Government for the statement they read. Indeed the world has lost two great men at the same time and as it is always said that that is God’s plan. The two men had many things in common, namely, their love for the vulnerable.

The Moslem community and most Ugandans know King Fahad as a very kind and hospitable person. He was down to earth. In fact he chose to be referred to as a servant of the holy shrines. The King made it easy for Moslems to go on pilgrimage, apart from Swalal fasting, Ashahadu and Zakat, it is difficult to leave one’s country to go to another country and they find life very comfortable. However, Ugandans are very saddened because it is during his time that pilgrimage has been made extremely easy.  

Mr Speaker, the King has also greatly contributed to supporting the Red Cross and the provision of beef through the Islamic Development Bank. My colleague has already talked about the coming of Prince Al Walid to Uganda, from which many Ugandans expect so much. This is all due to the love that King Fahad showed to this country, especially because of the cordial relationship that exists between the two embassies. On behalf of the community that has benefited from King Fahad’s generous contribution, we will really miss him. He has done much as far as the furnishing of most of the mosques is concerned. Many scholarships have been provided to Ugandan students. There are many Ugandans in most of these Emirates countries, working. These are because of people who have studied in Madina and King Abdul Aziz Universities.   

In brief, in Islam when we lose somebody we say “Ina lilahi wa ina ilaihi rajiuna.”  May his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR SAIDI OKUTI (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in paying tribute to the King of Saudi Arabia. As a Member of Parliament from the West Nile region I recognise the contribution of this late King in three very important things, which he did for our region. In 1979 during the liberation war, which drove all of us into exile, we lost very many people. Our sons, brothers and fathers, in the army died and left a number of orphans. On our return in 1986 these orphans all converged in the municipality and were loitering, becoming street kids. However, because of the peace loving and benevolent King Fahad, he opened the first orphanage centre in Arua Municipality. This took care of all street kids that were already loitering in the town. This was a very great service for our region because this is the first orphanage that the people of West Nile saw.  

Apart from that, we could not keep the late former President of Uganda, Idi Amin Dada in Uganda because of political circumstances. Therefore, the King offered him refugee and a burial place, which is a very great thing to a Lugbara or a Kakwa. If you bury one’s relative then you are a true brother. 

On a personal note, in 1978 my late father went to Saudi Arabia on a business trip. Through Ambassador Lt Col Musa Ayega, he met with the Crown Prince, now King Fahad. That time he was still a Crown Prince. He secured large sums of money, which were supposed to have helped him in his agricultural project in West Nile. However, this money came around 1979 as we were already going into exile. The project was not successful for we lost everything. For him to offer personal financial help to my family was a very good gesture, which I will not forget. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. In Arabic, we say “Ina lilahi wa ina ilaihi rajiuna.”  We are from God and to him we shall return. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.58
MR EDWARD KAMANA WESONGA (Bubulo County West, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It would be very wrong for the people of Eastern Uganda not to pay tribute to the fallen son of the world, King Fahad Abdul Aziz. When the Islamic University in Mbale was established people thought it would be exclusively for Moslems. However, I thank the fallen King for being broad-based. Even children whose background had nothing to do with Islam went through the same university.  

If you moved around this country and especially if you stayed around Kampala, you would find that most civil servants spend their time going back to school. If it had not been because of the late King, the people of Mbale would have been spending their evenings in useless ventures but of recent very many civil servants, teachers, go to the Islamic University of Mbale for evening classes and upgrade their academic status. For that reason, on behalf of the people of Eastern Uganda, I send our condolences to the people who have lost such a great son. We pray that whoever replaces him has a similar generous gesture for our region. I also thank the late King for being friendly to President Museveni. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this ends the official message of condolences read by the Government, even though it was not a formal message. I thank you for the contributions on this subject. 

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The Embassies of Saudi Arabia allow anybody who wants to sign the condolence book to go and do so, so members may feel free to go there. The Saudi Arabia Embassy is in Naguru and the Sudanese Embassy is on Nakasero Road.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the information. We welcome back our colleague, hon. Rosemary Seninde, who has been away because of sickness.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

3.10
Clause 98

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 98 of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS 
2.	AADROA ONZIMA ALEX
3.	AANIMU ANGUPALE
4.	AHABWE PEREZ
5.	AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO
6.	AKWERO ODWONG JANE
7.	ALASO ASIANUT ALICE
8.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE
9.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA
10.	AMONGI BETTY ONGOM
11.	AMONGIN APORU
12.	ANDRUALE AWUZU
13.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN
14.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS
15.	BADDA FRED
16.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER
17.	BALEMEZI LYDIA
18.	BALIKUDEMBE JOSEPH
19.	BANYENZAKI HENRY
20.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE
21.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT
22.	BINTU ABWOOLI JALIA
23.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA
24.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE
25.	BITANGARO SAMUEL
26.	BULAMU JOHN RICHARD
27.	BUTIME TOM
28.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN
29.	BYAMUKAMA DORA
30.	BYANYIMA NATHAN
31.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE
32.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO
33.	CHELANGAT KULANY
34.	D’UJANGA SIMON
35.	EKANYA GEOFFREY
36.	EPETAIT FRANCIS
37.	EPHRAIM KAMUNTU
38.	ERIYO JESSICA
39.	ESELE JOHN PETER
40.	IMUMET ISIAH
41.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA
42.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO
43.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM
44.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE
45.	KAJEKE WILFRED
46.	KAJURA MUGANWA
47.	KAKOOZA JAMES
48.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL
49.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA
50.	KAGONYERA MONDO
51.	KASULE LUMUMBA
52.	KATONGOLE BADRU
53.	KAWANGA JOHN
54.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA
55.	KAYONGO TOM
56.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE
57.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN
58.	KIKUNGWE ISA
59.	KINOBE JIMMY
60.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE
61.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA
62.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM
63.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL
64.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER
65.	KIZIGE MOSES
66.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER
67.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON
68.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE
69.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL
70.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT
71.	LOLEM MICAH
72.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL
73.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
74.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR
75.	MAATE ROGERS
76.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN
77.	MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD
78.	MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR
79.	MATEMBE MIRIA
80.	MATOVU BYATIKE
81.	MATOVU DAVID
82.	MAYENDE SIMON
83.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA
84.	MIGEREKO DAUDI
85.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA
86.	MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH
87.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA
88.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH
89.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS
90.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA
91.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL
92.	MULENGANI BERNARD
93.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI
94.	MWESIGE ADOLF
95.	MWONDHA PATRICK
96.	NANKABIRWA RUTH
97.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER
98.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI
99.	NASASIRA JOHN
100.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA
101.	NDEEZI ALEX
102.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE
103.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU
104.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILLIP MARY
105.	NYANZI VINCENT
106.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN
107.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH
108.	ODIT JOHN
109.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL
110.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY
111.	OKOT SANTA
112.	OKULO EPAK
113.	OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS
114.	OKUPA ELIJAH
115.	OLUM ZACHARY
116.	OMACH MANDIR FRED
117.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN
118.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO
119.	OULANYAH JACOB
120.	OWORI AMOOTI OTADA
121.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET
122.	RUHINDI FREDDIE
123.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO
124.	RUKUTANA MWESIGWA
125.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE
126.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT
127.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR
128.	SEBAGGALA LATIF
129.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
130.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
131.	SENINDE NANSUBUGA ROSEMARY 
132.	TIBARIMBASA AVITUS 
133.	TIPERU NUSURA 
134.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE
135.	TUBWITA BAGAYA GRACE 
136.	TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO 
137.	WACHA BEN 
138.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 
139.	WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID 
140.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
141.	WANDERA MARTIN 
142.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER 
143.	WESONGA KAMANA EDWARD
144.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 

THE CHAIRMAN: The position of clause 98 is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 144. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is the end of this particular Bill as far as clauses are concerned but there were clauses that were stood over during the process. I do not know the position of the minister on this.

DR. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, for the clauses, which were stood over, I have undertaken consultations, which I am about to finalize. I only need a day to finalize them.

THE CHAIRMAN: When you say you need a day, do you mean tomorrow you will be ready?

DR. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, on Friday I will be ready.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Can we proceed now with the Committee Stage of Bill No.2? What is the position? 

DR. MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, it would be difficult for me to proceed with Committee Stage of Constitution (Amendment No.2) Bill today but after we complete with Bill No.3 on Friday, I will be in position to proceed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I think we are being held hostage, we cannot move, we cannot do anything because of this Constitution amendment. I wish government could hurry up, bring all these things, we finish it and we start doing other things. We cannot continue like this!

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, what I say is that as far as Parliament is concerned it is ready, but the owner of the Bill says that he needs more time, what do we do? Since he wants a day to complete Bill No. 3 at the Committee Stage, we shall not allow any further adjournment from Friday and we shall proceed until we dispose of the two Constitution Amendment Bills, because I have heard the accusations against Parliament for this and the other when actually the problem lies somewhere else. We shall not allow any further adjournment Mr Minister. After Friday we shall proceed until we dispose of this then we move to the Budget.

MS NUSURA TIPERU: Mr Chairman, we are told that Friday might be a public holiday?

THE CHAIRMAN: Let the House resume then we can proceed with other matters.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.38
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume ant the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.39
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005 and passed clause 98 thereof without amendment. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.40
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I must clearly again thank you because the situation has improved in as far as attendance is concerned. Let us keep this up and in fact improve it more so that we are not accused of not carrying out our responsibilities. This has been an impressive attendance after yesterday’s attendance but as you have heard, the minister is not ready with the two Bills. We shall start the Committee Stage on Friday until we finish. For the business of tomorrow – (Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister of Public Service to make a statement about the arrangements for tomorrow. He is right here. 

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hesitated to make a statement purely for one reason that the bodies are not yet with us. Otherwise, the Cabinet had decided that tomorrow should be a public holiday and the rest would follow from there, but the bodies are not yet even within the Ugandan airspace. So, I am hesitating in talking about funeral arrangements and so forth when the bodies are not with us. That is why I have been hesitating and the Prime Minister is pushing me –(Laughter)  

What I can say, I do not know for how many more minutes we have to meet further here. We are in continuous touch with the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Deputy Prime Minister, we did not know that there was that arrangement. We are transacting business as we are expected; it is you who has prompted yourself to say you are making a statement and it must be a statement for a purpose. Now what is the statement?

MR KAJURA: Mr Speaker, the statement that I made is indeed the statement of accuracy and if we are continuing for a bit of time, I am in continuous touch with the airport and the aviation people and I would hope that I will be able to come here and state something, which is firm.

THE SPEAKER: No, the point is, if the statement is not ready, you do not attempt to make any, because it was not on the Order Paper. Now what do you want us to do?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, under the circumstances let me make the following statement that one; the Cabinet has decided that tomorrow will be a public holiday. Number two; other announcements will be made over the radio and other forms of mass media. We can only stop at that time because the contingent element is ubiquitous.  

Given that problem, tomorrow is a public holiday. Other announcements will be made as soon as the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service is absolutely ready. I think that is reasonable under the circumstances. I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament.

MR WACHA: Sir, my understanding of what has just transpired between the Second Deputy Prime Minister and the Prime Minister is that there is supposed to be a public holiday because of what has sadly transpired, the death of our colleagues and of Dr Garang. If the Government is not yet ready with one, the bodies; two, the funeral arrangements and three, maybe other matters connected, therefore, what is the public holiday for?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us appreciate the position as to who declares a day a public holiday. That is the Executive. For what purpose; they should know. For us now they have made a statement that tomorrow is a public holiday. You cannot say it is not going to be a public holiday when the function has been exercised by the person entitled to exercise it. What you can ask eventually is, “Why did you do it?” That will come when we ask them to account for having declared it a public holiday. I think that is settled. Therefore, I am adjourning the House to Friday morning at 10.00 a.m. so that we continue with other business.

(The House rose at 4.46 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 05 August 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)



