Tuesday, 19 August 2008
 
Parliament met at 11.15 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming staff and pupils who are in the strangers’ gallery, from Bukuusa Primary School, Busembatya-Bugweri, Iganga District. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to announce that the Members of Parliament have been invited to participate in a solidarity football match between the Uganda Parliament and the Buganda Kingdom Cabinet. The match will be played this Saturday, 23 August 2008, at Nakivubo Stadium at 2.00 p.m. The Parliament bus will leave here at 1.00 p.m. on Saturday. So, hon. Members, with your football team, sharpen your legs. I know you are good; don’t let us down. Thank you. [Hon. Members: “Morale boosters?”] Morale boosters! I will be there in person. (Applause)  

11.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This morning my attention was drawn, by some members of the communities in Northern and Eastern Uganda, to a statement that was made by hon. Ecweru to the effect that Shs 6 billion had been given by Government to address the drought situation to buy seeds, et cetera. The people from Karamoja are saying, “We are facing the same drought; what about our share of the money to fight the drought?” The people from my district of Pader are saying the same thing and the people from Lira District - who contacted me – are saying the same thing. Since the Minister of Finance is here – because they said the Minister of Finance gave out the money – it could help the country if that matter were clarified. Is the Shs 6 billion for Teso only or are they going to fight the drought situation for the entire regions of Northern and Eastern Uganda? And is the Shs 6 billion is enough? 

Bearing in mind what happened to the seed thing when we had floods, we are taking measures to ensure that this time around the people don’t end up with seeds that are not viable again. So, the minister or Prime Minister could help and clarify because the people are concerned about this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When did hon. Ecweru say this?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: He said it in Kumi. Actually, it is reported in the papers -(Interjection)–  it is your minister who said it, Madam Chief Whip. So, you could help us on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know I did not have adequate notice. Maybe I would have alerted the minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness to prepare, but since you have mentioned it; the government will take it up and they will respond at an appropriate time. 

11.20
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): I thank you, Madam Speaker. We have funds for the whole country and perhaps the statement, which was made, tended to tilt towards one area, but this money is really meant to help the entire country in difficulty. This money is being distributed and there is no doubt that those areas that our colleague has mentioned will be taken care of. I thank you. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008

II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday we were considering the report of the committee of ICT and since the Prime Minister is here, I really want to place on record our displeasure, because in the morning we had to adjourn the House because the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Finance had disappeared from the proceedings. Similarly in the afternoon we could not complete that report again because this time around the Minister of Finance had already disappeared. So, let me appeal to the Minister of Finance to remember that we are handling the Budget processes and we are required to be here throughout the proceedings. We don’t really have to look for you. You let us down yesterday and we hope that now that you have come, you are going to be here until we conclude this process, and I hope the Prime Minister will do the needful to make sure that his troops are here.  

Yesterday when we had to adjourn, we had reached a stalemate because no one could explain to us why the ministry of ICT required Shs 8 billion in taxes for something we don’t know, which they are going to purchase. Can I ask the Minister of Finance to explain that before we proceed?

11.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, before you adjourned yesterday I was representing the Leader of Government Business and actually I had stepped out for health reasons. Otherwise, it is not that the Leader of Government Business had disappeared. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, first of all, we thank you for your magnanimity towards the Minister of Finance, but it is totally unacceptable that the Speaker should appeal to the Minister of Finance to be present when we are considering the Budget of the Minister of Finance and it is his business to be available to answer queries related to the budget. I am not so sure whether I should not ask you to reconsider the appeal, because the Minister of Finance’s job is to be here when the Budget is being considered. They should not be appealed to, to be present really. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, the government has noted your concern. 

11.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The issue of the Shs 8 billion that is requested for taxation; we did meet with the ICT ministry yesterday and we have resolved that there are those which are going to be zero-rated and there are those that will be paid for. We have the schedule and the actual grand amount that will be outstanding is Shs 438 million. So, we are in agreement and it has been resolved and this will be included as part of the budget process for the ICT ministry.

Otherwise, yesterday we had sent one of us to be here in the afternoon and we apologise that he could not stay up to the end. We shall not repeat that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, for the records of this House, we would like you to put on record the items, which are going to be zero-rated because we do not understand how the Ministry of Finance forgot that aspect. You read them out and put them on record so that the House understands what is zero-rated and what has to be taxed.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1	(a) 	The data communication equipment, which  is zero-rated: Ethernet cables, Twisted 		Pairs of Cables, Routers, Ethernet Switches and Hardware Firewalls. 

	(b) 	The Next Generation Networks (NGOV) equipment and the Next Generation 		Network Switches. 

	(c) Optical Transmission Equipment: 	 Synchronous Digital Hierarchy Switching 		Equipment, Dense Wide Division 	Multiplexing Switching Equipment, Optical 		Time Synchronisation Equipment and Optical Fiber. 

Then there is other equipment. We have generators, which are zero-rated. We have 20 air conditioners and these will attract a total tax of Shs 4 million, DC power systems - standby power back up systems - those will be taxed Shs 14 million. Then prefabricated buildings will be Shs 240 million and warning tape will be Shs 10 million giving a total of Shs 268 million. 

The others are: project motor vehicles; these will have a tax of Shs 170 million with a sub-total of Shs 170. So, the grand total that will be taxable will be Shs 438 million. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now invite the chair of the committee to accordingly adjust his request to the House?

11.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Edward Baliddawa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As noted by the Minister of Finance, we have interacted with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of ICT as a committee. We are in agreement with that reduction in taxes and, therefore, I beg to move that the House pronounces itself to approve the budget proposal for the Ministry of ICT as follows: the amount of Shs 2,244,260,000 as recurrent expenditure; Shs 4,260,350,000 as development expenditure and Shs 438 million as taxes on the items that have been highlighted. The total budget will be Shs 6, 942,610,000.  

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am looking at the list of items exemptible and I want a clarification from the Ministers of ICT and Finance, why in this country we are compelled to buy prefabricated buildings. I am happy that the Minister of Housing is here. I want to know: we are creating employment, we have a lot of building materials in Uganda, we have very good weather; what compels us to buy prefabricated buildings in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want to - you know we reached a stalemate because the minister could not explain why he wanted Shs 8 billion. Now the money has reduced to Shs 430 million. I now want the minister to complete the answers. You complete the responses and if there is anything remaining, I shall pick you up. You complete your responses. You can start off from the issue of the figures. 

11.30
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ham Mulira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, honourable chairperson; and hon. Minister of Finance, for the clarification. I think the main outstanding issue was on the budget and the tax as it was included there. There were many responses but in my submission yesterday, through the main report, I had touched on issues raised by honourable members. However, with your permission I would like to pull out a few, which were not touched, starting with staff recruitment.

It was brought out by numerous honourable members that: “Why is it that after two years of existence we are still yet to fill the positions in the Ministry of ICT”? Madam Speaker, I would like to mention that staff recruitment is not a function of the Ministry of ICT. It is through the Public Service Commission. When the ministry was established two years ago actually it had only two members of staff, that is, the minister and the minister of state. Subsequently the structures had to be worked out: the mandate, the vision, the role and, therefore, the staffing complement which was required, which went through the motions with Public Service and through Cabinet, the structures were approved by the Ministry of Public Service. This affected even the structures of other ministries where sectors had been brought from and, therefore, the process was a bit long. 

Nevertheless, after Cabinet approval of the structures, the Public Service Commission took on the recruitment process and it is still ongoing. One honourable member said, “Why are you recruiting tea girls and you have not got software engineers and network engineers here”? The recruitment processes are totally different. The non-professional staff is not recruited by the Public Service and that is why those positions have been filled. 

Madam Speaker, if I may move on to another area by hon. Katuntu, which was to do with the planning unit, I think this is explained by the fact that the recruitment is ongoing. Nevertheless, the planning process is currently done by those members who are on board currently in the ministry. That is why we have those documents, the policies and the strategies, which we tabled yesterday.

The issue of the independent consultant supervising the project, that one was tackled and we presented and tabled a contract of the independent supervisor for the project. 

In terms of marketing the ICT sector in Uganda, one of the areas we highlighted was numerous stakeholders’ workshops, representation of Uganda and particularly the ICT sector in external fora and I am very pleased to mention that the feedback has been very good. In terms of the ICT progress in the country, we have received neighbouring countries within the region coming to Uganda to see the progress being made in ICT, including one country, which has now also decided to establish a fully-fledged ministry of ICT following suit, which is Namibia. So the marketing has been ongoing in various fora and marketing within the country, in terms of creating exposure through workshops and engaging stakeholders at every stage whenever major activities are being held, is progressively moving on. 

There was the issue of why POSTA Uganda is in the transport business. Madam speaker, in the entire world, the postal industry has had a great impact since the introduction of ICTs in day-to-day activities. The traditional role of mail and money delivery by post was affected by the new technologies because people send e-mails, which go in a fraction of a second. So, the postal mandate was being corroded; it is the worldwide phenomena. 

Therefore, the traditional postal organisations have become more creative and innovative in the way they deliver their services to be able to stay afloat. One of these ways of is, instead of having transport to deliver letters; you have a vehicle, which just takes letters upcountry. You use that vehicle to also provide transport facilities for the people. That is why POSTA moved into this transport sector; and it also has buses. So on top of delivering mail and parcels, they also deliver people and it is I think a service to the public.

There was the issue of the roll out of the national backbone. I think this came from hon. Okello-Okello when he was asking why the roll-out was started in Kampala and not in some other parts of the country. The reason for this is that the first phase of the national backbone included the E-Government infrastructure, which links all Government ministries and other key Government organisations. Therefore, that roll-out had to start where the ministries and these Government organisations are. That is why it was in Kampala, Jinja, Entebbe and towards Bombo. The next phase is going to roll out into the other parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, I think those were the issues, which had been outstanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there are two issues you have addressed. The committee requested you to address the question of the monopoly, which is being invaded; on the issue of the 350 gram letters; why other couriers are getting in? I think they wanted you to answer that. 

There is also another matter, which arose since last financial year of us facilitating the Sudan to use our – what do you call it? [Hon. Members: “The code number.”] Yes, for free. Can you answer those two?

DR MULIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, starting with the monopoly, I think when the Communications Act was established, which was in 1997, one of the bodies, which was formed is Uganda Posts Limited, with a trading name of POSTA Uganda. In order to support it - because it is 100 percent owned by Government and therefore, has certain obligations, which are not obligations to other couriers - for instance, if a letter is supposed to go to some remote part of the country, POSTA Uganda does not have an option whether or not it will decide to take it, yet other couriers can decide on their business areas.

Therefore, there was a need to provide some level of protectionism to enable POSTA be competitive, and it was agreed that letters of any delivery received, which is less than 350 grams, should be left to POSTA Uganda to enable it to have that scope of business to be able to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think their complaint was that there are others invading that monopoly. The complaint of the committee was that other couriers have actually encroached on that protection; that was their concern. 

DR MULIRA: The concern is taken and noted. Nevertheless, because letters still travel from one point to the other both within the country and outside, the regulator, which is Uganda Communications Commission, is supposed to regulate the postal services and ensure that these are met and adhered to. Nevertheless the task physically on hand is so massive because there are thousands and thousands of mail going through - there are about 20 courier services here. 

In fact, it is not only even the licensed courier services that have encroached, even bus services and taxis are doing the same. They put them on taxis and they are delivered for a small fee. Therefore, the supervision by Uganda Communications Commission is to enable it monitor and ensure that all these have been adhered to by wherever the postal services or the couriers services operating has been tasked to deliver. And in the committee’s report they mention it and they say that maybe additional stringent measures should be put in place.

Having said that, Uganda Communications Commission has in place measures of how it deals with monitoring this, which include adhoc going and trying to send mail of that capacity and then seeing which couriers or which service providers are breaking the law in that sense. Nevertheless, the point was noted and UCC is working on upgrading its supervision of this component.

Regarding the second item, which is the use of the +256 code of Uganda by Southern Sudan, I think the House was aware of the fact that in early 2006 the government of Southern Sudan approached the government of Uganda on this issue and came up with a temporary measure for usage of the code while they were sorting out their own code, and it was purely a temporary arrangement. This arrangement is at the government level. There was a policy level and the two governments agreed. Then at the operational level, it is the operators who are working with each other. So, in Southern Sudan there is an operator and in Uganda there is an operator, which is UTL, which was dealing with the physical operations of this communication. 

The issue of saying that this is being done at no cost, I think is not quite accurate because this is a business transaction. The two operators have interconnection charges levied on each other; and there is business and UTL, which is the operator in Uganda, pays taxes on this service. 

So, there is income, which has been coming from this. Nevertheless, we have now been informed by the government of Southern Sudan that they have now resolved their issue and in October they are going to operationalise the use of their unified code with Sudan and therefore there will be no need for them to use the +256 anymore. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us first have shadow minister for ICT, then hon. Alisemera. But be brief please.

11.47
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Wilfred Kajeke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I think it is fair that I put on record that we should thank the Speaker for ably guiding us yesterday because we had reached a difficult situation. We thank you very much. 

I also want the Minister of Finance to clarify to the House the issue of counter funding. The minister it talking about the second phase of the National Data Transmission Backbone and for us for that second phase to take place means we have to access the balance of the US $60 million, and for us to access that balance we need counter funding of Shs 5.7 billion. Can the Minister of Finance clarify to us where this money is, because in the policy statement we only see Shs 1.9 billion but we need Shs 5.7 billion; are you going to come for a supplementary?

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want to seek from the minister is that I can see on item (b) “Other projects” and one of them is the item on vehicles. I know that the ministry is still young and it has very few staff, and we have very many ministries, which have been starving and which do not even have vehicles. But I see a new ministry going to purchase 10 vehicles! Are they going to recruit directors or commissioners immediately to use these vehicles or the vehicles are for junior staff members that are going to run around? I want that clarification, otherwise the 10 vehicles, if you calculated wear and tear, fuel and everything, you will find that these 10 vehicles can run half of another ministry like sports. So can I be clarified on this?  Thank you. 

MRS TUMA: Thank you. I want clarification from the minister: I understand many NGOs involved in child rights activities have approached the ministry asking for a Government sponsored child helpline. What plans has the government put in place to make sure that the International Child Helpline, which has got three digits: “116” is offered to the people of Uganda to be able to enhance the child rights activities? Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is also a clarification. I remember in the Seventh Parliament these service providers agreed with the ministry to charge a unit per minute. But what is happening now is per second. Even before you get connected, they are already charging, you call again and they charge you. So was it updated? Because the agreement, which we in made in the Seventh Parliament was that these service providers, regardless of the network, do that. That is why we passed the Finance Bill with a tax component of 12 percent for each minute. So I would like to seek clarification from the minister on whether that agreement was updated to a second or a minute; because it is a public outcry.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first point of clarification was raised by the shadow minister, but for emphasis let me restate some of the issues. A number of projects fail to take off because Government fails to raise counter-funds and the minister is assuring us that this backbone project’s phase two will commence in this financial year. When does he intend to bring a request for us to approve counterpart funds since he is not including it in this budget? Yes, we are going to include taxes, but the counter-funds have not been reflected and definitely they will be required for the project to take off if it has to commence this financial year.

My second point should probably be clarified by the chairperson of the committee. In the report on page 12, the committee states clearly that for the National Digital Backbone Project, phase one, there was no independent expert and even your recommendation is derived from this observation. But the minister is insisting that there was an expert and I hope the committee interacted with the minister. I want the chairperson to assure us, are you agreeing with the minister or you want to categorically state that there was no expert so that this Parliament approves what you have put in the report? The minister’s submission is the opposite of what the committee is telling us and we want the chairperson to clarify to this Parliament what exactly the truth is. I thank you very much.

MR TOOLIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only one clarification, which I want the Minister of Finance to undertake. It is about the 10 motor vehicles. We know very well that when we are going to register the vehicles in the name of the ministry, then we do not need to pay the taxes. So, the Shs 170 million should be knocked off from the budget because as my colleague hon. Kalule stated, 10 vehicles plus the 14 existing ones add up to 24 vehicles; that is too much for a small ministry like ICT. You may find that on the part of the project, all the posts are filled up while on the side of the establishment there are very few posts, which have been filled. 

I think we should not register these vehicles as a project. They should be registered as ministry vehicles and we know very well that all ministry vehicles do not pay taxes. Thank you.

MR OMACH: I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The first question is directed to the Minister of Finance from hon. Kajeke the Shadow Minister for ICT. The counterpart funding of Shs 1.9 billion is included in the budget and it is sufficient for the first phase.  

The issue, which is being raised by the hon. Toolit about the taxes to be paid on 10 motor-vehicles, these are really book entries and so it has to be reflected under the ministry’s budget and then it will be paid and put as book entries.  

MR KAJEKE: This is the Policy Statement of the Ministry of ICT. On page 19 it says that in the Financial Year 2008/09 it is planned that the National Backbone will be established in two additional districts. However, the same budget allocation has been allocated against Shs 5.7 billion budgeted for. This funding gap will constrain implementation of the project. I cannot understand this in relation to the response of the minister.

MR BALIDDAWA: Madam Speaker, thank you. I appreciate the concern raised by hon. Kajeke but hon. Kajeke was in the committee and this issue was exhaustively discussed in the committee. It was the consensus of the committee, given what the minister explained, that the Shs 1.9 billion that was provided within the budget ceiling of the ministry was sufficient for the second phase -(Interjection)- it was exhaustively discussed. It is not a new issue, hon. Member; and he was present in that meeting. 

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, I want the chairperson of the committee to assure this House that ICT will not come again to claim for the balance of Shs 5.7 million out of the Shs 1.9 billion.

MR BALIDDAWA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as a committee we take what we have been given by the minister and the Minister of Finance, and I continue to stand by that. The counterpart funding has been provided within the development budget as Shs 1.9 billion, and I want to restrict myself to that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mulira, can you respond to your issues?

DR MULIRA: Yes. The issue of motor vehicles; the honourable members asked us why we buy vehicles now when we are understaffed? I think the issue as mentioned, two years ago, there were only two people in the ministry and the ministry is growing. In the policy statement on pages 48 to 49, I think we have clearly indicated the staffing levels, which are required, and we have also indicated the mandate and the functions of the ministry. The ministry may appear to be, as has been put by the honourable member, a small ministry, but the mandate is big. 

The backbone is a project, which is going all around the nation. We have got teams, the technical people, and the engineers, who have to keep moving as we roll out. And as I have indicated, the Public Service Commission is in the process of recruitment. Currently the staff complement should be 110. And so far 43 have been recruited, and are in the process of being recruited. So the figures which we are asking for are vehicles, which are going to be used within the financial year and beyond. 

The issue of other ministries, some of them not having vehicles; this is a new ministry, which started from scratch without even one vehicle. That is why the vehicles are required and therefore reflected. It may not be prudent to first wait to get the recruitment and then wait for the next budget cycle to start procuring vehicles.

In terms of the child helpline, this is an issue, which is being handled for the three digit code with a regulator and the International Telecoms Union. Very soon it is going to be resolved. We have been contacted by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Services, so it is being handled. 

Regarding the billing per second and per minute; part of this is dependent on the kind of arrangement you have with your service provider; whether it is post paid or prepaid. Nevertheless, this issue is being handled at the committee stage and we are looking into it.

Regarding the supervisor; I think the chairperson has already indicated that the supervisor for the project was there. I think yesterday we tabled the contract, which was signed between Government and the contractor who was procured using PPDA regulations and he conducted the supervisory role. 

Finally, regarding the prefabricated houses, this is an issue which has come out in the quotation and certainly it can be looked into again. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the question the honourable member was asking is: why do you import prefabricated houses as part of a loan in this country when we can build houses? That is what he wanted to know.

DR MULIRA: Madam Speaker, this is as indicated. This is part of the bill of quantities of the company, which is implementing and it is a turnkey project. A turnkey project means that when you sign, provided you provide supervision and oversight, the contractor produces the product, in this case the infrastructure at the end. And this was part of the bill of quantities by this contractor. Nevertheless, as indicated, it is something which we are going to look into with the contractor. Thank you.

MR TOOLIT: There are two issues; one is for the Minister of Finance. Can he explain about this book entry because we are not getting it clearly? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The what?

MR TOOLIT: The book entry; the Shs 170 million. Because we are going to approve money to be released to this ministry and I do not see how you are saying the taxes on the vehicles are only book entries; because we are going to approve the actual money to be released to the ministry.

Secondly, the Minister of ICT has stated that the buildings have already been put in the bill of quantities. So when you draw a bill of quantities, then the taxes should be included. I do not expect these taxes to be included here because it should have been included in the bill of quantities when it was submitted. So, you cannot actually enter twice. 

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I consulted the Minister of Works, who has just gone out, about the prefabricated buildings and he told me that he does not believe that this country needs to import prefabricated buildings -(Interjections)- I am of the view that the buildings, which are being proposed be subjected to the technical specifications and investigation by the relevant ministry. 

So I propose that the Ministry of ICT avails the necessary documentation and technical specifications for the justification to the Ministry of Works so that we can have a clear way forward about how this country can import prefabricated buildings. We need to know which type of buildings and why they are necessary. But the Minister of ICT has no technical knowledge; they are just using the bills from the supplier, who is of course working on his side. I think they should submit the technical specifications to the Ministry of Works and we move forward. I thank you.

DR MULIRA: Thank you for your submission. As I indicated, this is an issue which came in the bill of quantities and it is an issue which we are going to revisit with the contractor. Nevertheless, we have always been working with the Ministry of Works because there is a lot of civil works. It is not all about telecommunications. So, we shall continue working together with the Ministry of Works to proceed on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think the signal the Members are sending is that this country does not require prefabricated buildings, whether through ICT, Ministry of Works or whomever. You are creating employment in other countries and unemployment in our country. I think that is the signal the Members are sending. 

Minister of Finance, can you respond to that book entry you are talking about?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we are not allowed to exempt anybody from paying tax. So, the respective department or ministry has to pay taxes on behalf of entities under its ministry. And that money which is paid is received by the same government. So, the same government pays and the same government receives. That is what a book entry is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the chair of the committee whether there is something you want to respond to before we close? Is there something the minister did not answer?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know this is what was confusing Parliament yesterday; the money which we were about to pass in terms of taxes, is it physical money which will be paid or it is just a book entry? When we indicate Shs 170 million as taxes for vehicles and the minister is saying that it is just a book entry, are we approving money which will be paid or not? I think the clarification is not very clear. If we put it in our report that this Parliament appropriates Shs 170 million, our understanding is that this is money which we are approving for the ministry. If he is saying that there is no physical money that will be in transaction, I think it needs to be clarified clearly by the minister.

MR KAZIBWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the minister is using a wrong terminology when he says that it is a book entry. If it is just a book entry, there would be no financial transaction. If the ministry will pay to Revenue Authority and Revenue Authority pays back to the Ministry of Finance, it is a transaction; it is not a book entry. Thank you.

MR ISSA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the ICT Committee and in our report we gave a recommendation on the need to have an independent consultancy firm. We also urged the ministry during the consultation to really clear this because we were not in reconciliation with the Minister of ICT if we had the consultancy firm to supervise and monitor ICT activities. In our recommendation, we made it very clear but today the minister is not actually reconciling the report of the committee and his ministry. This question was even raised by hon. Chris Baryomunsi. 

I think it is important that the ministry makes a clear mark that could reconcile the committee’s report and the ministry as to whether it is true that we have an independent consultancy firm in the Ministry of ICT. As a committee, we did not get any information that regards a consultancy firm that had been supervising the sophisticated activities in the ICT ministry. So, I think the minister should be very clear and should take on this committee recommendation with a clear urge. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether that is not what he was laying on table yesterday. There are some documents he laid yesterday. 

DR MULIRA: Rt hon. Speaker, hon. Otto, the contract of the independent consultant was laid on table yesterday. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we have agreed that your committee should look at it post budget process and give us a report. Chairperson, please wind up.

MR BALIDDAWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I also agree with the observations of hon. Otto. We did recommend to the minister that they should involve an independent consultant and I think the ministry has taken that seriously. 

Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate the members and the concerns they have raised. I think they have raised the level of our concern in the committee; most of the issues are going to be picked up by the committee. We are planning to have a workshop where we are going to address most of these issues. However, I would really beg this august House to approve this budget as amended. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, can we resolve the issue of the book entry, honourable Minister of Finance? 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, this tax that we are talking about is a non-resource tax, which is administered by the Accountant-General. The Accountant-General passes a book entry without physical cash leaving to go to the URA, which is the payee. That is why we call it a book entry. It is a non-resource tax. This is what the law says; it has to be paid, it has to be recognised by the Accountant-General in his books, and the payer is Government of Uganda and the payee is URA. However, no physical cash does move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on ICT as amended.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 55 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT MANAGEMENT AND SERVICE DELIVERY PROGRAMME

12.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the government’s proposal to borrow US$ 55 million for financing the Local Government Management and Service Delivery Programme. This request was referred to our committee in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 152(2) of our Rules of Procedure. We have scrutinised the request and now we wish to report.

The committee held meetings with the Minister and the technical officers of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We also held meetings with the Permanent Secretary and technical officers from the Ministry of Local Government and also technical officers from Kampala City Council. 

The committee analysed the following documents: 

•	The Minister’s brief
•	Project document. 
•	Financing Agreement.
•	Project appraisal document.
•	Project Implementation Plan. 
•	Implementation Completion and Results Report for the second Local Government Development Project. 
•	Implementation Completion and Results Summary Report for the second Economic and Financial Management Project (EFMPII) June 2000-June 2006. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the following: 

•	Minutes of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request. 
•	Project appraisal document on the proposed credit between the Republic of Uganda for the Local Government Management and Service Delivery Adaptable Programme Loan Project. It is dated 20 November 2007.
•	Implementation Completion and Results Summary Report for the second Economic Financial Management Project, June 2000-December 2006, dated 30th April 2007. 
•	Implementation Completion Report for Local Government Development Programme dated 23rd November 2004. 
•	Local Government Management and Service Delivery Project, Project Implementation Plan dated 3rd November, 2007. 
•	Implementation Completion and Results Report for second Local Government Development Project dated 10th June 2008. 
•	Financing Agreement for the Local Government Management and Service Delivery Project between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association of Uganda.

Background to the Local Government Support 

i) 	Since the introduction of decentralisation, the Government of Uganda has been receiving support and cooperation from development partners in terms of grants, credits and technical assistance all aimed at bringing about good governance, improved service delivery, empowering local communities and sustainable development. The partners have further provided support to the government for the introduction and enhancement of public financial management reforms so as to improve planning, financial expenditure management and accountability. The decentralisation and the public financial management reforms have produced tremendous results in the way services are delivered.

ii) 	The Ministry of Local Government has executed two Local Government Development Programmes (LGDPs) since 2000, covering the whole country. The first LGDP was executed between 2000 and 2003 at a cost of US$ 89.9 million and it was financed by IDA of the World Bank. This was followed by the second LGDP with a grant component of US$ 100 million and a credit component of US$ 50 million to support service delivery in the local governments and deepen decentralisation. This was financed by the World Bank and other bilateral development partners.

iii) 	The LGDP I and II operations have contributed towards socio-economic transformation and development, and measurable development outcomes in the local government sector. The LGDP programme through the local development grants has brought services such as water, sanitation, community and feeder roads, health centres, primary schools, drainage, and garbage collection. 

iv)	The capacity building grants, which were provided to the local governments under LGDP, have resulted into improved participatory development planning, better financial management and human resource capacities of local governments’ personnel.

v) 	The interventions initiated under LGDP require prudent and efficient financial management systems. In this regard, therefore, the Government of Uganda through EFMP II has implemented reforms that have covered the following:

•	The legislative and institutional framework for financial management.
•	Institutional capacity for planning, budgeting and accounting in central and local governments. 
•	Introduction of computerised financial management systems. This has enabled government to implement a computerised financial management system leading to significant improvement in the financial management processes.

vi) 	The EFMP II has brought efficiencies and cost savings in the form of reduced budget execution time, more accurate accounting, reporting and auditing, reduced arrears, minimisation of opportunities for fraud and corruption, more efficient cash management and the strengthening of the government’s financial management capabilities. 

Both EFMP II and LGDP II ended in December 2006 and 2007 respectively. As a follow-up to the achievements of these two projects in regard to public financial management reforms, there is need therefore to:

•	Continue providing local governments with discretionary financing for service delivery and consolidate the foundation laid to date. When you look at the brief to Parliament on paragraph 7, you will see what government is trying to do.

•	Deepen and consolidate the functionality of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), roll it out to the remaining central government ministries, departments and agencies and the local governments that are considered viable. 

•	Strengthen Public Financial Management (PFM) in local governments which are not beneficiaries of the IFMS.

•	Strengthen the capacity of the Office of the Auditor-General to be able to audit local government accounts as required by law.

It is for these reasons therefore that the development partners have been requested to continue supporting the decentralisation and financial management reforms through a new project to be known as the Local Government Management and Service Delivery Programme.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the objectives and focus of the Local Government Management and Service Delivery programme are as follows: To deepen decentralisation, consolidate the PFM reforms and enhance local governments’ ability to plan and manage human and financial resources for effective and sustainable delivery of basic services.

As mentioned earlier, this programme will build on the achievements of EFMP II and LGDP I and II, and will cover all levels of the local governments.  This is necessary for the sustainability of local government initiatives in service delivery. The Local Government Management and Service Delivery programme will also finance some of the PFM reforms that government has designed in order to improve public expenditure management. These reforms have been consolidated into the Financial Management and Accountability Programme (FINMAP) which is currently under implementation. 

The project components are:

1. 	Component 1: Support to the local government sector investment plan at a cost of US$ 195.74 million and this will have the following sub-components:

(i) 	Local development grant at a cost of US$ 156.64 million. Under this sub-component, funds will be provided to local governments for infrastructure services such as construction of classrooms, water supply and sanitation, community and feeder roads, drainage, construction of health centres, solid waste management, sanitation, markets and demonstration farms.  

(ii)	Community Driven Development (CDD) at a cost of US$ 8.1 million. Under this, we shall have the following:

•	Small-scale investments geared towards enhancing production and raising household incomes through a revolving fund of US$ 2,500 per community project. 
•	Community projects that do not generate immediate financial returns but are useful for production. 
•	Community training, preparation of guidelines and establishment of the revolving fund mechanism at a local government level.  
•	The rest of the grants will go towards empowering the communities through strengthening participatory planning, increasing transparency in the local government service delivery processes and creating a platform for harmonised service delivery for community investments within the local government system.  

(iii)	Support to the local governments in the war ravaged areas at a cost of US$ 21.9 million. Under LGDP II, the local governments in conflict areas lagged behind in development due to low human capacities, lack of human resources to run the local governments, low revenue generation, poor social and infrastructure services. This component of the Local Government Management and Service Delivery (LGMSD) will support the local governments in the war ravaged areas of Northern Uganda and Luwero Triangle to rehabilitate and construct sub-county offices, staff houses, purchase equipment or vehicles and provide supervision and monitoring of the rehabilitation process.
  
	The component of Northern Uganda was developed to support the Peace, Recovery and Development Programme (PRDP) with the intention of providing the necessary infrastructure to ensure a good investment climate for implementing the Prosperity for All Programme.

(iv) Strengthening local governments through institutional building initiatives at a cost of US$ 9.1 million. Under this component, funds will be allocated to the provision of special training for the critical management cadres at the local government level such as Chief Administrative Officers, town clerks and sub-county chiefs. The training will enhance their skills in transforming the local governments into centres of investment and production. This component will also provide computers and training for financial managers in the local governments.  

2. 	Component 2 will be strengthening PFM reforms at a cost of US$13.2 million. This component is intended to strengthen public financial management systems at the central and local governments to enhance efficient, effective, transparent and accountable use of public resources as a basis for poverty eradication and improved service delivery.  

The activities to be financed under this component are intended to strengthen central and local governments financial management systems through computerisation, including extension of the Integrated Financial Management Systems (IFMS) to 28 central government agencies and 12 higher local governments, implementation of a mid-range computerised system for local governments, and improvement of manual records for all non-computerised local governments. 

The enhancement of the IFMS will further expand the use of the Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) system of payment throughout the entire central government and some local governments. The IFMS database will also be developed further to accommodate the Integrated Personnel Payroll and Pensions Systems (IPPPS), which shall be implemented by the Ministry of Public Service.   

Secondly, Component 2 will develop accountable and transparent institutional and management systems at the central government ministries, departments and agencies. This will, in effect, improve the efficiency of the central government agencies and local governments during budget execution. The Ministry of Local Government and local governments shall be supported to develop sustainable capacity in the following:

•	Local government budget formulation.
•	Local government financial management and control.
•	Transparent and comprehensive local government financial reporting.

3.	Component 3 is programme support, monitoring and evaluation at a cost of US$ 2.7 million. 

Under this component, the Ministry of Local Government shall set up arrangements to manage the project activities which will include the establishment and implementation of a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system, environmental mainstreaming in infrastructure development, technical supervision, backstopping as well as the preparation of the next phase of the project. I invite members to look at the annex - table 3, table 4 and table 4a - for details. 

Project Financing

The total project cost is US$ 520 million and this will be over a period of ten years and it is going to be implemented in two phases. Phase one will cost US$ 211.64 million and this will cover a period of four years and it is financed by IDA, local governments and Government of Uganda. The second phase will cost US$ 308.38 million and it will cover a period of six years. 

The source of the funds for the first phase will be as follows: 

•	US$ 55 million will be credit from IDA of the World Bank. 
•	The Government of Uganda will contribute US$ 143.7 million. 
•	Local governments will make a contribution of US$ 12.94 million.  

The credit component will attract an interest rate of 0.75 percent, a commitment charge of up to 0.5 percent of unwithdrawn balances, a maturity period of 40 years and a grace period of ten years. 

The committee made the following observations:

1. 	The minister’s brief included Luwero Triangle under the sub component of support to local governments in war ravaged areas, together with Northern Uganda, but it is not provided for in the Project Implementation Plan and the project appraisal documents. We therefore requested for clarity from the minister and we got a response which includes Luwero Triangle and Northern Uganda. I would like to lay this communication on Table.

2. 	Given the low revenue base of some of the small districts, it is unlikely that such districts will raise the required counterpart funding yet it is a precondition for accessing the funds by local governments. It was further observed that there are many projects running in the districts and such projects also require counterpart funding.

3. 	Installation and computerisation of the financial systems depends on the availability of power. The local governments’ units without power may not benefit from this facility.

4. 	The committee is happy to note that the locally generated funds form 74 percent of the total project funding, and that 83 percent of the project funds will be used for infrastructural development while only 4.5 percent will be used on capacity building.

This is a welcome departure from the heavy reliance on funds from our development partners and the high expenditure on capacity building that has been characterising most of the loan projects that we have been undertaking. 

The committee therefore recommends the following:

1. The Project Implementation Plan and the project appraisal documents should be revised to provide for Luweero Triangle. 

2. 	The ministry should design power alternatives for districts that are not connected to the national power grid to make it possible for the project to roll out countrywide.

3. 	There should be a contingency plan to cater for the likely event that some districts may fail to raise counterpart funding to run the project activities.

4. 	Government should honour its commitment to make an annual release of Shs 64,309,000,000, which is about US$ 35.9 million, which government intends to put forward as its counterpart funding. 

In conclusion, the committee is satisfied with the objectives of the project and recommends that this House authorises government to borrow the requested US$ 55 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for financing the Local Government Management and Service Delivery Programme. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. I note the report is signed by at least one third of the members of the committee and is eligible for debate. However, I just want you to give me information on a small thing; I want to know what constitutes Northern Uganda within this programme. This is because last year I went to West Nile and one of the complaints I received from the people there was that when they talk about Northern Uganda, they forget about West Nile and they asked me to see how they can be considered as a whole. I want to know what Northern Uganda is in this local government development.

MR KADDUNABBI: This list has many districts and they range from Adjumani, Apac, Oyam, Arua, Maracha-Terego, Koboko, Gulu, Yumbe, Amuru, Kapchorwa, Bukwa, Katakwi, Amuria, Kitgum, Pader, Kotido, Abim, Kabong, Kumi, Bukedea, Lira, Dokolo, Amolatar, Sironko, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Moyo, Nebbi, Pallisa, Budaka –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I am satisfied that they are there. 

12.39
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification from the chairman and the minister in charge of the loan. When you talk of construction of classrooms, this is the responsibility of the Ministry of Works and Ministry of Education. How are you going to handle this? Is the Ministry of Education going to be in charge or it is basically the Ministry of Local Government? That applies to also water and sanitation, health centres and demonstration farms.

I also want to know the difference between these demonstration farms here and the ones under NAADS. Isn’t it better that we get the resources here and add them to NAADS or we bring the ones from NAADS and put them here? Why should we have this duplication of resources?

About this 2500 per community project; what is the difference between the SACCOs and this community project? Is this another SACCO? Also, how are you going to determine a community project? Is it per village, parish or sub-county? You talk about sub-county houses and offices; do you have the list because we need to know which houses we are going to build? We must know which sub-county is going to benefit. If you have the list, please give it to us.

As regards vehicles, everybody here knows what will take place so that we can be held accountable. The training will involve people in local governments engaged in management, financial and computer skills. What is the difference between this and EFMP II because all local governments were trained; unless you are telling us that those trained people left or that they never learnt anything? Isn’t this more duplication? What is the reason behind this? Also, why should we employ people who are unqualified in local governments when there are people who are qualified in these areas? 

You have noted very well that some local governments do not have resources. If this is the case, what will happen? I think we should come up and say clearly that central government should be able to provide all the resources. Local governments already have problems so why should we give them an additional burden? What happens if a local government does not raise the funds? Doesn’t it qualify? Why don’t we shift this responsibility to central government since they are the ones who release money to local governments?

Luweero Triangle has benefited a lot. The evidence is there. We even have a Minister in charge of Luweero; unless the minister is useless but if he is useful, Luweero Triangle has been one of the beneficiaries. How can Luweero Triangle be part of Northern Uganda when it is in Buganda? Why don’t we call this project the Uganda Project because it comprises the North, Luweero Triangle in central Buganda, and most likely Kisoro will be included and Eastern Uganda. So why are you taking it as Northern Uganda? Let us call it a better name. We are using the name of Northern Uganda for wrong purposes. Luweero Triangle should stand as Luweero Triangle.

You have not mentioned a plan concerning power. You say that the government should come up with a design and plan for power so that there will be computers. I don’t understand this; unless Rural Electrification has not worked but if it has, they should give us a plan as to how this has been done. If there is no power, does it mean that there will be no computers in those areas or are you giving them generators? What are you going to do about connectivity? 

Madam Speaker, this proposal has a lot of problems in the sense that there is going to be duplication of activities. If we had amalgamated these activities and put them in respective areas, it would have looked far better. In my view, before we approve this, let us first have it in the project plan. Secondly, let us have the names cleared and three, why don’t we move these to respective ministries so that they take up these responsibilities? I thank you.

12.44
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a bit confused. First of all, the title of the loan request is “Financing Local Government Management and Service Delivery”, but when you go to the contents on page four and the component of the funding, you will realise that it talks about rolling it out to the remaining central government ministries, departments, agencies and the local governments that are considered viable. Therefore, it means that this loan title is misleading and it is not for local governments. It first says those that are viable and this means that there was a consideration of how the selection of the district was determined based on viability. I would like the chairperson to tell us what basis of viability is that which he talks about on page four.

Secondly, on the same page the report goes ahead to say that it will also deal with the question of capacity of the Office of the Auditor-General. So we now see that it is both for central government and local governments. It talks about the remaining central government ministries, departments, agencies and the local governments that are viable. This means that there was a loan that existed, some benefited and some did not. Can we know which those remaining central government ministries, departments and agencies are?

Madam Speaker, there are so many contradictions. While on page four the report is talking about local governments that are considered viable, if you go to page 5 the report states that it will cover all levels of the local governments. The paragraph that starts with, “As mentioned earlier, this programme will build on the achievements of EFMP II and LGDP I and II and will cover all levels of local governments.” So, there are these contradictions. 

But, Madam Speaker, I am worried because the chairperson talks about an existing financial management and accountability programme that is ongoing, which has not been evaluated, whose achievements we do not know. It is still being implemented on all these programmes that are embedded in this loan. It does not tell us what the achievements of FINMAP are and the gaps that necessitate the US$ 55 million and how much money is left under FINMAP; and why we should borrow this amount of money before we know what FINMAP has done; and when the implementation will end. 

But, Madam Speaker, the most worrying thing is the question of duplication. Last week, a loan was brought by the same chairperson. I want to refer you to page 8; on the same loan which we rejected and deferred. The same content of what was in the other loan is now repeated in this loan and I want to refer you to page 8, where it says that “…the IFMS database will also develop further to accommodate the integrated personnel, payroll and pension systems, which shall be implemented by the Ministry of Public Service.” 

Exactly the same activities that existed in the loan that was deferred, which I am told has now been approved by a caucus and will come back for approval in this House - [Hon. Members: “It was already passed.”] - it was already passed? I have been away. Then it means that this is already a mechanism and a conduit through which people eat money. 

Madam Speaker, on the same page, it says, “The enhancement of the IFMS will further expand the use of the Electronic Funds Transfer.” As far as I am concerned, we are already operating electronic funds transfers. Now, what is this fund going to do? It goes ahead to say, “…throughout the entire central government and some local governments….” Does it mean that at the moment there are some central government departments that are not using the Electronic Funds Transfer? On the same it talks about enhancing the systems and computerisation of the payroll and so on and so forth. These are the same activities -(Interruption) 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you my honourable colleague. Again, when we were in the Seventh Parliament with the Government Chief Whip, we actually passed a huge loan which is supposed to address the very issues that you see reported again in public service and in this. It would be nice to know what has happened that now necessitates us to put components of the same project that was implemented by the Ministry of Finance in local government and in public service. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, please close. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. Member for the information. 

But still, if you go to the beginning of this, it acknowledges the achievements that already the LGDP and other loans such as the EFMP II have achieved. It talks about the local government level at the moment, the achievement of EFMP II loan has been more accurate accounting, reporting and auditing, reducing arrears, minimisation of opportunities for fraud and corruption and more efficient cash management. 

Sincerely, Madam Speaker, for me who sits on the Local Government Accounts Committee, and we have known and seen how corrupt the local governments are, and you tell me how this has minimised fraud and corruption when the Auditor General’s report is very clear on how local governments are the most corrupt, I think it would have been better to be more accurate than to bring achievements that are actually not achievements. If you say it has minimised fraud and corruption, look at the Auditor General’s and the IGG’s reports and all the reports related to local governments.

But the benchmark is that, there is so much duplication in this loan and therefore it would be unwise for Parliament to pass it as it is. The committee should go back and look at what other loans have done, for example, the one which was passed under Public Service and come back with a revised proposal. Whether it is for local government or whether it is for central government, it should be clearer. I think as a Member, it will be wrong to pass this the way it is. Thank you. 

12.54
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting to us this report. Some of these things have been touched, particularly on the heading, but when you go to the contents, it is about other things. I thought it was going to focus on the local governments. 

Suffice to say that one, Madam Speaker and honourable members, when the Minister of Finance was presenting his budget speech to Parliament, somewhere under the subtitle “Local governments” he talked about releasing over one trillion to local governments, and somewhere in between that paragraph, he talked about lack of a clear criterion unto which this money can be dispersed to local governments. 

I wonder whether the chairperson of the committee has got the method used such that the Parliament can know how they have carried out the distribution of this. Honourable members, go back and read that. There is no clear methodology of giving money to districts and that is why when you read some of the reports we get from the different districts of Uganda, there are variations. Much as the populations could be the same or less or some even more, the way money is distributed lacks some kind of transparency. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Member for giving way. The information I wanted to provide is that, it is true the formula is not very clear. For instance, when you look at the equalisation grants which government extends to disadvantaged districts, you will find that a district like Bushenyi receives an equalisation grant and a district like Kanungu does not receive and yet in the eyes of Ugandans, Kanungu is really disadvantaged.

The Minister of Finance reported in the budget speech that the Local Government Finance Commission is working out a formula that will be used by government to calculate how much money goes to each district. I think it was stated clearly in the budget speech. But also, just last week this Parliament agreed that we shall put in place a select committee which is going to work on the formula and then advise Parliament on how the government can extend various amounts of money to various districts depending on various variables which the committee will come up with. So, that is the information I wanted to give you. 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give hon. Sebuliba Mutumba is that, the Local Government Finance Commission came up with a formula on how money could be allocated to local governments equitably. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health where the greatest amount of money comes from in terms of allocation rejected that formula. And in the last financial year, when we were talking about the budget, when they were allocating SFG funds, the Ministry of Education unilaterally selected a few districts. For example, in western Uganda, they gave Kiruhura money but they did not give Mbarara. In our side, they gave our neighbours, they did not give Manafwa. So, the problem is with ministries which do not want to build up this transparency so that this money can come out equitably for all local governments.

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, hon. Members. Madam Speaker, you have heard and that is why, for instance, when you come to page 7, the last paragraph, “Strengthening local governments through institutional building initiatives” - now this is the question again. If we have already trained these CAOs, and somewhere deep in the report they are talking about some war-ravaged areas - Northern group, Luweero - what formula are you going to put forward to allocate this money? Because there are some areas where the CAOs are over-trained and they come when they have all the skills. So, which formula are you going to apply here?

And you can imagine it is going to take $9.10 million. I would wish they can even give us a break down on this such that we are comfortable with this kind of expenditure. And, Madam Speaker, we are still balkanising this country into new districts. What is the plan for this because even some of the districts have already failed to operate? They lack the resources and new ones are coming up. How are you going to cater for the new ones which are coming up? I was reading in the paper today that President Museveni has already promised another one in Ngora.

Then on counterpart funding, some districts have failed to raise counterpart funding and what the local technocrats have done is to ask for land from the people of those areas like his place, Kalangala, and when they fail they just confiscate or take that land without paying them a dime. So, how are you going to address this? How do you value what has been confiscated? And yet somewhere in the report they are saying that government is going to help people out.

Madam Speaker, the way I have seen the whole report, it needs time for Members to go back and study. I am not going to talk about the contents of page 8 which hon. Betty has already talked - (Member timed out)

1.00
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to thank the chairman of the committee for presenting this to us. Allow me also to express my fears that the next generation will really suffer a lot due to the increasing burdens that will come out of our borrowing because it is like everyday we wake up and there is money to be borrowed by this Parliament. 

So, in line with this, Madam Speaker, allow me to go straight to page 7 where the committee is talking of strengthening local governments through institutional building initiatives at the cost of $9.10 million. They went ahead to say that they are going to do critical management cadres trainings that will include chief administrative officers, town clerks and sub county chiefs but they have not included sub county accountants. 

Madam Speaker, my experience with the last LGDP funding, in my own district some sub counties were penalised for not using the funds and for not accounting for the funds. In my district alone there were over seven sub counties which were affected. So, we are not including sub county accountants here and yet they are the ones that are directly involved with handling these funds especially at the sub county local government level. So, it is really going to be very impossible for these funds to be fully utilised if you do not include the sub county accountants.

Madam Speaker, my fears are also on page 9 where they are recommending that some local governments have to do some counterpart funding. It is like asking a patient who is unconscious, who needs an ambulance, to contribute Shs 100,000 to fuel the ambulance which is to take him to hospital like is currently happening in the rural villages. So, when you are asking for money to fund activities at local government levels, how do you ask them again to contribute such amounts? Some local governments, like in Northern Uganda, do not have funds; they do not locally raise revenue especially Northern Uganda that has been in this 21 year old war. They cannot raise substantial revenue to really contribute towards this. So, I wonder how the local governments will themselves benefit from these funds.

Lastly, I am worried about the constitution of the Northern Uganda districts. The chairman was reading out the list but unfortunately he did not finish. I was very interested in listening until the end because I know that it may go up to like 40 or 80 districts -(Interruption)

MR DENIS OBUA: Thank you, honourable. May I inform you that on the list of districts of Northern Uganda we have Kapchorwa, it was read by the chairman of the committee; we have Bukwo, Amuria, Sironko, Kumi, Pallisa, and Budaka. All these districts are not in Northern Uganda; they are in eastern Uganda. Whether you are using a geographical Northern Uganda or a political Northern Uganda, all these districts are in eastern Uganda. So, we better talk of North and north eastern Uganda much as the North is a very good lobbying strategy. We must inform those who negotiated this loan on behalf of the Government of Uganda to ensure that we put the record straight; let us talk of North and north-eastern Uganda. I am not saying that Kapchorwa should not be on the list, but it is not a district in Northern Uganda. That is why we should only talk of North and north eastern. The original Northern Uganda comprised West Nile, Acholi, Lango and Karamoja sub regions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Franca Akello. (Mr Kibedi rose_) You know, she has only five minutes. But if you are donating your time, it is up to you.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, it is okay.

MR KIBEDI: Thank you so much, hon. Franca, for allowing me to give further information. As the Youth Member of Parliament for Eastern Uganda, which includes Kapchorwa, Kumi, Sironko and the others I would like to say that those districts belong to my region. So, it was encroaching onto my area of jurisdiction –(Laughter)– to give that wrong information. So, Mr Chairman, you should come to me for the correct information as to where those districts belong.

MS AKELLO: Allow me to conclude, Madam Speaker, by thanking the two honourable members for giving me information. But what I was actually trying to say is that, although the funds are always sought in the name of Northern Uganda, those funds end up not benefiting the people there. A case in point is this PRDP, which is coming on board. I will tell you that even the district where the chief whip comes from is already included on the list of districts of Northern Uganda. I wonder how that came into place.

So, Madam Speaker, I think I have to rest my point. Thank you so much for giving me the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the hon. Member for Aswa. I know why that area is there; it is because the IDPs are living in your area; that is a known factor. Okay, after him I will go to hon. Kiryapawo and later hon. Rwakimari.

1.08
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank very much. I have a few clarifications, Madam Speaker. The first clarification I am seeking from the chairman features at page 6.2, the Shs 8.1 million for the CDD. The report says that this money will be given across the country. When I computed it with each community project costing $2500, it gave me 3240 community projects. How are these projects going to be distributed across the country? I am asking this because it is not enough to say they will be distributed across the country. I think Members are suspicious because every time matters come here people keep talking about across the country. We think this is being too general. So, we would like to understand to which parts of the country will these 3240 projects go?

Two is on, Madam Speaker, page 8 on component two; they are talking about 28 government agencies. I would want to know these agencies that they are talking about.

And lastly, Madam Speaker, on page 7, “Support to the local governments in war-ravaged areas”. Let us be frank and straight. During the bad time, these war-ravaged areas are limited, during the good time, they are expanded. When you talk about Luweero Triangle, we must know the districts constituting this triangle. I think it is not good to just continue talking about Luweero Triangle. Many districts have come on board and many have been extended. And at some point it might also be a disservice to the people of Luweero to hear that things are coming to them and the little that comes –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Okumu for giving way. Under NURP, we had a restocking programme; animals were being bought from elsewhere and brought to the North. Animals were being bought from Kiboga District among others and Northern Uganda was extended to include Kiboga District which was supplying animals to the North, but also being restocked at the same time. (Laughter)

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate is taking a different route and that is why I am persuaded to seek a point of procedure. Much as my sister left the floor, we cannot leave a bad record in the Hansard. She said that money meant for the North never gets there, yet even Saturday, when I was watching WBS TV, I saw a lady from the North who had constructed a house and was given iron sheets. She was speaking in her language but there was translation –(Interjections)– yes, I am giving that example. So at least those iron sheets were received by this local woman who acknowledged that, “Having put up a shelter, I received iron sheets.”

Last year, the Minister for Northern Uganda was here enplaning about the bad pangas. True the pangas were bad, but at least they got there. Now, you see the course of the debate, we want to see the districts in Luweero Triangle. I was a Minister for Luweero Triangle and four ministers have succeeded me; we even have a map. The Luweero Triangle districts have not expanded because they want to get money. I think that is not fair. 

So, is it procedurally right to deny and leave that record in the Hansard that money meant for the North does not get there? If it does not get there, can she tell us where that money goes for the record? If it does not go there, then it must be some where, perhaps in Mukono South. But I have not seen money for the North in Mukono South; where does the money go then? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think what the Member was complaining about is that the word “Northern Uganda” is being used to secure support that also goes to other places beyond Northern Uganda.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I think the term “War-ravaged areas” should not cause panic, because the degree on war ravagedness also varies and when legitimate Members of Parliament representing their people raise this concern on the floor here, it should not raise eyebrows because this is a genuine and serious concern by the people who are heavily affected.

I was on the point of the war-ravaged areas. I think we would be interested in knowing the districts of Luweero now that the districts of Northern Uganda have been read. And when you get the districts of Luweero and Northern Uganda as they are today, they are more than half of Uganda. So, why don’t we have a programme for a war-ravaged Uganda? Why do we exclude other areas, what criteria do we use, for example, to stop in Sironko and not bring on board Bududa, Mbale, Jinja, where Lakwena also went and Kamuli; people there were also displaced. So, the idea is that we should not give excuses and –(Interruption)

MR SANTOS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Okumu for giving way. The information I am giving him is that, when you write a project in the name of Northern Uganda, because of the problems that have been there for the last many years, you can easily get financed and then you use the money to finance these other districts which have not had problems. That should be at the back of your mind. (Laughter) 

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I think what hon. Okumu is saying has got some justification, that instead of concentrating on Luweero and Northern Uganda, when we know very well that we had a very serious ADF insurgency in the Rwenzori region, covering about five districts of Kasese, Kabarole, Kamwenge, Kyenjojo, Bundibugyo, we should talk of supporting war-ravaged Uganda instead of specifying Northern Uganda or Luweero. 

That is the information I wanted to give hon. Okumu, that there are other war-ravaged districts that are not included in this programme. And at one time, I will seek clarification from the minister in charge.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the issue I am raising should be taken a little bit more seriously -(Member timed out) 

1.18
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for bringing this report to this august House. 

Madam Speaker, I know there was the Teso Commission, which dealt with areas that had been affected by war, and Pallisa was one of the areas under Teso Commission and since then it has remained so. So, when you hear, “The districts of Pallisa or Budaka and Northern Uganda,” I think what hon. Kaliba said is the right word that we should include every area which has been affected by war either directly or indirectly. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am forced to rise on a point of order. The honourable member holding the Floor has argued that it is fitting to call a war-ravaged area, “Northern Uganda” as if war is only limited to Northern Uganda. The matter of concern being raised on the Floor by honourable members of Parliament is that Northern Uganda is a geographical entity. There was also war in eastern Ugandan; it is another geographical entity - because the Teso Commission was in eastern Uganda and there was a war in eastern Uganda! That was a geographical entity. Is she, therefore, in order to imply that when you are talking about war, you are simply referring to Northern Uganda and not eastern Uganda? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, you know the honourable member is actually justifying the existence of the districts of Pallisa, Budaka, Sironko and others on that list. She is supporting you and explaining why they are there. They have not just been incorporated. She is explaining the background to their being on that list. She is really with you. 

MRS KIRYAPAWO: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Let me go ahead. Madam Speaker, the other issue that I have regards Luweero Triangle. Luweero Triangle, I think, needs a strategic plan to see how we can rehabilitate it. So, I do not know when they get this money for Luweero Triangle that it will really do some work which we can see and speak of. There is a lot of money which has been spent in Luweero but when you go to areas which belong to Luweero Triangle, you will not believe what you see. Sometimes this money has been for compensation of claimants, and the claimants never end. 

Now, even here we are talking about rehabilitation and construction of sub-county offices, staff houses, purchasing equipment, vehicles, provide supervision and monitoring, where are the schools for Luweero Triangle? What about health centres for Luweero Triangle? I am sure that this money will again go but you will find that those sub-counties –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking the clarification?

MRS KIRYAPAWO: When you do not see schools for children under UPE under USE, then we shall remain with the problem of Luweero. So, I would rather ask the minister to put some of this money of constructing staff houses for sub-counties into schools. If you could look into the schools, health units, water and roads. Some of us have done a lot of work in this country but even here in Mukono, when you move on some of those roads, you will not believe that you are just near Kampala. Yes, compare it to some of the areas that are far. I would like Luweero to have strategic programmes like the programmes we have in Northern Uganda, for example, Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme. Whereby if you say it is schools, it goes into schools. When you say roads or water, it goes to that rather than saying Luweero, and year in and year out Luweero comes on the Floor of this Parliament. 

So, my request is, can we put an end to rehabilitating Luweero because Luweero like Northern Uganda has many districts which fall under Luweero Triangle. So, my main problem is to see how we can rehabilitate Luweero Triangle and also to clarify that some areas are under it with the title Luweero Triangle. Maybe we should ask clarification as to why they categorised those districts under Luweero Triangle. There must be a justification just like there are justifications for some of these districts which are under Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Rwakimari. But before hon. Rwakimari comes in, there is a procedural matter. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we debate on the Floor now, we are basically debating two things: We are debating, one, the merits of the loan that has been requested. And secondly, we are debating the report of the committee that may not actually have a bearing on the actual content of the loan. 

The issue of the Luweero Triangle is even openly stated in the committee report; that it is not in the project document; that there has not been any renegotiation of it to be included. And we run into this problem, which we pointed out when we were talking about the public service loan, where we begin to delude ourselves that we can change a project document by merely pronouncing ourselves in committees and in the House, and then at the end it does not happen. If the funding for Luweero, because a lot of the component funding of this project is government funding, were coming from government funding and which I would want to talk about later, then you do not need to actually bring it as a request for this loan because it becomes very diversionary. 

So, the procedural matter that I wanted sorted out is the source of this request to include Luweero Triangle. I know that the chairman comes from Butambala and his district is part of Luweero Triangle. How did this request for Luweero Triangle to be included in war affected areas come in? (Laughter) 

Secondly, the Members on our side have kind of kept quiet but let me say this. It does not reflect on Government very well when they still want money for Luweero Triangle twenty something years after the Luweero war ended. And I do not know whether the people who are doing this, linking it with the war in the North, realise the impact that it creates? It just means that for twenty something years the war ended in Luweero and you did nothing. It becomes very difficult but I enjoy it when you admit your failure like that. However, can we sort out that procedural matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the chairman will. Do you want to address it now? Okay.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the issue of Luweero Triangle is really not coming up because Kaddunabbi comes from Butambala but it came from the minister’s brief to Parliament. And the in Minister of Finance’s brief, page 7, he specifically says, “Support to local governments in the war ravaged areas at a cost of US $21.9 million”. And he says that, “This component of LGMSD will support the Local Governments in the war ravaged areas of Northern Uganda and Luweero Triangle to rehabilitate and construct sub-county offices, staff houses, purchase equipments and vehicles.” 

So, I believe that it was Government’s intention to include Luweero Triangle. But when we looked at the project implementation plan and the project appraisal documents and Luweero Triangle was completely out. So, we insisted as a committee that we either get a clarification on whether Luweero Triangle is not among those to benefit, or it is to benefit. We got a written confirmation from the Ministry of Local Government that Luweero Triangle will benefit but - I had requested to be helped with the copy. 

You will realise that the districts in Northern Uganda and the Teso sub-region are getting a series of things and those ones in Luweero Triangle are getting mostly rehabilitation of the sub-county offices or sub-county chiefs’ houses only. And the ones in Northern Uganda are getting bicycles; they are buying equipment; they are constructing offices. And the argument was that the reason they did it that way is that in Northern Uganda, many places do not have offices. Many places do not have houses. And to further help Northern Uganda, they are going to give bicycles even to chiefs, to help them do their work a little better, which is not the case with Luweero Triangle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your answer is now raising more issues. The source of the project appraisal is the government. The source of the other information is the government; you know -

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, the things the honourable chairperson of the committee listed are what we would use to define the merits of the loan request. It is not the substance of the issue that I raised. The substance of the issue I raised is this: is funding for Luwero Triangle going to come from the agreement for which we are now in the process of passing the loan? Because passing of the loan is the final process of the negotiation for the loan that includes the actual content, the agreement, whatever those protocols are; that is the process. 

What I am saying is that somewhere along the way we have to sort out this because we as Parliament would be doing things that we need to sort out not by what we say in Parliament but by a legal provision to allow for resolutions and amendments of Parliament to be taken by the funders. Because I know that many amendments that we did before like this in Parliament never got taken. And we then deceive our electorate and the public that we actually have the power and we can change this! And he says clearly that it is in the project document, and that is my concern. The actual content, the merit of the loan, we will sort that one out. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as I stated earlier on, this is the first phase of the two phases which will be totaling to US $520 million, and the government of Uganda will provide US $143.7 million. This is money from the central Government; and the local governments will have US $12.94 million. Then there is a gap, which has to be financed by a credit, which is coming in from IDA. And that is the one of US $55 million. What my committee did was to explain everything, which is covering the total of US $211.64 million. That is why we have so many components. US $143.7 million is coming from Government, only US $55 million is coming from IDA and US $12.9 million is coming from Local Government. So, I cannot specifically say that this one is coming from donors or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Rwakimari. I think we have cheated her.

1.36
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important debate. 

First of all, I wish to express my disappointment with the Ministry of Finance for bringing this loan before bringing the promised loan to fund reproductive health. Last time when we were debating the loan for Public Service, the Minister of Finance clearly promised that before he brings other loans, he will bring to this House a loan to fund activities of reproductive health. Before I go further, I just want the minister to note and tell us later when he is going to bring the loan of US $100 million to fund activities of reproductive health in the Ministry of Health.

Secondly, when I look at the components of this loan, I feel that the components are amorphous and lack focus, like my colleagues have mentioned. When I look at page 6, component No.1, Local Development Grant, at a cost of US $156.64 million; the construction of classrooms, water supply, sanitation, health centres, I begin to wonder whether this is the mandate of the Ministry of Local Government or the mandate of other ministries. Therefore, I am just wondering why this money cannot be given to the responsible ministries so that we get efficiency and effectiveness in the use of these resources. 

I do not need to go further because most of the points have been highlighted. I just want to propose that maybe in order to benefit the local governments - because there are components of this loan which are very good - in order not to lose focus of those other very important components, I just want to propose that maybe this loan can be taken back to the committee so that they harmonise some of the issues that had been raised in order to avoid duplication? [Mr Byarugaba: “Information”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking it? Information from Isingiro.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you hon. Beatrice Byarugaba -

MRS RWAKIMARI: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Alex Byarugaba in order to call me Mrs Beatrice Byarugaba when he knows very well that I am Mrs Beatrice Rwakimari? And after giving him an opportunity to give me information, he just misuses his opportunity to do so and calls me Mrs Byarugaba. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byarugaba, you are out of order to allocate yourself to the Member for Ntungamo; she is Beatrice Rwakimari. (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: I am utterly, very sorry for that mix up, my wife happens to be Beatrice Byarugaba -(Laughter)- and hon. Beatrice Rwakimari and Beatrice Byarugaba are very close friends.  

That not withstanding, Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and to thank the honourable member holding the Floor for giving me an opportunity to offer some information because I have heard this retaliated by several speakers that there is some disharmony. No, essentially let us not lose sight of the fact that we have a policy of decentralisation whereby local governments are supposed to actually be doing all that we are talking about. Unfortunately, the central Government’s departmental ministries are consistently refusing to let go and that is why when you look at page 5, the main objective of this loan is to deepen decentralisation and empower local governments to determine development levels in their own areas. 

We should be able to differentiate everything else we are talking about PPAs. This is the mandate of local governments. I wish, therefore, my colleagues could differentiate and not mix up. I wanted to give her information to the effect that actually it is the mandate of local governments to do all this under the policy of decentralisation and I thank you very much for that.

MRS RWAKIMARI: This is a presentation, not information. Anyway, I think what he has raised is not different from what he had said that some of the components are really very good although others need to be harmonized because they are kind of duplicated in other ministries. In order for us to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of this loan, I propose that this loan be differed so that those components, which seem to be spilling over to other ministries, may be removed so that we remain with what actually belongs to the Ministry of Local Government -(Member timed out)

1.43
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity and thank the chairperson of the committee for his presentation. My concern is right on page 1 where he laid documents on the Table. I expected documents M and E to be laid on the Table because on page 4 there is a budget that is tied to M and E and M and E under project management are equally very important components. So, on 4(ii) we have a budget of 13.2 million tied to M and E. I would really appreciate it if he could lay that document on the Table to enable us study further the M and E process.   

And like my colleagues have presented, Madam Speaker, we have had a grant executed under LGDP I and LGDP II, which have extended up to 2007 and under these grants we would have appreciated if they had given us the districts and the components so that as we deliberate on this - I do not know whether to call it LGDP grants really - we would know where the two grants stopped so that we do not get duplication of activities.  

Equally under I and II, they have mentioned water and sanitation and there is improvement of infrastructure, which are good components. To me they are very good components, but when I talk about water and sanitation - I hail from Ibanda fortunately - of recent we got water up to the district headquarters - I would call it the town centre. But the Chairman, LC V was saying that his duty is to make sure this water reaches the centre yet the majority of the population lives in urban and semi-urban areas. I have been wondering under this project whether we have that component where we can extend this water to the urban and semi-urban areas. 

There is a component on community driven development, which is given as 8.1. My problem is that it says “across the whole country” but it does not look to be really good enough to cover components across the whole country. Under this component there is where they say a revolving fund of US $2.5 million is for a project under the community component, which I still believe is: (1) too little; and (2) I am worried about the management of this revolving fund. At the back of my mind I am wondering why this revolving fund should not really be under the Ministry of Finance.  

Under the same component they raised the empowerment of the office of the Auditor-General so that he may be able to carry out good work while auditing the local governments. I am perturbed because I think there would be conflict of interest if the office of the Auditor-General is empowered by the same ministry that he has to audit. I mean to write his audit reports on the same ministry could easily cause a conflict of interest. 

Like I have said, when I look at page 6, the component and the project look good, especially water and sanitation -(Member timed out)

1.49
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I thank the chairman of the committee for the report because Sironko was mentioned. However, Sironko is in Eastern and not Northern Uganda. But to be honest, most of the affected people, if you go to Sironko now, there is an area called Acholi Inn in Sironko town council. We have been hosting those people who were affected in Northern Uganda; we have helped them settle, we have worked with them; even the manager on my farm is from Amuru but he is comfortable.

If you look at the project table, -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, just around Jinja Road roundabout, there is a building called Kitgum House. (Laughter) I have looked at the tenants who are there, I have never seen any single Acholi being hosted there and yet the name remains Kitgum House, in Kampala. That does not qualify it to be part of the North. Is the honourable member trying to justify the claim for the programme meant for Northern Uganda in the name of Acholi Inn, in Acholi quarters in Mbale, so that they can be able to access part of that programme? Can he clarify on this issue?

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, if you go to Sironko, what is called Acholi Inn basically is dominated by people from Acholi. That is why we call it Acholi Inn. They came during the war -(Hon. Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, these are small things.

MR WAMAKUYU: They came during the war, we have kept them well -(Interjections)- in fact Mbale could be included. Most of hon. Kajeke’s voters are from that area, like many other Eastern districts. But if you go to table 3(a), the budget summary for project management support, you find that much of the money goes into consultancy and you wonder! Consultants are the ones taking the largest share. So, I do not know which type of consultancy and there have also been projects like EFMP II. Those are the same consultants who are doing the same work, but they are taking the largest share. We should structure the loan such that much money goes into other activities other than consultancy. 

In table 4(a) they are talking of bicycles for parish chiefs. Madam Speaker and honourable members, those of you who know my constituency know that three quarters of it is hilly; it is a mountainous area. People there do not know how to ride bicycles, even I do not know how to ride one but I know how to drive. They are not relevant to us. So, I would propose that when it comes to bicycles, Sironko especially should be given an alternative, but the bicycles will not work.

On page 4 they say, “EFMP II has brought efficiencies and cost savings in the form of reduced budget execution time, more accurate accounting, reporting and auditing, reduced arrears…” but if you go to all these budgets we have now, the levels of arrears are increasing -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you could also assist me? You are raising objectives but not giving any solution. What do we do with the loan?

1.55
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I have perused this document, which is trying to enable us borrow money for strengthening decentralisation and service delivery in our districts and the entire country. The intentions of this borrowing look to be fair in terms of service delivery. 

When I look at the background of all the programmes we have had in the past, you will find that generally there is what we call service delivery by the Ministry of Local Government but my concern is that once these funds are released to the districts, it appears there is no mechanism in place to follow as to how they are being utilised. It would appear that the ministry releases funds and it forgets about the money. And when you go down you find that all the projects they are talking about, like they say the roads, the sanitation, and the schools are all shoddy structures, which cannot last for even thirty years. When I look at the programmes I find that we are borrowing but will it have impact? What is it? The programme is okay but will that money have an impact on our people? So I want to caution the ministry to have a mechanism in place whereby once this money is borrowed, the use must also be monitored throughout the country.

When I look at page 10 of this report, it is actually saying that districts, which are to benefit, are the ones which have a power source. Now I am wondering as to whether a district like mine in Yumbe will benefit out of this. We have no power; our computers are not working so what are we going to do in order to receive benefits out of this money?

When you look at Northern Uganda, in fact the North really needs Government intervention in terms of development. Those areas are backward and the welfare of the people compared to others is actually the lowest. In my opinion, this loan should delay so that we meet the objective of these loans. My prayer is that we shall have the loan and some technicalities can be done by the people concerned.

The other issue was about the East. It is not the first time that we are borrowing combining North and East. All the loans we have got in the past combine these people, why should we worry about that then? What is important is to ensure that the money once borrowed has done the real job for which it is borrowed. My concern is on the monitoring mechanism. Money should help the people concerned. This august House makes noise here after passing loans and we do not even follow them up. We wait for the results and once money is embezzled, we just come and make noise. We do not have a mechanism in place whereby these funds can be followed to the last moment.

1.58
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): I will join my colleagues in thanking the chair for the presentation of the report. My problem is drawn from the project life. According to the document given, the project is to start in 2007/2008, which year is almost gone. I do not know whether this was done intentionally or it was a typing error, or the project has started. We would like to know since Government use of projects to deliver services is preferred because it is a cutting edge, has a time limit and you are here seeking for resources to do this work. Are you saying that if this loan is approved now, then this will be assumed to have been done last financial year or you are going to recast? I would like to be advised. 

Secondly, I have a problem with regionalising, triangularising and dividing Uganda into many bits and pieces and wasting the time of Members debating and wanting to justify why some areas should be included or not. I would like to look at this as a nationwide problem. I am aware that there are sub-counties in areas maybe where there have never been wars that have no good roads, no offices and no water. There are no good roads in Kanungu for example. The war has not been there recently but the roads are bad and I do not think I would oppose a proposal by Government to borrow money to make roads in Kanungu. Why doesn’t Government look at problems that are on the ground in various places and come out with funds - including borrowing - so that we address these issues and stop calling our places regions, triangles and all sorts of names? 

Madam Speaker, why do we want to borrow money to help regions and districts that are not doing well and we are putting in force a condition of contributing when you know – and I am surprised that there is a lot of money being allocated to consultants. We are looking at consultancy issues as if we are looking at an area where an activity has never taken place. LGDP I and II, FINMAP have been in place and we have a lot of information about our country. We do not need to spend a lot of money on fresh consultancy as if we do not know what is there. 

The Ministry of Local Government has a lot of this information in their data bank just as the Ministry of Finance has. Why is it that while we negotiate for all this money, including money where Government is giving the biggest amount, we are allocating a lot of it to consultants as if we are very green and we do not know the existing situation? There are so many projects that Government has implemented in these areas and this information is available. They know what has been done and what has not been done and it would be good if this information were used. And by having that information available already, we would reduce on the cost of consultancies so that work can begin and the minister does not have a problem of recasting now.

The other issue is that there are so many projects like NUSAF, PRDP, now this one; which area is going to be funded by which funds? There is a lot of mixing up projects. If we pass this loan, what do I tell my people that money has been passed to do and where? I have a problem of water for example in my constituency, which covers the whole district as well as the neighbouring districts. But if I am going to be given bits of money for water under PRDP, bits of money for water under this programme, bits of money for water from the central ministry, when shall we solve the problem of water in a constituency or in a district? Why doesn’t the government come up with enough money to cover a project in a given area  –(Member timed out)

2.03
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a fact that Uganda is among the poorest countries in the world and we are actually poor. The very reason we are poor should guide us in being very careful in utilisation of the resources we have in this country. These resources whether borrowed or generated locally should be properly utilised. And what should be the guiding principle? In order to have these resources properly utilised for the country, it requires us to set our priorities first and right so that when these resources come, they can be fitted there. 

For example, this loan appears as if it is going to answer each and every problem that is prevailing in our areas but can you achieve that really? Ideally at the end of the day, as hon. Bukeni has asked, what will he tell his people at the end of the day about what this project is going to achieve? I am not saying we should not implement it but we should be more focused because we have limited resources.

In implementing some of these programmes, we need to avoid duplication. I do not want to mention what has already been said because when you look at all the components of this project, most of them are duplicated elsewhere and we do not know to what magnitude. That is the very reason we should set priorities.

On the issue of rehabilitation of Luweero Triangle, I would request and advise that in some of these programmes, we have a time element. Like the Luweero Triangle, we should have had phases and by now we should have left the element of rehabilitation and gone to another stage so that we do not talk of rehabilitation all the time. I realise that there is a component on monitoring and evaluation and I think we do not need to have it. What is the use of the existing systems, for example the PS, the directors and commissioners and so on? What is the role of that structure? I thought that was the body responsible for the implementation of these programmes? Do we need to borrow money to set up another one when we have a permanent one? Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity and those are my concerns.

2.06
MR JOHNSON BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to give my views on this debate. First and foremost, I want to say that it is really important and fitting that we keep strengthening the local governments. The policy of decentralisation is a very challenging policy and unless we have well equipped local governments, we are likely to fail in development programmes. I, therefore, support that we should get money to strengthen the local governments. 

My concern however is focus, like has already been mentioned. It is high time that our Government began concentrating on development. Spreading money all over the place makes no impact at all. This is what we should be looking at. What are we looking at in the local governments? For example, we have the new districts. Almost half of the districts in Uganda are new districts. How equipped are they? Do they have administrative blocks? How about the human resource? Are they in position to carry out the jobs that are assigned to them? This should be the basis of our borrowing money and distributing it. Unless we do this, we shall continue borrowing money and throwing it in thin air.

As regards the issue of Northern Uganda and so on, the focus is war ravaged areas in Northern Uganda and other parts. Just say it clearly. Some of us get embarrassed. I come from Bukwo and it deserves to be supported but I cannot be in Northern Uganda. If the document says it is in Northern Uganda, it is not. I know that Bukwo has suffered so much from the effects of the wars emanating from Karamoja and you cannot assist Karamoja and leave out the victim. I think this was the basis of including Bukwo and Kapchorwa in this program and I think this should be understood and made clear so that our Members understand it.

There is an area that I wanted to get clarification on and that is on page 6. The report talks about community driven development and you are talking about revolving funds. Can we understand how you want to use and operate this? What we are now saying in Prosperity-for-All is establishing SACCOs through which money can be revolved for the benefit of the people. How is this one intended to work? Can we get clarity here? 

This goes together with the concerns of Members of this House about duplication. Unless we clearly state this, you may find that the problem of duplication leads into misuse of funds. You have known of areas - okay we have got money that goes to local governments for schools, water, roads. How is this one going to be used and how are you going to separate this? Are you going to include it within the funds that are remitted to the local governments, increase the amount of money on the roads and so on, or is it going alone as it is?

Finally, the issue of LGDP I and II; it did quite a lot of work but have we had an evaluation report to look at how it performed, its weaknesses and so on? I was an RDC at the time when I came face to face with LGDP and one of the biggest problems was the mismanagement of the fund by the local governments. The contracts were given to people who were supposed to be councillors or supervisors and the work actually never took place -(Member timed out)

2.11
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this loan. I am very happy that at least local governments have something to go with. I originated from local governments and I am aware that in our district we did much with the former grants, especially the LGDP. I am just making one specific request on the LDG, page 6 that among the activities listed here, we should allow local governments to have a component of tree planting so that we can establish tree nurseries in our villages and at districts. This can be relevant in component one, the LDG and in the CDD in activity No. 2. I am making a special request that we have tree planting specifically mentioned here and allowed to be incorporated in this project.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I expected the Front Bench of Government to inform our colleagues but I know the Minister for Environment is happy if more money is being given for her. However, the information I want to give you is that there was a loan that took a very long time in the last Parliament, for the Productivity Enhancement Project. In that loan, huge sums of money were supposed to be directed at tree planting. We would like to find out from the minister what the situation is since the minister, Jessica Eriyo is around.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my friend and colleague for raising that issue but I also want to thank hon. Charles Ngabirano. He is one of those MPs or Ugandans that I am very proud of because if you visit his constituency, you will really see the amount of work that he has done; mobilising the communities to plant trees on the hills of Rwampara. I want to congratulate you, honourable. You have a passion for tree planting and irrespective of whichever loan or activity we have for tree planting, we still have quite a lot to do. 

I would like to support what the honourable member is raising. When you look at component two of this loan, the specific activities are not listed but when you look at bullet No.2, it talks about community projects that do not generate immediate financial returns but are useful for production. I think tree planting is one such activity that is something that can help in production. 

When you plant trees, you restore the water catchment areas and even recharge the underground water so that the other projects do not fail and you protect the roads and so forth. So, I really support him if the local governments can identify tree planting as one of the projects.

To inform the honourable Leader of the Opposition –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister please, we asked you to give us a tree planting week and you have said nothing about it. Now you are just supporting what members are saying. You come with your own policies. Please conclude. (Laughter) 

MR NGABIRANO: Madam Speaker, thank you. Because of time, let me request for clarification and maybe this will come from the Minister of Finance and from the Minister of Local Government. I know that local governments operate through the political structures but currently, all the lower local governments are not operational. The LCIs have not been elected and in all local governments where we need by-elections, we have not filled those political positions. I would like to get clarification from the Front Bench; we are pushing this money into the local governments but what arrangements are we putting in place to make sure that the political positions are filled up? I thank you.

2.16
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I also note from the beginning that the title of this loan request is misleading. When you call it “local government management” when it is talking about the Auditor-General and ministries, it is misleading. 

Secondly, the committee should also have gone much deeper than it has done. Why hasn’t this loan been modelled alongside LGDP I and LGDP II? The LGDP I and LGDP II handled very many components and they were developmental, including building health centres which hon. Kiyonga promoted, which have become white elephants in villages. 

The idea of dividing the country as my colleagues have said - Northern Uganda, war-ravaged areas - is creating a situation in the areas where there was no war. People begin to think that there is a lot of attention given to those areas at the expense of other areas, creating the impression that maybe it is good to have rebellion. There are too many programmes in the North – PRDP, NURP, etc - and yet on the ground you do not see facts. 

The other area that I wanted to point out is that this loan that we are tying to look at should have excluded ministries because ministries, especially the Auditor-General is already getting a lot of money under PAF. Now, when you talk of all the 28 ministries, how much of that money will remain for the local governments? 

I wish to recommend that this committee goes back and makes more consultations because this is a very important report. You can even see that the ministers of local government – all of them – are not here. We do not even know who is going to follow up what we are discussing. Let them go back and make consultations and remodel this loan to serve local governments. 

The ministries do not have problems. How can the Ministry of Finance ask for money? The Ministry of Finance has a lot of money and it is the source. It is like they are bribing us into giving them on the pretext that we are giving local governments. That is not good. Madam Speaker, Thank you very much. 

2.19
MRS MARY TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee. I also support the idea of strengthening and deepening the decentralisation policy in this country. However, I have several concerns regarding the proposal to borrow this money. One is that when we mention the districts which have been affected by the war, we should include all districts - Kasese, Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kamwenge and Kyenjojo - just like my colleagues have mentioned. 

The other issue is on production and increase of household incomes. I know it is a focus of our government to increase household incomes and eradicate poverty. However, I believe that we are not going to achieve this without addressing the issues of maternal health. You know very well that women contribute more than 50 percent towards the economy of this country but we get 16 women dying everyday due to maternal complications. My prayer is that the local government, while considering this loan, should mainstream issues of reproductive health in this loan. (Applause)

Secondly, I am also concerned about the duplication that is reflected in this document. We know very well that in the budget proposal, Shs 1.1 trillion was allocated for all roads including community and feeder roads. So, we would like to know which specific roads are being addressed in this particular document because this one is supposed to take care of all community and feeder roads in this country. 

Lastly, my concern is on road maintenance. While we construct roads, there is no component of road maintenance. After construction of the roads, I wonder how they will be maintained. I thank you for that opportunity, Madam Speaker. 

2.21
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. Members will agree with me that the local government is actually one of those sectors that have attracted quite a lump sum of government funding, both local and foreign. However, to date this sector is still one of those where government money and donor money is still being mis-utilised, underutilised or being stolen. Up to now, we have to do a lot. 

You can see from this report, on page 2, the chairman tells us that from 2000 to date this programme has actually been going on. Simple calculation here gives me about over Shs 410 billion that has been injected into this sector for that very purpose. So, this area has to be looked into. Before we go into accepting these loans, we must look seriously at how much has been done on the ground. 

Under the various components, they are telling us that infrastructure is going to be part of this loan but this has already been factored into the budget. Why are we going into loans when actually we have already supported or already budgeted for these various aspects?

Madam Speaker, the committee is telling us on page 8 that the central government is also going to be supported yet the purpose of this loan is to finance local government management and service delivery. If you look at page 8 under 4.2, under the IFMS it mentions 28 central government agencies and only 12 higher local governments are going to benefit from that. Why should we mix the two? Are we funding both central and local governments or are we funding local governments? The purpose of the loan must be clarified right away. 

Madam Speaker, another issue is to do with capacity building. Time and again, we approve a lot of money for capacity building; actually, a bigger percentage of local government funding goes into capacity building. We have built capacity ever since and up to now, we are still building capacity. You can look at the component here on 4.3; a whole Shs 2.7 million is going to the local government ministry to monitor and supervise yet we have already also budgeted money to do your job in the national budget. Why are we duplicating resources?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to give information as a Member of Parliament from Mukono South. I have noted that over the years, we have sat here as government and decided that we will recruit graduates as sub-county chiefs. So, in the three sub-counties we have recruited graduates but they need capacity in the procedures of government and so on. Every four years, we get a new set of local leaders; the voters throw away 80 percent of elected people and you get a new set. 

I agree with a colleague who asked why we over build capacity of the CAOs rather than other people. I would submit that the youth within the councils, the women within the councils and the people with disabilities within the councils have not had the same capacity building like the chairman or the CAO. So, we still need capacity building. Let us focus it on the people within our councils that have not benefited so that we bring the debate within our local councils at par.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, honourable minister. I think I am still discussing within the report. Like the honourable minister is saying, on page 4 it says there will be special training for critical management cadres at local government levels such as Chief Administrative Officers, town clerks and sub-county chiefs. The sub-county chiefs have just undergone training for over a month and now they are still within the programme. 

To conclude, I was actually talking about 4.3 - whether the ministry has the capacity to supervise and monitor the local governments. If there is capacity, there would not have been this misappropriation of the funds in the local governments. I am still putting it to the local government ministry that it has failed and up to now it is still failing, and even this money will not do its job. We know of kickbacks. The kickbacks are the very problem why we have this, and actually I want to - (Member timed out)

2.28
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some few comments to make on this report. First of all, on the methodology used, they said they invited technical officers from Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Local Government and Kampala City Council. I would have loved that they invite other technical officers from the districts instead of relying on Kampala. 

Secondly, the committee never visited any district to see the impact of Local Government Development Programme I and II. They did not visit to see whether these programmes have an impact on the ground. There were no visits made. It was a boardroom approval of the loan. (Laughter)  

Thirdly, how are the many upcoming districts catered for in this loan? We have Buikwe, for example, being cut out of Mukono. Mukono is catered for so it means Buikwe will be left with no benefit, and I hear so many others are coming up. How are they going to be catered for in this programme? 

Fourthly, when it comes to borrowing money, we feel as if it is going to be free money but we pay interest on this money. We rush when we have not done enough ground work. If we are to audit Ministry of Agriculture, you will find loans which have been approved by this Parliament lying idle for five years or more and the government is paying 0.5 percent in dollars. 

We do not even know whether the government is ready or has already earmarked its counter-funding or whether they have appraised the capacity of local governments to raise the counterpart funding. The money may be borrowed but it may lie idle on the accounts and we continue paying and in actual fact we may not benefit and we may end up being the losers. If we are to compute how much Uganda pays in commitment fees on un-withdrawn balances, it is running in millions and millions of dollars. I think if we ask the Minister of Finance to present to this House how much the government has paid as fines for un-withdrawn balances on loans which Parliament has approved, the House will be shocked. When it comes to laying papers, we want Parliament to approve and we rush; we do not look back to ask what has been done with what we have approved. Has it benefited the country or has the country lost? 

Furthermore, on page 4 the report mentions minimising fraud and corruption. However, our manifesto talks of zero tolerance and not minimising. We do not have that space. They should talk of zero tolerance in local government councils instead of minimising.

The report says that 83 percent of project funds will be used for infrastructural development whereas 4.5 percent will be for capacity building. What about the remaining 12.5 percent? It is not talked about. With those observations, Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable Minister of Finance and the chairperson of the committee, 19 members have spoken and so far I have not heard anyone support this loan in its present form. What I am hearing is a need for an evaluation and recasting. There are complaints about duplication. Are you still of the same recommendation that we approve this loan in its present form? Out of the 19 members, other than the one who wants the trees, no one has supported the loan.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you but I had wanted earlier on to make a clarification which I thought would help members in their deliberations. This money we are talking about - the US$ 211 million - is the money which is going to be sent to the local governments so that they effect programmes which we will request from them. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you were listening to the members. They are complaining that you have not evaluated the previous loans in the local governments. They are complaining that you are duplicating, including a loan we passed last week. They are saying they want it recast. Have you not been listening?

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I did lay on Table an implementation completion and results report for the second Local Government Development Project. I also laid on Table the implementation completion and results summary report for the second economic and financial management project.

Madam Speaker, we have been examining what has been going on in our local governments through the policy statements and other fora. I think we need this money in order to get what we need in our areas. 

One of the reasons is that there was a concern that the construction of classrooms should be done by the Ministry of Education and Sports and that health centres be constructed by Ministry of Health and that water be worked on by the Ministry of Water and Environment. All of us know that our local governments send money to the lower local governments and it is these lower local governments that put in place water points, health centre IIs and many other things of that sort. So, I think honourable members have to look at it and really decide. I would request that we respond to some of the concerns; it might help to clear a few queries.

2.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I really did not want to contribute to this debate because members had adequately covered quite a number of issues, but there are some specific things that we need to sort out. That is why I earlier on rose on a procedural matter.

In the first place, when you look at the methodology on page 1, the committee says that it looked at the project documents but when you go and read the report about those project components, you begin to ask yourself whether all these components are part of the loan document or not. I am saying this because I am now not sure whether the loan requested in support of a bigger project is at the same time the project document or there are some projects that the ministry has come up with. In fact, if the ministry came out with a project like that, you begin to wonder because even information on Luweero Triangle did not come from the Ministry of Local Government; it came from the Ministry of Finance. 

The point I would like to make is on the issue of the project document. If you have included the 74 percent component of government contribution and you call this a project, yet we know very well that in the budget for Ministry of Local Government there is no project request – all the money you are talking about are grants to local governments obtained through the budgetary procedure - that is where the confusion has come from. I wish the committee had just stuck to bringing before this House what the loan request is about, how the loan would support other activities and so on, but this is not anywhere. We are only reading about the components, which are not part of the loan.

The chairman of the Committee on National Economy should know that government moved away from the policy of project funding to budget support. Therefore, essentially what you are suggesting is to lift a budget fund and make it a project fund, which is counter to government policy. This is where the confusion arises from. There is nothing like a component with more than US$ 150 million in the loan requested for. If the committee just stuck to the loan request and explained to us what this loan is about, it would have helped us get out of all this confusion. I really want clarification from the ministry on whether all these components are part of the loan document. I am saying this because they are not, as far as I am concerned.

Now that I am here, Madam Speaker, let me mention two things that are important for the minister and the committee to consider. One is this question that was mentioned once - the question on unviable districts. I am amazed that a committee of Parliament recognises that there are unviable districts and does not make a comment about them. How can we have unviable districts in the first place? How do you deepen decentralisation by having unviable districts? Don’t we see this contradiction? 

Secondly, we are planning this support based on the premise of existing districts but everyday we are planning to create new districts. So, how disruptive is this creation of new districts going to be to the programme? (Mr Wopuwa rose_) No, it is okay. I know what you are trying to say. I am talking about overheads. (Laughter)

The other one is about the two elements that are not included. Sometime ago, we passed a law providing for the LC courts as a mechanism of underpinning the administration of law and order in the country. These courts are therefore very critical components of the wellbeing of the districts. However, these courts are not being supported in this project; unless they are being supported separately in the Ministry of Justice and yet they do not belong there as local administration elements.

The last element that has been considered but is also broadly talked about by the Auditor-General’s Office is the District Local Government Accounts Committees. The only reason we moved very fast with looking at the Auditor-General’s reports at the national level was because the accountability committees were given special funding for facilitation. Many of the local government district accounts committees operate on very minimal funding therefore, the question of corruption is not effectively followed up. Could we consider, therefore, including very specific support to LC courts’ development and the district local government accounts committees?

Finally, I will want ministries, when they bring projects, to stop trivializing their own projects. To suggest that it requires government, in a project involving borrowing, to give out bicycles to LCs is very serious. You know the technocrats develop projects but sometimes politicians divert them. However, when you stop thinking politically and you look at those things, then you will ask yourself what country is this where they have to give the LCs bicycles? You mean they cannot afford to buy bicycles, honestly? It kind of trivializes projects that are adopted. So, let the ministry and the committee really clarify; they have included in this report things that have nothing to do with the loan, although the loan supports them, and they have pulled out the relevant things. This gives the wrong impression that government is giving special money to support some activities yet these are things we are considering as part of the budget of local governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was creating an avenue for you to have another look at this loan, but if you are insisting that is up to you.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, this loan was brought to our committee in the same way we have presented it, although with the details. I would like to read what is in this table, which is on the local government –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kadddunabbi, do you have the support of this House? Are you satisfied that you have the support of this House? Why don’t you agree to defer it for a while and look at it again? You do not have people to support you.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, even issues that are very obvious have ceased to be obvious in this House. We would like to request for some time to reconsider this loan. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now suspend the House to 4.00 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.44 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.10 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting but I have some bad news to pass on to you. Sometime back, we heard that President Mwanawasa of Zambia had died, but at that time he had not died. Now I have information that he has actually died and the Vice President, Dr Banda, has declared seven days of mourning in the Republic of Zambia. So, I would like to ask the House to stand up for one minute in his honour.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

4.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from the information you gave, it will only be appropriate for both sides of the House to say something brief, for the record, on the passing away of President Levy Patrick Mwanawasa of Zambia.  

Let me therefore take the opportunity on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament to convey to the government and the people of Zambia our sincere condolences at this unfortunate death of the Zambian President. In doing so, we would like to recognise the commitment of the Zambian President to an orderly political process in their neighbouring country of Zimbabwe, and I believe, in Africa generally. 

I also put on record our appreciation of the very open effort they put in fighting corruption in their country where they made no exception to that fight. We pray that the good Lord rests his soul in eternal peace.

4.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, as Government we do propose that a formal motion should be moved to pay tribute to the fallen comrade at an appropriate time, if you give us space on the order paper.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the Report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I would want you to join me in welcoming the pupils from Ikwera Neguri School for the disabled in Aduku, Kwania Constituency. They are up there. You are welcome (Applause)

4.18
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Madam Speaker, allow me first of all to take this opportunity to thank my government for having given me the opportunity to serve as the chairman of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs.  

Allow me also to thank my committee members, the technical team and the responsible ministers for the cooperation in as far as the interface we had during the process of going through their budget policy statements is concerned.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs on the Policy Statements of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs for the Financial Year 2008/2009.

The report covers Vote 004, Ministry of Defence; Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs; Vote 0144, Uganda Police Force; and Vote 145, Uganda Prison Services. The budget allocations for this financial year are as follows:

Vote 004 – Ministry of Defence 
Recurrent Expenditure –  Shs 445,242,925,000  
Development Expenditure – Shs 31,367,380,000

Vote 009 – Ministry of Internal Affairs
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 11,396,586,000 
Development Expenditure – Shs 1,761,729,000

Vote 144 – Uganda Police Force
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 125,212,957,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 8,500,925,000

Vote 145 – Uganda Police Services
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 42, 715,917,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 1,565,999,000

The committee recommends to this House to approve the proposed budgetary allocations for the above votes. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have been seconded by the Government Chief Whip.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, the heading of the report is: “Report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Policy Statements for the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs for the Financial Year 2008/2009.”  

Introduction
I beg to present to you the report of the sessional Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs on the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs budget proposals for the Financial Year 2008/2009 pursuant to Article 90 of the Constitution and Rule 161 on the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Scope of the Report 

This report covers the following votes: 

Ministry of Defence covering Vote 004: 

i) 	Ministry of Defence 
ii) 	Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) 
iii) 	National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) 

Ministry of Internal Affairs covering vote 009: 

i) 	Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters
ii) 	Uganda Police Force.
iii)	Uganda Prisons Service. 
iv) 	Amnesty Commission. 
v) 	Government Analytic Laboratory 
vi) 	National Community Service Program 
vii) 	The Non Governmental Organisations Board 
viii)	Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration.

While considering the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Defence policy statement for the Financial Year 2007/08, the committee proceeded as follows: 

i) 	Studied and analysed the policy statements plus other relevant documents which were availed to the committee and then raised queries for clarification by the relevant ministers. 

ii) 	Interacted with the ministers and officials of the relevant ministries. 

iii) 	Interacted with persons directly affected by the policy issues of the two ministries. 

Madam Speaker, I now proceed to make specific comments on the two ministries. Some of the photocopies had some repetitions. If not amended, you may find that some of the pages were repeated especially from page 26 to almost page 32. If it is clear, then it was clarified as I checked with the photocopying services. 

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE - VOTE 004

Performance of the Previous Year, 2007/08, Budget 

Amount of funds appropriated for the Financial Year 2007/08: The ministry’s total approved budget was Shs 423,713,000,000. However, the release by the Ministry of Finance was Shs 425,065,000,000. The release of the wage and non-wage recurrent budget amounted to Shs 5.26 billion over and above the approved budget. You can see the table showing the approved budget of the recurrent, the non-wage and the development budget, which totals to Shs 423.713 billion and then the outturn of the year 2007/08 which was Shs 425,069,000,000. We also show the release performance, which in total exceeded by 0.32 percent. 

This higher than approved release was mainly as a result of the additional resource supplementary of Shs 4,298,000,000 in the Financial Year 2007/08 to cater for shortfalls in the classified security expenditure, which was Shs 3.4 billion, and Uganda’s contribution to the East African Standby Brigade, which was Shs 857,000,000. 

It should however be noted that the release balance of Shs 978,000,000,000 was not approved in the supplementary appropriations nor the approved budget for the Financial Year 2007/08. The source of this data was basically from the draft estimates of revenue expenditure of the recurrent and development expenditure of 2008/09. The Ministry of Defence is refuting this amount and saying that Ministry of Finance did not submit in this extra expenditure. I am yet to get clarification from the ministry. 

Key Planned Programmes for the Financial Year 2007 

You can see the recurrent expenditure. I will highlight some of the major activities of the recurrent expenditure: 

1. 	There was increase of salaries of privates from Shs 160,000 to Shs 180,000, and also to achieve appropriate increment in the rank of second lieutenant in the army.
2. 	Further stabilisation in Karamoja. 
3. 	Sustaining training of forces. 
4. 	Containment of ADF. 
5. 	Continuing implementation of the Defence Review. 
6. 	Continuing with the peace mission in Somalia. 
7. 	Paying pension and gratuity to those entitled.
8. 	Operationalisation of the army shop. 
9. 	Improving science teaching within the secondary schools of the army 
10. 	Strengthening political education in the army and civil military relationships. 

On development activities, they did the following:

1. 	Expedite the rate of construction of barracks and make a start on building of a new and modern military referral hospital. 
2. 	With assistance from the Republic of South Africa, they started building a centre at Kawaweta and constructing a monument in Kampala in memory of the ANC comrades who died during the war. 
3. 	Completing installation of the integrated resource management information system. 
4. 	Eventually, relocating Ministry of Defence and UPDF headquarters from Bombo to Mbuya. 

The achievements are detailed as you can see. Most of them utilized the figures which were put forward during the proposed expenditure, as you can see up to item no.10 where the development expenditures is also captured.

Key Pending Activities and Ongoing Programmes of 2007 

These are items which are still on-going, which have to be allocated resources during this Financial Year 2007/08: 

1. 	Implementation of Integrated Resource Management Information System (IRMIS) 
2. 	Construction and rehabilitation of barracks, which is still ongoing. 
3. 	Construction of a military referral hospital. 
4. Recruitment, training and retraining programmes 
5. 	Consolidation of pensions and retirement management. 

Key challenges faced by the Ministry of Defence during the Financial Year 2007/08.
 
1. 	Price increments for the foodstuffs and oil products. This resulted in the procurement of fewer quantities hence having to cope with scarcities. This explains part of the supplementaries. 
2. 	The uncertainty and prolonged Juba Peace Talks constrained the ministry in terms of continued expenditure on unplanned travel and other activities. 
3. 	The unfavourable situation that prevailed in our neighbouring countries, especially Kenya, did affect some of our planned activist. 
4. 	Funds for preparing our troops to go to Somalia have been coming late from the AU and as a consequence, the ministry is forced to make some short-term borrowing within its own budget resulting in rescheduling some of the planned activities.

The planned salary increment for all the soldiers was not possible. Out of the required 50 billion, only 30 billion was availed. Thus, resulting in increasing the salaries of the privates up to second lieutenant. This was a partial increment from 160,000 up to 180,000.

4.2 captures the planned activities for the financial year 2008/09:

•	Computerisation of the payroll to consolidate personnel control.
•	Increase of salaries for privates from Shs 180,000 to Shs 200,000 per month and corresponding increases up to second lieutenant. From Lieutenant upwards there will be an average increase of 10 percent; from lieutenant to general across the board.
•	Recruit more troops and enhance training and re-training programmes.
•	To further improve the welfare of soldiers by among other things operationalise the army shop and maintain adequate levels of food supplies, clothing, healthcare, and education of the children of the soldiers.
•	Continue with the disarmament process in Karamoja sub-region and ensure elimination of cattle rustling, highway robberies, incursions into neighbouring districts and countries.
•	More UPDF personnel due for retirement will be retired. 
•	As part of modernisation and professionalisation, UPDF Marine and Paratrooper Units will be expanded.
•	All defence land shall be titled and secured.
•	Follow up on the work of neutralisation of negative forces in the region.
•	Continue working with AMISON and co-operation in defence and security matters in the East African Community, African Union and the United Nations.
•	Ugshs 22,442,000,000 has been allocated to clear part of a 40.4 billion backlog of domestic arrears. 

On the development part:

•	Consolidate and enhance Defence capability by procurement of additional equipment.
•	More training centres are planned to be opened.
•	Enhance engineering and construction capacity and particularly increase barracks construction and maintenance. Construction of the military referral hospital will also be advanced and initiated as already the preparatory work has been carried out in the last financial year.
•	Land will be acquired for purposes of training and securing the oil fields.

Off budget interventions:

•	Infrastructure development at Kaweweta will be undertaken and an additional amount of Shs 3.0 billion is expected to be received from the Republic of South Africa. 
•	An additional amount of Shs 3.072 billion is expected to be received from the AU for purposes of preparing UGAPAC III contingent to Somalia. 

New/emerging policies and programmes:

•	These are healthcare insurance policy. 
•	Management of other resources under Integrated Resource Management Information System.
•	Decentralisation of finance and audit function up to service and division level.  

Anticipated challenges for the financial year:

•	The unresolved Juba peace talks will continue to pose a challenge. Much as we hope for a positive result, we still have to make provision for the worst case scenario.  
•	Pension funds to clear the existing huge backlog is still inadequate. This tends to compromise our future retirement plans.
•	The existence of negative forces in the Democratic Republic of Congo will continue to threaten our security especially along the western border line.
•	Increase in prices of weapon systems globally and the fluctuating dollar rate will continue to affect our procurement plan for the requisite weapons. 
•	The construction of a new military referral hospital which has been budgeted for and will require Shs 35 billion has been undertaken.  

Observations

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, the committee made the following observations:- 

The Defence fund

The Defence fund provided for under the UPDF Act has remained un-operationalised up to now. The guidelines to regulate the fund are under discussion at the command level and staff level and they are just awaiting signature of the minister.  

National Enterprise Corporation

The Defence industries have five subsidiaries and the current state is as follows:- 

Luweero industries limited

•	This industry is in production and is currently producing army equipment.
•	The industry has also been earmarked for use by the East African industries for the production of army equipment. 

NEC Construction Works and Engineering Services

•	This industry is currently carrying out construction work and fumigation services. 

NEC Pharmaceuticals

•	NEC Pharmaceuticals has entered a joint venture arrangement with Health World for production of medical products, rehabilitating and repairing machinery. Production is expected to start in the financial year 2008/2009.  

NEC Lime and Dura Limited

•	The department of geology repossessed the concession and this entity is to be deregistered from NEC. 

NEC Farm Katonga Limited

•	This firm covers 17 square miles of land, which have been surveyed, titled, and boundaries opened. 
•	There are 800 head of cattle on the farm.
•	Modalities of forming a joint venture with an Iranian company are ongoing for crop and animal production, processing and export.

The committee noted that the NEC industries have accessed resources from Government but they have not generated any non-tax revenue for the defence sector. This has to be seriously reviewed to make them more profitable and productive.  

Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces in Somalia

The UPDF provides protection to VIPs visiting Somalia. It guards Mogadishu city and the performance is good. It has been joined by the Burundi army and the African Union is facilitating the mission.  

Protection of Government includes:- Protecting the President, the key institutions, the state house, airport and the harbours.  

Auxiliary forces

All auxiliary forces: Arrow, Amuka, Karamoja LDU, and LDU in Acholi region and West Nile who were verified present on duty were paid all arrears. Some of them were absorbed into the police, the UPDF and the rest retired and a verification exercise is underway to determine those who went home irregularly for payment. Some LDUs in Acholi sub-region are for the moment retained until the security situation necessitating them is irreversible.  

The UPDF is working closely with the police to build the capacity of ASTU and the force level in Karamoja region has been increased in order to exert more pressure on the illegally armed to be disarmed. 

The details of the auxiliary forces, the breakdown as far as showing the LDUs from specific regions, the Amukas, the Arrows and the ASTU, is supposed to be an addendum of which I should also lay on Table. And I think the photocopying service should be availing you that annex, which shows the detailed breakdown of the LDUs in the 4th division, LDUs in the 5th Division, Amuka ,that is, Apac and Oyam; Amuka that is 5th Division; Arrow 3rd Division; ASTU 30th Division; and then ex-gratia to LDU in western Uganda.

Other payments include food allowances for pay teams. So, the total comes to Shs 15, 063, 280, 563 which is the amount that has been given out to the auxiliary forces. I beg to lay on the Table, Madam Speaker.

Payment of pension and gratuity

People who served in the defence forces of Uganda to the rising of the UPDF after independence and before 1986 and left without their pension and gratuities are entitled to these terminal benefits at the rates of salaries of operation at the time they left the forces. It was also noted that, however, that the issue of the date of discharge for those who left the forces after the change of Government in 1979 and 1986 is still a subject of legal dispute.

The people who left the forces before independence are not entitled to pension or gratuity from the government of Uganda since they did not serve it. However, those who continued their service into the Uganda Army are entitled to the pension and gratuity over a period that includes their pre-independence service.

I think there is still a contention that when Government was taking over at the time of independence, Government took over both the assets and liabilities of the former colonial Government. So, this is still a contentious issue, which we need to deliberate on.

Recommendations

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee recommends that:

1.	The UPDF fund guidelines be finalised and the funds be operationalised. The funds from the NEC industries should contribute to the defence fund.
2.	Political mobilisation aimed at sensitising the local leaders in Karamoja should continue so that there is continued co-operation between the Army, the leaders and the population in the disarmament exercise. 
3.	The committee recommends that the salary increments should be effected across the board.
4.	The committee strongly recommends that Ugandans who served the colonial Government should also receive their pension and gratuity since at independence the government took over all the country’s assets and liabilities.
5.	The UPDF should also make ensure that the people of Uganda as a backup force to the Police and their properties are well protected.
6.	 The Uganda Government should provide funds to enable the Ministry of Defence purchase enough – actually, I note here not only personnel carriers but the entire equipment for the Army.
7.	The LDUs retained for continued service should have their terms and conditions of service spelt out and regularised.
8.	The process of verifying the auxiliary forces should be expedited so that all those whose payments are in arrears should be cleared. 
9.	The committee recommends that the proposed sell of land especially lower Mbuya and Kitante be abandoned. The proposed revenue should be catered for elsewhere. However, this one, we are still discussing with the hon. Minister as a committee because he has even submitted to us the Cabinet policy guideline as far as the sell of land is concerned to ensure that we have an amicable resolution on this issue.
10.	Recruitment and training opportunities within the forces should be regionally balanced. The committee is going to make further consultations – actually, the minister has requested that we hold a closed session whereby we ensure that there is regional balance in as far as promotions and training as far as the UPDF is concerned. 

VOTE 009: MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

Headquarters

Performance of the previous FY 2007/08 budget

Amounts of funds appropriated for the FY 2007/08. For purposes of speeding up, you could see the table where the approved amounts of wage recurrent was Shs 2.248 billion; the non-wage was Shs 9.178 billion and then the development expenditure was only Shs 268 million giving a total of Shs 11.694 billion. 

The outturn in wages was Shs 2.151 billion, then the non-wage was Shs 10.697 billion and the development expenditure was only Shs 214 million and then the total outturn was Shs 13.063 billion. 

The release performance when you look at the percentages, it exceeded by 111.71 percent. This high release of the non-wage was mainly as a result of an additional resource supplementary of Shs 1. 52 billion to cater for the shortfall in the operational budget for the Juba peace talks, the final settlement of the UNRF II and the recurrent budget. The ministry further received Shs 1.28 billion from the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) and Shs 614 million for CHOGM activities. 

Key planned programmes and activities for the FY 2007/08

The ministry prepared the following key planned programmes and activities for the previous FY 2007/08:

Directorate of citizenship and immigration control had the following planned activities:

1.	Computerisation of record management;
2.	Set up a national population data bank;
3.	Pursue the recruitment and training of various cadres of staff;
4.	Construct 1ne border post at Afuji;
5.	Develop infrastructure at the entry points and regional offices; and
6.	Procure PISCES equipment and furniture for arrival and departure at the domestic terminals.

Government analytical laboratory:

1.	Complete the construction, equipping and furnishing of Mbale and Gulu regional testing laboratories;
2.	Construct Mbarara regional laboratory;
3.	Remodel food and drugs laboratory and establish a cold room for preservation of  exhibits and other materials; and
4.	Complete procurement of the Electro Static Document Analyser and Video Spectrum Comparator. 

National community service programme:

1.	Implement the Northern Uganda action programme;
2.	Train local council courts; and
3.	Consolidate activities and structures in the new districts.

National focal point on small arms and light weapons

Small arms and light weapons:

1.	Finalise the draft of national policy and guidelines;
2.	Develop structures and regulations and procedure on firearms;
3.	Conduct   destruction of ceased surplus stocks of small arms;
4.	Develop and implement national public awareness on public education programmes;
5.	Establish a forum for joint planning; joint operation between law enforcement agencies between Uganda and Kenya.

Conflict Early Warning and Early Response Mechanism (CEWERN):

1.	Strengthen the CEWERN secretariat, particularly acquisition of staff and their facilitation; 
2.	Operationalise the district CEWERN committees in the Karamoja;
3.	Develop response strategies to guide response at national and local levels; and
4.	Develop a comprehensive national action plan for conflict early warning and early response. 

Amnesty Commission:

1.	Clear backlog of 1,500 reporters;
2.	Receive, resettle  and integrate 6,000 reporters from various fighting groups such as LRA and ADF;
3.	Monitor and follow up reporters in communities where they are resettled to assess how they are in civilian life;
4.	Operationalise six reception centres in Gulu, Kitgum, Arua, Kasese, Mbale Kampala and liaison offices in Juba (Sudan) and Beni (DRC) for documenting and repatriation of LRA and ADF combatants;
5.	Mapping out and sensitisation of zones and amnesty resettlement and reintegration committees.

Non Governmental Organisations (NGO) board: 

•	Follow up on recruitment of staff for the new NGO organisation structure.
•	Sensitise stakeholders on NGO Act, 2006 and Regulations 2007.
•	Solicit funds for revamping the NGO database and computerisation.

Achievements of the ministry

These are basically quantification of the amounts of funds based on the planned activities. I think we do not need to go through all these. Could we proceed to key challenges, that is section 5.1.5. The ministry was faced with a number of challenges, page 22. Actually we could begin with key pending or ongoing activities, those which are going to be carried over to this financial year in section 5.1.4:-

1.	Finalising the LRA peace agreement; 
2.	Construction of border posts of Afuji and Mpondwe; 
3.	Construction of Mbarara regional laboratory. 

Key challenges faced by the ministry during the financial year 2007/08

1. Identification of citizenship due to lack of the national population data bank.
 
2. Inadequate funding due to the creation of Directorate of Citizenship and Migration Control, national community services programme and NGO board activities. The creation of the directorate has led to the limited funds for its operation. There has been expanded activities within the headquarters but the funding has not come as adequate as required.
3. 	Low levels of computerisation.

Planned and proposed activities for 2008/09

Recurrent activities

1.	Pay salaries for 404 staff at Shs 2.55 billion;
2.	Maintain a fleet of vehicles at Shs 15 million. This was a very contentious and is still a contentious issue; you can see the degree of limited funding maintaining a fleet of vehicles at 15 million, including the minister’s vehicle.
3.	Complete restructuring of NGO secretariat in liaison with the ministries of Public Service and Finance.
4.	Complete the implementation of the documentation management system in the NGO secretariat.
5.	Monitor registered NGO’s in eastern, Northern and western Ugandan.
6.	Hold regional sensitisation workshops for the NGO Act, 2006.
7.	Finalise and issue NGO regulations.
8.	Improve public awareness at Shs 25 million.
9.	Procure law books and bulletins.
10.	Undertake staff training in ICT.
11.	Print visa stickers and passports at Shs 2.0 billion.
12.	Maintain machinery and equipment at Shs 265 million.
13.	Network the directorate headquarters and the other border stations.
14.	Inspect, investigate and prosecute immigration cases.
15.	Recruit, train in specialized scientific areas at Shs 50 million.
16.	Consolidate community service programme in 14 districts of Northern Uganda with support from EU, human rights and good governance programme.
17.	Train members of the local council courts and scale up public awareness, sensitisation activities in all districts.
18.	Monitor and supervise 4,500 offenders.
19.	Continue to consolidate activities of community services structure.
20.	Engage and enhance partnership with civil society organisation.
21.	Repatriate 500 ADF.
22.	Clear backlog of 3,600 reporters.
23.	Establish a national mechanism of accountability and reconciliation at Shs 100 million.
24.	Carry out monitoring and evaluation at Shs 150 million.
25.	Continue running the Amnesty Commission including the seven DRT offices and liaison offices at Beni, DRC at Shs 1.6 billion.
26.	Develop reintegration policy for all reporters at 40 million.
27.	Conduct capacity building.
28.	Carry out baseline surveys.
29.	Conduct structure and regulation procedures for central firearms.
30.	Continue with destruction of seized and surplus stocks.
31.	Develop and implement weapons management and collection project in Northern Uganda.
32.	Carry out national public awareness programme.
33.	Conduct planning and training workshops and other activities to support the implementation of Karamoja integrated development programme as well as PRDP in Northern Uganda.
34.	Hold working meetings with Kenya national focal point and regional centres on small arms.
35.	Strengthen the Centre for Early Warning, Response Secretariat.
36.	Establishing an effective early response system.
37.	Enhancing sharing information within the region. 
38.	Continue promoting amnesty law through sensitisation at Shs 250 million.
39.	Demobilise, grant amnesty and settle 5,000 reporters from various fighting groups at Shs 2.0 billion.

Development activities

•	Procure computers; 
•	Tarmac part of the ministry; 
•	Procure two vehicles for the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration, NGO board at Shs 150 million;
•	Acquire vehicles, motor cycles, radio calls to ease investigation;
•	Construct Goli border post in Nebbi district at Shs 100 million; 
•	Procure heavy duty photocopier; 
•	Complete construction of Mbarara regional testing lab at Shs 550 million
•	Furnish and equip the two regional laboratories of Mbale and Gulu;
•	Procure scientific equipment and furniture for Gulu laboratory at a cost of Shs 500 million;
•	Remodel the food and drug laboratory and complete establishment of cold room for preservation of exhibits and materials;
•	Procure one vehicle for Kampala zone and maintain the fleet of vehicles at Shs 15 million.

New and emerging policies:

1.	The national database and ID project which is projected to cost US$56 million. Continuation of peace talks which is projected to cost Shs 2.0 billion.

Anticipated challenges in 2008/09:

1.	The national database and issuance of national identity card require Shs 155 billion. This project has not been catered for in the coming financial year therefore, leaving a funding gap as above. The project is crucial in that it will help resolve the problem of identity cards, identification for who are Ugandans and to help us in the region.
2.	Lack of ICT infrastructure has led to high cost of communication. The ministry plans to develop its infrastructure at a cost of Shs 120 million but only Shs 35 million has been provided.
3.	Lack of funds to procure another printing machine for the East African passport at a cost of Shs 700 million. Spares for the old machinery are not readily available. This is an activity which promotes the East African Co-operation; there has been a serious complaint about the failure of our Government to provide east African passports.
4.	Continue running the commission including the seven DRT offices and the liaison office in Beni in DRC Congo at Shs 1.621 billion.
5.	The wage required for the 404 in-post staff at a cost of Shs 2.613 billion and MTEF provision is Shs 2.250 billion, leaving a deficit of Shs 363 million. The wage requirement for planned recruitment is Shs 517 million.
6.	There is need for more funding to facilitate the implementation of the signed agreements from the JUBA peace talks; only Shs 60 million is provided under MTEF ceiling, creating a funding gap of Shs 2.0 billion.
7.	The creation of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control requires an additional Shs 4.85 billion.
8.	The Government analytical laboratory requires Shs 404 million for procurement of chemicals and reagents in addition to the maintenance of DNA machine and other specialised equipment only Shs 5.0 million has been provided leaving a funding gap of Shs 389 million as per the estimates.
9.	The three programmes of Ministry of Internal Affairs, that is, national community services programme requires Shs 539 million; the national focal point on small arms, light weapons requires Shs 130 million; and then NGO board are under funded. Out of the budgeted Shs 1.801 billion, only Shs 788 has been provided, this leaves a funding gap of Shs 1.022 billion.

The Government of Uganda signed a joint communiqué with the regional centre of small arms and light weapons to contribute US$ 70,000 and that is Shs 126 million annually but only Shs 25 million was paid in 2007/08 leaving a deficit of Shs 101 million. The provision for 2008/09 is Shs 30.7 million leaving a funding gap of Shs 183 million for the two financial years. 

Observations

Money has not been provided for the computerisation of records in the directorate of citizenship and immigration. This continues to affect the performance of the directorate as the staff continue to look for files manually which takes a lot of time. Also the stores where the files are kept are full and scattered on the floor.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs has hired a team of consultants to advise them on how to proceed the national data bank project. The project has stalled after the IGG stopped the tendering process when one of the bidders complained about the process on which it was awarded.

The wage ceiling for 2007/08 is not very different from last year’s ceiling. The ceiling does not take into account the formation of the directorate of citizenship and immigration control which leaves funding gap of Shs 931 million and community services programmes with a funding gap of Shs 85 million. 

The regulations governing the security firms have been issued. However, there is need to amend the Firearms Act and the regulations to provide adequately for the private security firms. 

The passport machine readers have been installed at Entebbe International Airport, Busia, Malaba, Katuna and the other border posts which have not yet been covered lack infrastructure, power supply, telephone and finances. 

There is no specific law establishing the government analytical laboratory which hinders its activities. There is need for the law establishing the government analytical laboratory so that these activities are well streamlined and internationally recognised.

There is no regulation to guide the operation of the NGOs in Uganda. There is need to put in place regulations especially with the current problems being experienced in Pentecostal churches.

Recommendations

Funds be provided by Government for the computerisation of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration to help speed up the processing of passports. This will also free space which is internally occupied by paper files.

The national data bank project should be expedited so that national identity cards can be provided to help solve the problems of identity in Uganda. This will also help to identify foreigners who enter Uganda illegally.

The wage bill for the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be increased to cater for the newly created Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration. That is captured as Shs 931 million and the community services programme of Shs 85 million. There is need to provide salaries according to the approved structure of the ministry.

The Firearms Act and regulations should be amended to help provide efficiently for operations of private firms and individuals who want to acquire weapons. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should introduce an amendment of the Firearms Act and regulations. 

With the expected increase in the number of visitors in Uganda especially after CHOGM, passport reading machines should be installed at the vital border posts. Government should therefore provide necessary infrastructure to help the ministry install passport reading machines.

The peace talks between Uganda and LRA are still ongoing under the mediation of the Southern Sudanese Government and the government should continue to support the talks so as to find a long lasting peace solution to the people of Northern Uganda.

The legal framework for the government analytical laboratory has not yet been provided for. Government should draft a Bill to establish a Government analytical laboratory and should also provide funds for the accreditation to make the results of the laboratory internationally recognised. 

The NGO policy and the approved structure of the public service should be implemented to make the NGO board more functional. The ministry meanwhile should post more staff and improve on the operation levels of the NGO secretariat to monitor and supervise the over 7,000 NGOs country wide.

Vote 009: Uganda Police Force

Performance in the previous year 2007/08

The table explains clearly how much was approved during the financial year 2007/08. We approved the wage recurrent of Shs 63.550 billion, and a non-wage recurrent of Shs 45.818 billion and a Government development expenditure of Shs 5.277 billion. 

The outturn in terms of wage recurrent was Shs 80.519 billion, the non-wage was Shs 45.814, and Government development expenditure was Shs 4.654 billion. The totals are on the next page making a percentage outturn of 114 percent.

The high release was mainly as a result of a supplementary of Shs 16.968 billion to cater for the shortfalls in wages. The ministry further received Shs 2.062 billion from the Justice Law and Order Sector, Shs 7.68 billion from the Netherlands Government and Shs 12 billion for CHOGM activities. The ministry also received additional resources supplementary of Shs 16.968 to cater for the shortfalls in wages.

Key planned programme activities for the previous year

1.	Completion of training and deployment of the 428 cadet and ASPs, 4200 PPCs and the 1000 SPCs who were recently passed out.
2.	Equip the staff with appropriate skills and competencies and develop the right attitude and behaviour for effective policing and professionalisation.
3.	Purchase and survey land for various police stations.
4.	Construction of dormitories, barracks, Bushenyi Police Station and complete construction of an office block and Kabalye Training School in Masindi.
5.	Complete construction of three dormitories at Kabalye training school.

There are also special projects under the Justice Law and Order Services funds:

•	Complete the construction of Kiboga and Kira Police stations.
•	Complete two accommodation blocks in Kajjansi; Nakapiripirit and Kisoro districts.
•	Construction of classrooms and dormitory blocks at Police Training School at Kabalye Masindi.
•	The Netherlands grant:-
•	Complete procurement of 28 vehicles and 148 motorcycles for operationalising in Northern Uganda.
•	Complete construction of police stations in the North at Amuru, Pader, Oyam, Dokolo, Kaberamaido and Amolatar.
•	Complete construction of headquarter offices for ASTU in Katakwi and zonal offices in Kolir, Orum, Lapono, Ngariam and Bukwo.
•	Construction of accommodation blocks at Pader, Oyam, Dokolo, Kaberamaido, Amuria and Amolatar.
•	Complete installation of 735 uniports in the 105 police stations in Teso, Lango and Acholi sub-region.
•	Complete procurement of two ambulances, one fire tender and two lorries for the North and training school at Kabalye. 

CHOGM funds

Complete installation of CCTV camera for security surveillance in Kampala and Entebbe. 

DFID funds

Complete procurement of 17 vehicles in kind to support Police presence in Northern Uganda, that is, Kilak, Nwoya, Omoro, Aswa, Chua, Lamino, Aruu, Agago, Usuk, Oyam, Kole, Otuke, Moroto, Dokolo, Kalaki, Amuria and Kapelebyong. 

The overall release performance of 114.25 percent represents an over release performance. This is due to a supplementary budget as I explained earlier on.

Achievements

With the funds allocated by the ministry during the financial year - we have attached the required amount of funds on the work done during the planned activities. 

Let me proceed to the key pending or on going activities on page 34 for the financial year 2007/08. These are the pending activities, which have been carried over to this coming financial year, which we are going to approve:

1.	Completing construction of Police headquarters, Naguru (CID wing); 
2.	Complete integration of the local administration police; 
3.	Construction of dormitories at Kabalye Police Training School; 
4.	Payment for rapid response boats and the helicopter;
5.	Payment of plain clothes allowances for officers of CID and counter terrorism; 
6.	Payment of domestic and utility arrears;
7.	Construction of Bushenyi Police Station; 
8.	Enhancement of salary to staff.

Challenges faced during the financial year and these are very critical:

1.	Inadequate manpower with the current standing of one Police to 1,096 people instead of an ideal ratio of 1:500. So, the Police force still has a very limited number. 
2.	Inability to enhance salaries for its staff over the years to address the high cost of living, long hours of work and risk while on duty.
3.	 Inadequate funds to fully address command and control, promotion, discipline, career growth and development, motivation and staff retention.
4.	 Inadequate accommodation for both office and barracks. For example, out of the 24,633 police personnel, only 11,359 are accommodated leaving a balance of 13,274 personnel without accommodation countrywide. 
5.	Inadequate basic operational equipment such as transport and communication.
6.	Inadequate provision of funds to fully integrate the 5,893 local administration police into the main stream police force. 
7.	Sustainability of Police operations in the North and north eastern Uganda after the expiry of the donor support. 

The planned or proposed activities for 2008/09 will mainly be the following:

1.	Pay salaries and wages to 38,168 staff at a total budget of Ugshs 80.4 billion. 
2.	Train 1,500 in various disciplines to enhance professionalism in the force at Ugshs 868 million. 
3.	Continue construction of Police headquarters at Naguru at Ugshs 2.0 billion; barracks and stations and various services (uniforms, food, anti riot consumables) at a cost of Ugshs 10 billion.
4.	Pay utilities (electricity, water, telephone) and property expenses at a cost of Ugshs 16.5 billion.
5.	 Offset contractual obligation on four rapid Interceptor Boats and a helicopter at Ugshs 3.6 billion.
6.	Procure various communication and office equipment at Ugshs 700 million. 
7.	Maintain 667 vehicles and machinery at Ugshs 7.6 billion.
8.	Payment of domestic arrears of Ugshs 1.85 billion.
9.	Complete restructuring of Uganda Police Force in liaison with the ministries of Public Service and Finance, Planning and Economic Development and cascade performance management. 
10.	Adopt and operationalise the force transport policy.
11.	Dispose of 2,000 pending disciplinary cases.
12.	Complete integration of local administration police into the Uganda Police Force.
13.	Increase police presence in Karamoja and sustain existing activities in Northern and north eastern Uganda as a response to peace initiatives.
14.	Generate and collect non-tax revenue. 

New/emerging policies and programmes:

1.	Sustainability and maintenance of the CCTV system.
2.	Construction of staff quarters at Kabalye Police Training School.
3.	 Sustainability of operations and activities in North and eastern Uganda after the expiry of donor support.
4.	Accommodating the Police constables on deployment after training, among others.

Anticipated challenges during financial year 2008/09:

1.	Inability to enhance salaries for its staff over the years to address the high cost of living and risks while on duty. 
2.	Inadequate funds to fully address command and control, promotion, discipline, career growth and development, motivation and staff retention. 
3.	Poor welfare due to lack of enough accommodation. Out of the 24,633 personnel, only 11,359 are accommodated leaving a big gap of personnel without accommodation countywide. 
4.	Inadequate equipment, that is, in terms of transport, communication, fuel and feeding in operations to enable Police officers perform their duties effectively.

The committee observed that the Police force is recruiting a large number of officers without considering accommodation facilities for them yet the available barracks are old and inadequate. 

There are many private security firms and organisations in the country and yet their training, curriculum, source and use of fire arms leave a lot to be desired. 

The accommodation of Police barracks continues to be pathetic. There is need for improvement in the barracks’ conditions to make them habitable and provide decent accommodation for Police officers who stay there. 

Fire fighting services in Uganda are in a few places and cannot be easily accessed in case of fires. In many districts, these services are not available to the population yet there are no private firms engaged in this service due to lack of regulations for them. The institutions responsible should shoulder the responsibility to help the Police. 

The Police special branch has been phased out yet the committee does contend to the fact that it was an important pillar in the structures of the force that did and still would do a good job other than relying on the army investigative organs. 

The recent promotion of the 472 police officers and the 1,000 police constables will go a long way to boost the morale of the Police and thus improved performance. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that measures to find decent accommodation for Police officers be put on the priority list of the Police force. 

The force should ensure strict supervision of private security guards and put in place disciplinary mechanisms of such companies that do things out of their realms and operations. 

Funds should be provided for rehabilitation of police barracks so as to improve the sanitation and help reduce the congestion of police officers. More police officers should be recruited to reduce the current ration which stands at one police officer to 1,000 people. This will help improve the efficiency of the police. Funds should therefore be provided for recruitment and salaries for the recruits. 

The sale of Nsambya Police Barracks or the public private partnership of the same should be halted until further detailed studies are conducted for the benefit of the Police force. 

The remuneration of the Police force should be enhanced from the current Shs 160,400 to Shs 200,000 as it is being done with the defence forces. I think we need to rationalise our military personnel. If the lowest payment rate for the army is Shs 200,000 then it should equally go to the Police and even prisons. At least for that, I beg to appeal to Members. 

The aspects of the duty-free facilities should be extended to the police force as it is being done with the army.

Fire fighting stations should be improved and the Fire Act should be reviewed to ensure the police’s position. It is stated that fire fighting is a mandate of the local government but Police is carrying it on. So, we need to bring on board the law which ensures that police is also protected and given that mandate to ensure that it is fully empowered to do the fire fighting exercises. 

The police should start appreciating cadreship and professionals in the force by giving them special allowances. There is hardly any allowance a police officer gets. The Police Act should be revised to put into consideration the privileges, promotion and general welfare - [Mr. Odonga Otto: “And discipline”] - and discipline as well. 

Madam Speaker, I now move to Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Services
 
Performance in the previous year 2007/08 budget

The table explains the recurrent wage as Shs 19. 647 billion; the non-wage recurrent as Shs 20.210 billion and then the development expenditure as Shs 1.436 billion, giving a total of Shs 41.105 billion. 

The prisons got a shortage in wages. The outturn was Shs 17.164 billion. The non-wage recurrent was Shs 19.997 billion and then the development expenditure was also less at Shs 1.376 billion giving a performance release of 93.76 percent. 

Uganda prisons services further received Shs 4.354 billion from the Justice, Law and Order Sector and then Uganda prisons services did not receive any supplementary appropriation during the financial year 2007/08. 

Key planned programmes and activities for the previous year:
Safety and security of prisoners, staff and the public:-

1.	They were able to construct one prisoners ward at Luzira for condemned prisoners.
2.	Renovation of six prisoner’s wards at Masaka prisons.
3.	Align prisons rules and regulations to the Prisons Act 2006, and in terms of human rights awareness and practice.
4.	Construction of 44 low-cost houses in Luzira and Apac.
5.	Rehabilitation sewage at Kakiika Prison.
6.	Completion of renovation of Gulu Soroti and Tororo prisons.
7.	And they were able to procure one bus and one truck lorry to reduce the walking distance when taking the prisoners to court. 

	Also, rehabilitation of offenders was promoted and incidence of crime reduced. 

8.	They managed to procure one tractor, two sub-soilers, two hammer mills and other farm inputs. 
9.	Land surveying and processing of land titles for seven prisons.
10.	Promote social rehabilitation and integration of offenders.
11.	Renovation of prison headquarters and food stores on the Seventh Street in Kampala.
12.	Train 700 warders and wardresses and 15 cadets to reduce staff prisoners ration from 1:6 to 1:5. 

Achievements of prisons services for the financial year

1.	Maintenance of the daily average of 32,000 prisoners in custody in terms of providing food, clothes, medicine, utilities at approximately Shs 15.24 billion. 
2.	Procured uniforms for the 32,000 prisoners and the 6,375 staff at a rate of Shs 2.3 billion.
3.	They delivered a daily average of 422 prisoners to various courts countrywide at a cost of Shs 1.016 billion in terms of fuel, maintenance and staff allowances.
4.	They managed to treat 4,839 inmates admitted to hospitals and 122,130 outpatients at a cost of Shs 313 million.
5.	Procured farm inputs at Shs 710 million for 3,000 acres and produced food worth Shs 2.5 billion on top of training over 4,000 offenders in agricultural skills.
6.	They maintained over 24 tractors at a cost of Shs 81 million.
7.	Surveyed three prisons lands at a cost of Shs 30 million.
8.	Started aligning prisons rules and regulations to the Prisons Act, 2006 at a cost of Shs 50 million.
9.	They recruited and trained 700 warders, wardresses and 13 cadets as assistant superintendents of prisons at a cost Shs 580 million.
10.	They enhanced management competencies of senior officers at a cost of Shs 20 million. 

Development activities

Constructed new prisons at Nakansongola at a cost of Shs 2.0 billion and at Gulu at a cost of Shs 1.3 billion with accommodation capacity of 400 and prison at Shs 59 million; six wards each of capacity 40 prisoners in Masindi at Shs 8.0 million and Gulu sanitation at Shs 5.0 million. Namalu, two twin wards, administration block and 16 staff housing units at a cost of Shs 650 million. Soroti, four wards at a cost of Shs 120 million.
 
They constructed Arua prison perimeter fence of 365 metres perimeter of 3.6 meters high at a cost of Shs 80 million.

Started the construction of Luzira main gate bridge at a cost of Shs 50 million.

Renovated various offices at prisons headquarters at a rate of Shs 55 million; partial renovation of food stores at the Seventh Street Industrial Area at Shs 21 million.

Procured two base radios at a cost of Shs 34 million.

Reconstructed sewage lines including lagoons at Fort Portal at a cost of Shs 121 million and Soroti at a cost of Shs 100 million – for prisons’ external works only.

Constructed 60 housing units at a cost of Shs 820 million at Arua, Nakasongola, Mbarara, Rukungiri and Luzira prisons. 

Procured nine vehicles, two buses at a cost of Shs 260; two lorries at a cost of Shs 180 and five pickups at a cost of Shs 245 million.

Procured various industrial tools for prison workshops at a cost of Shs 100 million.
 
Procured one tractor, a four-row planter and two sub-soiliers at a cost of Shs 165 million. 

Key pending or ongoing activities, those which are carried over:

1.	That is integration of the 174 local administration police. 
2.	Construction of Gulu prisons.
3.	Reconstruction of the bridge at Luzira main gate 7.
4.	Training of 700 warders and wardresses. 

Challenges faced during the financial year 2007/08

1.	Integration of 174 local administration prisons with a staff of 2,154 into the central prison system and a daily average of 10,096 prisoners. 
2.	Inadequate staff and prisoners’ accommodation.
3.	Inadequate manpower which is currently at 1:5 prisoners instead of the most ideal of 1:3. 

Planned and proposed activities, programmes for the coming year

1.	Payment of wages of 6,721 staff, un-uniformed 6,375, civilians 345 at a total of Shs 19.6 billion. 
2.	Maintenance of custody of a daily average of 34,275 prisoners projected in terms of provision of food, clothes, medicine, utilities, at a cost of Shs 15.24 billion.
3.	Procure uniforms for 6,100 prisoners and 1,857 staff at a cost of Shs 650 million.
4.	Deliver a daily average of 422 prisoners to various courts countrywide at a cost of Shs 1.016 billion in terms of fuel, maintenance and staff allowances.
5.	Treatment of 4,839 inmates projected to be admitted to hospitals and outpatients totalling 122,130 at a cost of Shs 313 million. 
6.	Maintain the 24 tractors at Shs 81 million.
7.	Survey five prisons land at Shs 30 million in Kumi, Bushenyi, Ndorwa, Gilgil and Kamuli. 
8.	Recruit and train 700 warders and wardresses and 40 cadet POs at a cost of Shs 430 million.
9.	 Train 10 senior staff in management skills at Shs 30 million. 

Development activities

The construction of Kitalya prison; four wards, administration block, perimeter fence, sanitary system at a cost of Shs 950 million. This is a funding from the Justice Law and Order Sector. 

Reconstruction of Moroto prison; administration block, two perimeter wards, two prisoner wards, each of a capacity of 50, one block of staff houses for six families and a perimeter fence at a cost of Shs 1.03 billion.

Installation of power supply in Arua prison at a cost of Shs 30 million.  

Perimeter fencing at upper maximum prison at a cost of Shs 20 million.

Completion of renovation of food stores at Seventh Street Industrial Area at a cost of Shs 15 million.

Complete internal water and sanitation works at Fort Portal and Soroti prisons at a cost of Shs 51 million.

Complete construction of 60 housing units at Shs 150 million in Arua, Nakasongola, Mbarara, Rukungiri and Luzira prisons.

Procure seven vehicles; one lorry at Shs 90 million, five pick-ups at Shs 245 million, one coaster for sick prisoners at a cost of Shs 80 million.

Procure one tractor, a four-row planter at a cost of Shs 150 million. 

Procure and install two hammer mills at a cost of Shs 40 million.

Procure farm inputs worth Shs 556 million to cater for 3,000 acres to produce food worth Shs 2.5 billion in addition to training of 4,000 offenders in agricultural skills.

Build a local area network at the Uganda prisons services headquarters at a cost of Shs 50 million. 

Madam Speaker, anticipated challenges for the financial year 2008/09:

1. 	Integration of former local government prisons. The Prisons Act, 2006 transferred 174 prisons from various districts to Uganda Prisons Services with effect from 1 July 2006 without prerequisite funding. The 174 prisons have a daily average of 10,096 prisoners projected to increase to 11,106 prisoners and are manned by 2,154 staff. The required budget for effective operation is Shs 13.67 billion as compared to the MTEF ceiling of Shs 2.48 billion. This has led to a funding gap of Shs 11.19 billion in the financial year 2008/09. For example, there is no budget allocation for the financial year 2008/09 for utilities. That is electricity, water and telephone, and procurement of equipment such as arms and ammunitions, handicaps, etcetera.  

2. 	Promotion of staff and prisoners welfare:
 i) 	Prisoners’ beddings - blankets and felt mattresses. No provision has been made to cater for provision of prisoners’ beddings. A total of Shs 1.76 billion is required for prisoners’ bedding. 
ii) 	Prisoners’ uniforms. Shs 84 million has been earmarked to cater for 2,800 prisoners out of the 32,000 prisoners. The required budget is Shs 1.9 billion to provide only two pairs of uniform per prisoner per year.  
iii) 	Staff uniform. There is a total of 6,375 uniformed staff plus 700 warders and wardresses and 40 cadet Pos planned to be recruited in 2008/09. To dress 7,075 staff with two pairs per year requires Shs 5.04 billion only Shs 524 million has been earmarked for staff uniform in 2008/2009.
 iv)	Feeding of daily average of 32,000 prisoners. Like in the previous years, feeding has remained a challenge in the prisons management. Shs 14.9 billion is required for feeding a daily average of 32,000 prisoners at a bare minimum of posho and beans. Only Shs 7.9 billion has been provided. At the current level of investment, food from prison farms is projected at Shs 2.5 billion leaving a funding gap of Shs 4.3 billion. 
v)	The prisons medical services. Shs 340 million has been allocated to prison medical services. Provision of health services remains a challenge in the 174 prisons units with 10,096 prisoners; these are the local administration prisons. Shs 800 million is required to cater for medical services, which has not been catered for. 

3. 	Enhancing safety and security of prisoners, staff and public. Most prison facilities were built in the 1920s. As a result, there is a high level of dilapidation and as such the need for rehabilitation. There are 532 prisons wards; 2,967 staff houses, 16 rest houses, 51 health amenities, 346 offices, 226 kitchens, 196 stores, 27 workshops, which requires over 450 million if we are to put a rehabilitation provision into these prisons facilities so that we have better improved prisons services.  

4. 	Limited offenders’ rehabilitation programmes due to inadequate funding of industries. Shs 400 million is required to recapitalise the industries.

Observations

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee observed that the Kingdom of Busoga is in negotiations with government to sell off the land on which Bufulubi prison farm is located. If done, the prison will also need to be evicted.

There is still a high level of congestion in Uganda prisons with some accommodating up to twelve times above their capacity. With this congestion, the spread of diseases among the prisoners is also high. Most of Uganda’s prisons continue to be in a dilapidated state with collapsed water and sanitation systems posing a health hazard to prisoners, prison staff and the neighbouring communities. Most perimeter fences are no longer in position to provide maximum security for capital offenders. 

There have not been promotions in the force and those that have taken place have not been equalised. 

Kirinya prison is also due for relocation but no visible alternative has been got as yet.

The committee observed that the size of prison staff is still inadequate to cater for their welfare as I observed earlier on.

Recommendations

•	Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee recommends that avenues be explored to release some of the inmates who have served for long and yet may not be in position to pose any challenge or threat to the society. I think there is a lot of congestion and we have not adequately facilitated funding so we could assess those who are no longer a threat and have served for quite a long period so that they can be given pardon so that we can decongest our prison services
•	Funds be provided for relocation of Kigo Prison from Buganda Kingdom land. 
•	Negotiation with Busoga Kingdom should be finalised so that the government can take over the Bufulubi Prison Farm without any further encumbrances.
•	Congestion in the prison is contributed to by the case backlog in the trial courts. The concerned institutions should work together to reduce the backlog and solve the problem of prisoners on remand.
•	The government should also look into the possibility of restructuring new prisons since most of the current prisons were built when the population of Uganda was still small and the rate of crime was still very low.
•	Funds should be allocated for the rehabilitation and maintenance of prisons to help provide maximum security to prisoners. The weak fences are contributing to the increasing escapes in prisons currently. 
•	Also sanitation should be improved in prisons to improve the conditions of living, to reduce the spread of diseases as a result of poor sanitation.
•	The serious funding gap in the welfare of prisons and prison staff must be put into consideration to improve the prison services in this country. We cannot pass a budget knowing that food, clothing and utilities are not budgeted for.  
•	The committee recommends that the salaries of prison staffs be increased. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, allow me to appreciate the work that is being done by the Police, prisons and UPDF to protect this country and to keep law and order. (Applause) Despite the challenges they are facing, they have tried as much as they can to fulfil their mandate.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends the adoption of this report and approval of the budget on the following votes.

VOTE 004 - Ministry of Defence
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 445,242,925,000;
Development expenditure, Shs 31,367,380,000.

VOTE 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 11,396,586,000;
Development expenditure, Shs 1,761,729,000.

VOTE 144 - Uganda Police Force
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 125,212,957,000;
Development expenditure, Shs 8,500,925,000.

VOTE 145 - Uganda Prison Services
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 42,715,917,000;
Development expenditure, Shs 1,565,999,000.

This is subject to the accommodation of the funding gap in the recommendations. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. I have noted the signatures and they have more than one-third required for the debate. But before I invite the Opposition, I noted that you have brought up challenges like prisoners’ beddings, blankets and mattresses, prisoners uniforms, staff uniforms and feeding. I did not see sanitary towels –(Applause)- is that not a challenge? Let me invite the Opposition spokesperson if they are ready.

5.41
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you my chairman. Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. I had tailored my response according to the report that I was availed. It is a report that contained 44 pages and the new report that I have just received is 49 pages and I thought I will be in jeopardy if I tried to use the old report to respond to a new report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay. You can stand down for now. I will ask other Members to contribute.

MR KYANJO: I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there Members who are ready? Yes, hon. Okello.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am mindful of the pressure of time on us to complete the budget process by the 30th day of this month. However, the report just presented to us is, I think, the most serious of all of the reports we are going to receive because – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, all the reports are serious; all the reports are serious. There is no report more serious than the other. All the reports are equal in this House. (Applause)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the House has been sitting since 10 O’clock this morning and I think this report requires fresh minds. I would like to suggest that we take this report with us and sleep over it so that tomorrow we come with fresh minds and tackle it properly. That is my suggestion, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, no one is suggesting that we are going to conclude this debate today. We can start on it and adjourn to tomorrow. If there are members who are ready, please contribute now. I will find an appropriate time to adjourn.  

5.43
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu):  Madam Speaker, I am just standing in for the portfolio of the shadow Minister for Defence and I am ready to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, proceed.  

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for this report, but I just have a few responses to the report of the committee.  

The Ministry of Defence is a very important ministry in this country; we consider the sovereignty of this country to be under the protection of that ministry -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Since this Parliament is investigating the conduct of the Uganda Police Force, I seek your procedural guidance on whether it will be prudent for us to continue allocating money to a category of people who are still being investigated –(Laughter)- by this very parliament. How do we proceed in that matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when we appointed that committee, we were confident that it would do its work on behalf of this plenary. So, let the committee do its work as we continue with the other business.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Most obliged.  

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, the Ministry of Defence is important. The expectation of the citizens of this country is that this ministry will continue to protect the sovereignty of this country and behave above partisan politics in this country.  

My concern number one is on the training, promotion, deployment and retirement of officers and men and women of the UPDF. There is a lot of concern and we would like to get clear clarification on criteria for selecting people for further training, promotions and how they get deployed. 

When I talk about deployment, there is a common term in this country called katebe to describe non-deployment for some people. This is quite rampant. Sometimes when you meet the officers on katebe, and their condition is quite frustrating. Some of them are very senior officers and they have served this country with all the dignity, but the condition under which you find them is really appalling. If the ministry feels that these people are of no service to the nation, instead of just putting them on katebe for years, they should retire them so that they can go back and look after their families other than leaving them frustrated.  

I want to give an example, Madam Speaker, of three officers. One is Maj. Gen. William Okecho. This officer joined the National Resistance Army (Mr Okecho rose_) Please, I am not taking it – (Interjections)– Yes, I am not taking it. He joined the NRA and eventually the UPDF at the rank of a Brigadier. This officer served the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces for 21 years before he was promoted to a major general. In 21 years they have promoted him one step but there are many other officers who over these years have gone through the ranks and files and have been promoted more than five times. 

The other example is Col. Steven Othieno who joined the NRA at the rank of lieutenant colonel and stayed at that rank for 17 years without promotion. They promoted him once and only to the rank of a colonel. Unfortunately, he is still a colonel and on katebe.

Madam Speaker, Col. Oulanya Ojara who comes from my constituency joined the NRA in November 1985 from Masaka at the rank of lieutenant colonel. He stayed for 16 years in service without promotion and was promoted once in 2001 to the rank of colonel. He has also remained on katebe. It is quite frustrating! These are senior citizens of this country who rendered their services; if they are not useful, they should be left to go back home and be retired. Why should we hang senior people? First and foremost, they are family people. I am raising this issue because when you look at the conditions of these people, where they are and how they live, there is a big problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members! Please do not carry on other meetings.

MR OKUMU: My urge to the Minister of Defence and the ministry is that if some officers cannot be trained or promoted and they cannot be deployed, at least retire them. Let them go back home and serve their families. Secondly, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR TOSKIN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much, colleague, for giving me this time to seek a clarification. Could you kindly help us to know more about the officers you are talking about? What are their ages, qualifications and so on? That information is important for us so that we can be able to help you and judge. Thank you very much. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Okumu for giving me this opportunity to provide information on the promotions in UPDF. We have one person called Lt Col Francis Achola who is a graduate of Political Science of Makerere University. He joined NRA in 1985 as a major and he was promoted the other day to a lieutenant colonel after serving for 22 years, and he is a graduate. Actually, he was put there to head these auxiliary forces deep in the villages while thousands of people were being promoted. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, members should take this matter seriously. First of all, as a normal human being, when asked to offer services you serve, but when your services are no longer needed you should be retired. 

To my colleague, hon. Toskin, if I give an example of an officer serving for 16 or 17 years and then skipped and promoted, it is quite unfortunate. When Col Oulanyah Jara joined the NRA in November 1995, his adjutant, Lt Oketa, was a lieutenant at that time. Today, Oketa is a major general; he has been promoted over the ranks. As I talk, the bodyguard of Col Oulanyah Jara is now a brigadier and a second division commander. So, these are things we the representatives of the people find quite frustrating. It is not fair to senior citizens who have served this country honestly. If you do not need their services, do not put them on katebe to allow officers go on boda-boda. 

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it procedurally correct to select three individuals out of tens of thousands of the people who serve in the armed forces and try to generalise as if it is a scientifically correct representative sample of what is going on? Is it an impartial procedure and hence correct information to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we are to dissect procedure by way of percentages, I think we would have a problem in this country. The report talked about promotions, wages and he is dealing with the policy of promotions. So he is okay. Minister, you are going to respond.

DR KIYONGA: I am constrained, Madam Speaker, because my colleague, hon. Reagan, started his contribution with a very important principle that the army and the Ministry of Defence must protect the country and that this must be sustained. In his report, the chairman of the committee did allude to the subject of promotions and the subject of balancing the army, and he did underscore that this point arose during the committee hearing. In our judgement as a ministry and also the committee, we felt that these concerns needed examination under camera, first within the committee. 

In my view, if hon. Reagan continues the way he is doing, we might be risking what we are trying to protect. Are we expecting everybody to come here and explain the conduct of each officer who is being mentioned? It is better for this country that the committee, in camera, hears these details, gives explanation and then we come to the plenary with an overall judgement without risking the security of this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether this is classified information. Is that information classified? When you are answering, you can give a general answer stating what you are going to do without stating that Ojara did that. I think the country is interested in knowing what is happening and this is not classified as far as I am concerned.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, all of us are raising these issues in good faith. I know there are many members out there who know officers who are on Katebe and they are really frustrated. Madam Speaker, if you find some of these officers – for example, when you are a senior officer – (Interruption)

MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Reagan Okumu for giving way. When you actually started talking about these promotions, I switched on my phone illegally. A constituent of mine sent me a message and said he has been in the Police for 22 years and has never been promoted; he is still a police constable. This is so bad. It lowers the person’s esteem. 

I see this guy in town here driving these police cars that chase you people when you commit a traffic offence. He has really worked so hard – that is what I imagine - so why doesn’t he get promoted? He sent me his number; here it is – (Laughter) – I was going to give the police number because surely somebody has to be promoted in order to be motivated.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Reagan for giving way. I visited the high command in Kimaka and you find people with highly qualified papers. They are doctors, lawyers but they have a lot of pain. There is differential promotion in the Army. I asked one of them about it. Initially, they thought that everybody who had gone there professed the Movement faith. I told them I was FDC and one of them was so quick to pass judgement. When I listened very faithfully to them and asked them how happy they were with their promotions, Madam Speaker, I was terrified. They told me promotions in the UPDF depend on how you relate with your bosses irrespective of your qualifications. If there were opportunities to call these individuals here and talk to them, you would find some shedding tears. 

That is only not happening in the UPDF but it is across the civil service. There are people who have worked and because their names originate from the wrong regions, they have never been promoted. My information to Reagan is to take heart and believe that the minister here needs to do something paramount about actual promotions based on merit in the Defence forces and elsewhere. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, my appeal is to the ministry. I think I started by saying that if somebody cannot be trained and he cannot be promoted or deployed, some of these people are mature so at least retire them so that they can go and look after their families. 

I know of a major general who is frustrated and if you go to Jinja you will find him drunk. He is not drunk because he likes drinking but because he is frustrated. He was once the Chief of Staff in this country. When you go further, you will find that even the way he lives now, the man feels useless. He says, “I have served this country. I have done all this”; if you go to Jinja you will find him. This is a very frustrating thing. 

This is an appeal that we should treat people who serve this country as human beings. It is important that if you do not need anybody, let him go back home. Give him his package or her package and they go home and retire rather than holding them there saying “you are in active service” or “you are a senior officer” when you do not even have transport for yourself. You get some of these very frustrated officers on boda-bodas trying to connect and they do not even have any proper housing. I want to stop at that, Madam Speaker, but I hope that the message is clear. We do not want to come and start lamenting because we can bring a list of these people; there are so many of them who are frustrated. Let the message be taken and corrective measures be carried out.

Madam Speaker, my other concern is about intelligence organisations, especially CMI, and about the way they operate and the way guns are given to operatives. My simple understanding of operatives is that they do not necessarily need to operate with guns; they are informers. They are supposed to get information across. They are supposed to collect information to service the intelligence. I want the Ministry of Defence to dig deep into this and streamline this arrangement because it is spoiling the image of the UPDF. 

These operatives arrest people and take them to the barracks. Eventually, when the army is exposed, they hand these people over to the police. I think this is not right. You should move away from that. Discipline some of these officers who are doing that and let the army steer clear of these things and they will get the respect they deserve from the citizens of this country.

In that same line, Madam Speaker, there are officers who have died or who have been killed in service. When you talk of benefits, it becomes a nightmare for the families to make a follow-up. I also do not want to go into details but I want the ministry to correct this. During burials, you hear very good statements - “Do not mind, we shall cater for you” - but after the burial it becomes a nightmare for the families to access support from government. With some of these officers, their bodies have not even been availed for burial and it is quite frustrating. For a person who served this country who died while he was in active service, especially when he was an officer, the family deserves to bury him or her. Again I do not want to mention names but we have the names. I know hon. Crispus Kiyonga, the Minister of Defence, knows some of these cases that I am talking about. 

Madam Speaker, we are also concerned about the welfare of soldiers. It is not enough to say you have increased salaries of soldiers to Shs 200,000. For many of you who were old, even during Amin’s time soldiers were treated well. They would be respected even in villages. A soldier would get leave from service and at least there were basic things that would be given to him. Today our soldiers find a lot of difficulties in even getting leave to go home and rest. Soldiers are not politicians who do not get leave. They deserve to get leave to go and rest and go back fresh. I represent a constituency in northern Uganda and I have been living with so many soldiers. Some of them get very frustrated because they do not even get the opportunity for leave. 

Mr Minister, now that there is some degree of stability in this country, we would appeal that the question of giving leave to soldiers should be streamlined so that soldiers can have opportunity to get back to their families, to get back home, to refresh and get back to service.

Madam Speaker, we salute the contribution Uganda has given to Somalia. At least we know that has been in the interest of Pan Africanism. We in the Opposition supported this deployment of troops but we want some clarity. The AU under which Uganda is operating today is complaining that they can no longer hold the challenges in Somalia, that the UN should come and take over. We want the ministry to come and give us a clarification on this matter. 

There is also talk of a UN report about Ugandan troops in Somalia; I also want the minister to clarify on that to the House. And whether there are some other African countries, which had also promised to come, for example Nigeria. Nigeria initially said it could not come because of elections but up to now they have not reported. What is happening? Are we going to hang in there with Burundi? What is the future of our stay in Somalia?

Madam Speaker, it is also of grave concern to us that while we seriously involve ourselves in some countries in good relationships especially in terms of acquiring military hardware, like in the former Soviet Union republics like Ukraine and others, it is sad that we do not have a military attaché in the foreign mission in Moscow. It always becomes extremely expensive when the Minister of Defence wants to do anything; to send people to fly to Ukraine or to some of those countries. I thought that it would be easier and cheaper for the ministry to have a military attaché in an area where it has a military interest. I still think that we have military interest in that region. If I am not poorly informed, I am aware that part of our artillery, most of our helicopter gunships still originate from that region but we do not have any single military attaché in Moscow. Even the staff in Moscow is really –(Interruption) 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I am not very knowledgeable about military issues but I want to seek clarification from hon. Reagan Okumu whether the military attachés are the only individuals who can help advance military interests of a country, including acquisition of military hardware? 

MR OKUMU: That is why I am a shadow defence minister. (Laughter) Do you get it? That means I know and I am not talking out of ignorance.

Just two more things: I really want the Minister of Defence to put this country to rest especially about the former armies who trekked from all over the country to go to Bombo to register with the hope that – because I understand that the records of the Ministry of Defence got burnt some time back so it is very difficult to trace the records of people who have served this country. And the Ministry of Defence found it easier to make announcements for people to go to Bombo to register. I do not know; how far have you gone with that arrangement and how many people have you registered? What mechanism have you put in place to verify so that you do not register ghosts? What about those who have departed; are their relatives also able to go and register them if they can remember their numbers or you are only dealing with the living? 

Finally, on the question of deployment in Southern Sudan, the minister knows very well that this House should always support any deployment of troops abroad. I just want to request you to regularise the deployment of our troops in Southern Sudan; Southern Sudan is not part of Uganda. Regularise it through this House or else you bring he troops back home. Yes, you regularise it or else you bring them back home. You regularise it because their presence there is not sanctioned by the House as the law requires. 

So, those who believe in the rule of law will really understand me and I know that the minister does appreciate this. I do not think anybody in this House would come and oppose the process of regularising the stay of our troops in Southern Sudan; I do not think so. But it is better to make it within the framework of the law and you will be justified for any thing. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to give a few of these responses. And we thank the committee for the comprehensive report to the House. Thank you. 

6.14
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you once again, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I will deal with the figures first. The Ministry of Defence has Shs 476, 160,305,000 and the Ministry of Internal Affairs is seeking for Shs 192,154,000,113 implying that the Ministry of Defence budget is in excess of  Shs 284,456,192,000. And now this is in excess of the Defence budget.

You are aware and Ugandans are aware that if you combine the Prisons together with the Police, and the budget for the Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters, this is itself much less than the Ministry of Defence. The justification - year in year out - has been that we are fighting the Kony war and that is why the Ministry of Defence has always had an absolutely high budget. Now the ADF is under control; Kony - you are negotiating with Kony - what, therefore, is the justification and rationale for having a budget in excess of Shs 284 billion when Ugandans here have not actually settled issues to do with the Police and the Prisons? And here we are giving Defence resources of this amount  –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, my colleague on the left hand side. I would like to seek a clarification from you. What I know is that we have a deficit budgeting. How is it in excess so that we can be on board? What I think happens is that the ministry budgets what it expects in a year; how is it in excess?

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, I think possibly it is the way I speak that my colleague did not get it, but when I get to slow down possibly you will understand me. Possibly you can discuss that over coffee. (Laughter) The figures are absolutely clear. Unless you have a visual impairment you should be able to se this. 

I have a concern. We have just been talking about promotions in the Army but there is a big problem here in the Police. The Police chief has a military background and we have – my understanding of the police force is that this is a civil force. However, we have the military heading the Police. What happened to the promotions? Are we getting the help from the military from Defence because there are no competent people with in the Police force who could actually be the ones taking charge of this force? We are seeing weird behaviour in the Police force; we used not to see this. Could this be a result of militarising the Police so that they lose their civility?

This is something that we need to take seriously. As a nation we cannot continue like this. There must be benchmarks, there must be ways as to when and where you qualify and you professionally develop. If I have a military background and I am taken to the Police force, what is the streamlined framework for my promotion there? Am I promoted in the armed forces or I am just promoted in the Police? Because here I am lost! How can we run a country in a confused manner, yet we are talking about professionalising the army and militarising the Police? That is unthinkable and this must be checked in budgetary terms. 

I still have an issue of dealing with our fallen UPDF men. The preservation of our brothers and sisters who die is very unfortunate. On three occasions I have been forced to go and find bodies that are actually rotten, to the extent that opening the coffins becomes impossible. And when the bodies are finally brought to the relatives, you are mandated to open. It is such an unfortunate thing! What is happening with the military hospitals? Are they equipped? 

Around Mbuya here I just see one lorry around, I do not even know where it is going. And the situation in Mbuya is so pathetic. How can we always be having very high budgets like this and nothing gets done? And our dear gallant sons and daughters stay in filthy places to the extent that now we are even very kind enough to begin dealing the land that we should be developing for their accommodation.

Madam Speaker, in this country there is no formal framework for promotion in the Army I want to assure Ugandans and this country. There was one, I think it was being developed when Gen. Muntu was there -(Interjections)- but it was sidelined at  that time. Up to now there is no formal way of promoting anyone in the Army -(Interjections)- the ministers are here, they can bear me witness or prove me incorrect. There is no formal framework, promotions in the Army are based on how kind you are, how good you are, possibly how –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give hon. Bako is that much as you see there is no formal framework, there is at least a kind of framework. For example, we know of some senior Ugandans who were in Sandhurst then they went to the US and are now Lieutenant colonels. Those are the kind of frameworks we have in promoting people in the Army. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you, hon. Otto for the information -(Dr Kiyonga rose_) I wish the honourable minister could hold his fire so that you respond to this finally because I need to give opportunity to other people to –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to have to come back to this point. We are discussing the Army in the fashion we have chosen. The difficulty I have as the Minister for Defence is: do I stand up and answer these allegations in the open? Do I sit and wait until the time for response? Whatever we are saying here is live on air; the population is listening to all this. [Hon. Members: “Let them listen”] And you can hear what some of the colleagues are saying -(Interjections)- my judgment is that this is not the right way to handle this matter. Clearly like what hon. Bako has said that there is no framework for promotion, there is a law, all of us if we are Members of Parliament, we know there is the UPDF Act, which clearly spells out procedures of how this should be done. We are being told that there are bodies of soldiers which reach families smelling, rotten. I would really want to hear substantiation of this statement.

But the bottom line is that we are here today; we are here tomorrow; the way we handle matters that are sensitive is not the way, in my view, we should be proceeding. The chair of the committee said this matter was brought up in the committee and by consensus within the committee we said we need a separate timing under camera at the committee level to thoroughly examine this matter and then return to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, the committee is a delegate of this House. The committee works on our behalf, even if they are to sit there in camera, they have to report to this House. How shall we discuss it when they are - you should not worry! If you have got good policies, when you come to answer you will say, “This is the policy, which is being followed”. (Applause)

MR ODIT: I think the Minister of Defence on an emotional response tried to discourage the classified information but in the Seventh Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that classified? Please, back in the Seventh Parliament we agreed on what is classified and what is not classified. What is not classified does not come to this House, even through the committee. So, whatever is here is not classified. That is since the Seventh Parliament; this is nothing new.

MR ODIT: That is right but what I wanted to bring out is the piece of information, which was discussed, was when the issue of decaying bodies was raised in the House. The minister at the time said it was very expensive to keep on taking individual bodies to particular areas. The cheapest thing would be for the Ministry of Defence to wait for bodies to accumulate so that they could be able to pick and load them in one lorry and take them to particular districts and so the fewer you are in terms of dead ones from your area, the longer you have to wait for more and more bodies to accumulate so that they can be taken all at once. That was here on the Floor of this House. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving way. Madam Speaker, what is before us is compared to what happened in one country called “imaginary country” in which the army took power four times and they enjoyed, got rich and then developed themselves to the extent that the police in that country was ignored. Therefore, the police decided to try to take over power so that they could also become rich because they were never promoted and they did not have any opportunity for their problems to be addressed. Do we want to wait for this kind of scenario to take place in Uganda? 

The information I want to give you is to the effect that in Uganda, one Assistant Inspector-General of Police has been waiting for an opportunity maybe to reach the level of Inspector-General of Police for a long time and he has the best qualifications but that has not been possible. What are we talking about if the Police and Army issue cannot be addressed? I propose that part of the budget from the military should be slashed and given to Police to develop them. Thank you.

MS BAKO: Thank you colleagues for that information and I think the cumulative effect of that information if it really reached our good minister would be readjustments in his forces - UPDF to be UPDF, Police to be Police and Prisons to be Prisons so that ultimately Ugandans know that one day if one wakes up to be a policeman, he will never be called an army officer.

Finally, Vote 009, the headquarters; Shs 11.649 billion was approved and then the releases were Shs 13 billion. Why does the Ministry of Finance release money in excess of what is approved? Even if these are the Votes-on-Account or monies coming from the Justice, Law and Order sector, doesn’t Parliament really deserve to know how you get these resources and you work them out? These figures are very disturbing. How can Ugandans approve something and in the end the coffers get something else? Are you joking around with taxpayers’ money because you can just fleece around with it? I think this is unfortunate. [Dr Suruma: “Information”.] Thank you so much, Mr Minister, not now. 

Ugandans want to be secure in this country but the justification for this excessive Defence budget does not arise given the fact that we are now in what the NRM Government calls a peaceful nation but what we believe is relative peace. And now that the rebelling forces, the ADF and the LRA, are not active as they used to be, this is not justified. 

There is what the committee calls the NEC industries. What are the benefits of these industries to this nation and where are their proceeds? All I see is monies in excess of Shs 13 billion has been expended. How much do these industries generate to this nation? We need to know. What are these industries? Are these personal properties? I am seeing square miles of a firm here, is it a government firm that belongs to the UPDF? Is it a personal firm? Where are the proceeds of this firm? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is an appropriate time to adjourn. The House is adjourned to 10 O’clock tomorrow morning.

(The House rose at 6.31 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 August 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)







