Wednesday, 19 August 2009

(Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting as we continue with the business of yesterday. I appeal to the committees to try to wind up the business that they have been handling for the last three weeks so that we can be in time. The Budget Act is clear; we have to finish the process by 31st. I have powers under the Act to extend the time, but that should be the last resort. Let us try to be within the time rather than use my discretion to extend the time. I also appeal to members to attend the committee meetings. It seems you may have some problems, but try to solve the problems and attend to the committees. 

2.57
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here on an issue of national importance regarding the constitution of various committees of the sub-counties in the newly created administrative units of the Local Government. 

Effective 1st July this year, a number of sub-counties came into effect due to the sub-division of the already existing sub-counties. The situation I am most familiar with is that of Butaleja District. Here, the secretary of the electoral office had scheduled to constitute the committees of these respective administrative units but he received instructions from the Electoral Commission that they would come up with a uniform date for this exercise to be conducted in the whole country. 

Because of this suspension, and because executive committees were not constituted, these sub-counties are not formally functioning. They cannot deliberate on their budgets, nobody can lay the budgets and a lot of administrative functions cannot take place. 

Can the Attorney-General, who is responsible for the Electoral Commission, inform us when this exercise is going to be conducted, if it is going to be conducted at all? We need to know so that these lower administrative units are fully constituted and they start doing their job. Thank you very much.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I have had the opportunity to relate with Hon. Dombo on this matter before we came in here. I have had the benefit of taking his point very seriously, and I consider it a very important matter that needs urgent resolution. I have related with the Electoral Commission and they have assured me, and I wish to assure the public and the nation that this exercise will be carried out from 31st this month to 7th September this year. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.00
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to present a proposal to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 49,500,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing phase II of the Energy for Rural Transformation Management Project. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Let it be handled by the appropriate committee and they subsequently report to us. 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues, this is a request to borrow Special Drawing Rights 17,600,00 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing phase II of the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Let it be handled by the appropriate committee and they subsequently report to us. 

3.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 25(1) of the Local Government Finance Act, the Commission is required to submit a copy of its annual report to Parliament. Accordingly, I beg to lay on Table the Annual Report, 2008, from the Local Government Finance Commission. I beg to move. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009
II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We continue with the general debate.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, the report from the Sessional Committee of Public Service and Local Government on the budget estimates is ready. I wonder whether I can be allowed to present the report in summary form. 

THE SPEAKER: You will have an opportunity when we handle the vote, but you can briefly tell us what you think about the budget. Currently, we are dealing with the general debate on the Budget presented by the Ministry of Finance. After agreeing with the motion, then we shall go into details, handling the votes falling under various sessional committees. However, you can generally make a contribution if you wish.

MR YIGA: Of course, Mr Speaker. The report is detailed and the committee had the opportunity to interact with the relevant people. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I seek guidance from your chair. I thought it would be procedurally correct for the chairperson of the Budget Committee to react first before we come in for the debate, instead of the hon. Member coming in with a report from the committee.  

THE SPEAKER: She had asked for today, I think. If you are ready today, you can make your observations.

3.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Betty Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to make some remarks to kick-start the Budget debate as per rule 129 (5) of our Rules of Procedure. 

Honourable members, you recall that the Budget Committee made recommendations on the Budget Framework Paper and submitted them under Section 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act, 2001. These recommendations were duly submitted to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament for onward presentation to His Excellency the President in accordance with Section 73 of the Budget Act. In accordance with Section 8 of the Budget Act, members will recall that I presented this same report, which was adopted by this august House on 19 May 2009. 

On 24 June 2009, Parliament passed the Vote-on-Account to enable Government access funds for its programmes for four months. This is normally to enable Parliament have enough time to scrutinise and debate the Budget and conclude with the passing of the Appropriations Bill.

I also circulated guidelines for use by sessional committees in examining the ministerial policy statements. The key elements of the guidelines were meant to ensure thorough scrutiny of the ministerial policy statements in order to improve absorption of resources by spending agencies. These guidelines included, among others, the requirement for the agencies to present realistic work plans, procurement plans and recruitment plans of their organisations.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has also sent to me, in reply, detailed comments on the recommendations of Parliament on the National Budget Framework Paper. These have been transmitted to email addresses of all honourable members for use in finalising the sessional committee reports and also to inform the debate.

I wish to invite the attention of the House to Section 9 of the Budget Act, which says: “There shall be presented to Parliament by the sessional committees’ reports on the budget estimates that fall within their respective jurisdictions by the 31st day of August in each financial year.” I pray that an opportunity be accorded for this exercise.

As I conclude, this time round I would like to advise that Parliament considers and passes the finance Bills before the Appropriations Bill in order to incorporate and also inform the House on sources of funding for the Budget before appropriation.

I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

MR SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, can I now make my presentation for my committee?

MR SPEAKER: You may.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 129 as having been cited by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, I would have expected that instead of her leading us through the process of budget formulation, now that she has the two budgets in her custody - the Budget as presented by the Minister of Finance and the alternative position as presented by the Shadow Minister for Finance - the time was now ripe for us to go into debate of the salient issues as raised in the two budgets. (Interjections) Yes, I know why am saying “the two budgets”. If you ask me, I will explain. Ours is a response to the Budget and, therefore, that being the case, I am asking for guidance. 

I have seen my colleague, Hon. Anthony Yiga, the Chairman of the Public Service and Local Governments Committee, stand up to ask if he could make a presentation of his committee report. I do not know how the two will be incorporated when we go into sessional committee debates because at the same time there will be people who will want to engage in the general debate on the national budget. 

I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, and I believe I do this for the whole House as well because this is happening for the first time. Instead of engaging in a general debate on the Budget, we are going into sessional committees. How do we proceed? 

THE SPEAKER: What happened on Monday was that the Shadow Minister of Finance participated in the debate on the motion moved by the Minister of Finance. His was a contribution but he used the opportunity to criticise and appreciate here and there. The main motion is to debate the minister’s motion. So, anybody is free to make a contribution by way of general debate. What I now expect from him or any other chairpersons during this motion is to make a general observation, maybe restricted to the sectors falling under their committees. He may choose to refer to what Hon. Oduman said or not. It is up to him to choose where he may or may not comment.

After this motion is disposed of, we are going into what we call Committee of Supply. We shall sit as the committee to consider in detail the various votes handled by these committees. However, as I had advised earlier, I expect the committees, if they are going to use their reports, to have an executive summary rather than reading a 54-page report to us. We do not have that time.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I am going to summarise. I will not read the whole report in its entirety. 

The Committee –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I just want some guidance from you, Mr Speaker. We thought that we were now ready to start the general debate on the Budget before the committees could start presenting. 

THE SPEAKER: I think he has come with his notes to refer to while contributing to the general debate. (Laughter)

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, we as a committee had the opportunity –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what we have now is a general debate on the Budget. After that, we shall resolve to go to the Committee of Supply where we are going to handle various votes. This is what I have said.

MR YIGA: So, Mr Speaker, should I withdraw and wait for that opportunity? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Make your contribution.

MR YIGA: Okay. Mr Speaker, that is what I want to do because the committee made general observations and I know some of them touch on what Hon. Oduman raised in his report. I think we should be able to benefit from what the committee raised. 

Mr Speaker, the committee raised the following observations –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you fear to hear what he wants to say? Please listen to him and appreciate it or leave it.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the guidance I would like to seek is whether when Hon. Anthony Yiga, the chairman of the sessional committee comes and makes general observations as raised by his committee, he will again be given an opportunity to come and make a formal presentation? 

THE SPEAKER: When we come to votes falling under the committee, he will be given an opportunity. Turning ourselves into a Committee of Supply means agreeing to approve the figures in respect of various votes, but here we are having a general debate. I cannot tell whether he is contributing to the general debate before I hear him.

MR WADRI: You see, Mr Speaker, I do not intend to take a lot of time of this House but the problem now is – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to start and then when you get a problem, you will stand up and we shall guide you?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, at what point shall my Shadow Minister for Public Service and Local Government come in because there is going to be a problem?

THE SPEAKER: Your Minister of Public Service should have been in that committee and presented his views, had his views considered and made part of the report. The views of the Shadow Minister for Public Service and Local Government should have been expressed in the committee because he is part and parcel of that committee. 

MR YIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. We have the following observations to make on the Budget and the ministerial policy statements from the sector which we handled.

On No.1, we are concerned with the pension arrears and we noted that the pension arrears as at 30th June 2009 stood at Shs 130.4 billion. 

We also noted that because of the inadequate budget for the recurrent pension obligations, the Government ends up accumulating arrears. The recurrent pension obligations require Shs 152.2 billion, for example, but for the last three financial years, the provision for this item has been at Shs 78.4 billion. That is why you end up accumulating pension arrears all the time. So, this is an area where we think that the government should look at very seriously. This financial year, there is only a provision for Shs 12 billion to clear some of the pension arrears. 

Secondly, the committee was concerned about the failure to implement the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System. As a result, these senior Ugandans who retire find it very difficult to access the pension payroll. So, action is required there. 

Another issue is that of pay reform. As Government, we have failed to pay attractive packages to our civil servants, which results in low motivation of staff, and has also increased staff turnover.

We are also concerned about the misuse of public vehicles in this country. We noted that the Minister of Public Service plans to carry out a vehicle census. The committee is of the view that this is not enough because the public is more interested in having guidelines and standards to check vehicle misuse. 

We also noted that ministries are purchasing vehicles beyond the required capacity. 

We noted that Government is spending over Shs 100 billion annually on vehicle maintenance alone across all sectors.

Mr Speaker, you will recall that Parliament was persuaded to approve a loan for the Ministry of Public Service which, among others, was supposed to cater for the construction of the records centre. We note, however, that two years down the road, we are still at preliminaries. We do not see any visible work towards having the National Records Centre in place.

The other issue concerns the civil service colleges which we also noted are still at preliminaries and the Ministry of Public Service seems to exhibit lack of capacity in this area. So, they have actually failed to absorb money. They are relying on consultants.

We also noted that the government has delayed to introduce the Public Service Pension Bill to this House, which would have assisted greatly in reducing pension arrears. So, action is required in this area.

We noted the delayed access of staff to the payroll as mentioned earlier. So, those observations concern the Ministry of Public Service.

On the Public Service Commission, we noted that the commission is faced with a problem of inadequate funding for advertisements. They are not able to advertise all the vacant jobs, yet this would have actually assisted our unemployed Ugandans, especially the youth, to access jobs. There is also a problem where the Public Service Commission is not able to monitor the activities of these service commissions because of inadequate funding.

We also made general observations in the local government sector. We noted that there is still a problem with the two new taxes which were introduced - the local service tax and the local hotel tax. Very little is being collected and we felt that more has to be done to popularise these taxes.

We also noted that local governments are faced with a very big challenge in relation to financing. Many of them are really not able to deliver services to the satisfaction of their constituents.

We noted that the Ministry of Local Government is faced with a problem of counterpart funding. There are several projects which are financed by loans where the government has not been able to meet counterpart funding at the required level. So, counterpart funding is required; notably, we have the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project financed by a loan and the government is required to raise Shs 6 billion this financial year. The donors are ready to meet their commitments but the government has not provided the required Shs 6 billion. So, this is an area where we think that the government needs to scale-up and raise the required money.

We note that the issue of gratuities for local governments is a very big problem as many local governments have failed to pay local government pension to the staff who retired.

We noted that the government made a commitment in the last financial years to assist local governments to pay pension arrears. In 2007/2008, Government made a commitment to pay Shs 17.5 billion; in the last financial year, a commitment was made to pay Shs 30 billion. We found out that there is a problem of transparency in this area; many local governments do not know which pensioners benefited from this money. So, we feel that something has to be done to usher in transparency in this area.

We noted that there is a problem of unregulated and unplanned urban development in this country. As a country, we have been pre-occupied with creating town boards and upgrading others to become town councils and municipal councils but the government has not come in vividly to assist them with infrastructure to deliver services. That is an area where we think something has to be done.

We noted that the unconditional grant has not increased in relation to the increase in the national economy. The budget is growing but the unconditional grant for this financial year has only increased by seven percent. This is money which would have assisted our local governments to deliver services, and we feel that something has to be done in this area.

We noted that the government came up with an idea of creating sub-county fora – barazas - to enable our people to participate in monitoring what is happening in their villages and sub-counties. We found out that this plan was left to the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity and the Ministry of Local Government was actually not doing much. We thought that the Ministry of Local Government should come in to work hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity so that these sub-county barazas can actually be operationalised.

The other issue concerns the national assessment - the Ministry of Local Government introduced a scheme to penalise those who are performing badly and reward those that are performing well. We noted as a committee that the punishment goes to the Local Government and not to the officials who created the problems. The committee was rather uneasy and wondered why those officials who led to those problems are not punished.

We noted that the equalisation grant did not actually have a lot of impact on the ground because it has stagnated at Shs 3.5 billion yet the committee has for a long time been recommending that the grant be increased to Shs 6.5 billion so that some impact can be realised on the ground. As of now, little impact on the ground is realised because of little funding.

The other issue the committee noted with concern is the failure by Government to come up with a transparent grants allocation formula in regard to conditional grants. Sectors now allocate funds at will; transparency is lacking in this area. We feel that Government should come up and streamline and ensure that we have an allocation formula which is transparent and which can actually be known by all the stakeholders. Of course, some few ministries have applied the formula selectively, but Government has not been able to apply it because Cabinet has not endorsed it.

We noted that there are a number of districts with boundary disputes which need to be addressed. We think that the Ministry of Local Government should move fast to address them.

Mr Speaker, the last observation is that, the committee noted that the demand for creation of new districts is on the increase. Already, Parliament has been requested to approve the creation of 13 new districts and the Ministry of Local Government is handling requests for the creation of another 15 districts. 

The committee notes further that in this country we have 151 counties and to date, we have 80 districts. We also note that single counties are becoming districts now and Government is yet to rationalisation the creation of districts. 

We also note that one-county districts are relatively doing better in terms of service delivery than the old and big districts, which further supports the split to create new districts.

We further note that districts are created as we get near to elections, which causes uneasiness among our people.

We note that the central ministries will not be able to effectively monitor and supervise the work of the increasing districts.

Mr Speaker, we made several recommendations on the issues which feature in our observations:

We would like to say that requests for the creation of new districts that are still with the Ministry of Local Government should be quickly handled with the people being informed of the fate of their requests, in order to make the entire exercise transparent.

Mr Speaker, we observe that we are nearing election, time so matters relating to the creation of districts should be cleared by the end of October 2009. This will enable the Electoral Commission to have ample time to plan for the 2011 elections.

We made very many recommendations, which I think the relevant ministers have taken note of. But at the end of it all, we recommended that funds be approved and availed to these ministries and local governments when it comes to appropriation by the Committee of Supply. 

Allow me to lay on Table, Mr Speaker, a detailed report containing all the observations and recommendations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Malinga.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Malinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development raised quite a number of issues. He was persuasive; unfortunately, quite a number of the statements that were very high sounding, as far as Ministry of Health is concerned, were inaccurate.

This is an honourable House and whatever we say here becomes part of the record –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, this is a response statement by the Opposition to the Budget Speech. The motion we are debating is that one by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What you heard from the Opposition was the response to the minister’s motion. But what I have realised is that you are now making the Opposition’s response the central issue in this motion.

DR MALINGA: I am debating the Minister of Finance’s statement, which the Opposition responded to with inaccuracies that I would like to address.

Mr Speaker, I hope that the –

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to make this booklet part of the record?

DR MALINGA: I beg your pardon, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that of the Minister of Finance; the concentration should be on that. Otherwise, if you are going to spend time debating the response by the Opposition – we do not have time!

3.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When Hon. Yiga talked about pensioners, I waited for him to say that they had identified money to pay them. These are senior citizens of this country who have contributed quite a lot. We should not forget that even where we are seated, we are enjoying the sweat of those pensioners. So, it is very wrong for us not to pay them, first, their monthly salaries and two, their lumpsum pension. I am saying this because these are people who now have a number of issues relating to poverty as if they never worked for this country.

If any person working for Government goes to any village and sees the way pensioners suffer, what would he/she think? They would think of paying themselves pension money immediately so that by the time they retire, they already have received their pension.

Mr Speaker, I would like to emphasize that a dog will always produce a dog, while a cow will always produce a cow. We cannot say that the civil servants of the old days were less or not corrupt and it is the current ones who are corrupt, because they come from the same tree. It is the way we handle the civil service that brings these problems. What is wrong with paying pensioners; we have the money! 

Recently, in one of the studies about pension reforms, we flew to South Africa. But while there, the person who was driving with us around kept showing us houses, which he said belong to ministers of Uganda. This was shocking to us. I will tell you that we had a smooth ride because the roads and buildings are very good. I wish those ministers who built houses there could also construct good roads here. But the pertinent question is: Why ministers and not public servants?

Mr Speaker, it is time for us members of Parliament to appropriate money to pay pensioners. If we do not do it, it will be us that will have contributed to the suffering of the retired civil servants.

We always talk about corruption in the Civil Service. We should also, here as Parliament, decide and help the civil servants. 

As for job security, the moment there is no job security, you will not see any whistle blower in the Civil Service. Why? This is because if he or she blows the whistle, tomorrow he or she will have no job. Also, this business of civil servants not having a good pay and job security causes this rampant corruption.

Mr Speaker -(Interjection)- yes you are right, my brother Hon. Okot Ogong. And for those who have more and more, that is what we call greed. 

Money Laundering 

Uganda is the biggest money launderer currently, yet we have refused to have the Money Laundering Act in place. The people who are supposed to bring it are those on the frontbench. Why have they not brought the law for the last five years? Are they still laundering money so that when they have finished laundering that is when they will bring the law? If they do not bring the law, I think even if it has financial implications, we would request you to allow members to bring a Private Member’s Bill to deal with this matter. 

The economic growth –(Interjections)- they do not know what is called point of order. This is not a primary school debate. 

Economic growth

We have statistics that in the agriculture sector, which employs 80 percent of the population of Uganda, the economic growth is 0.7 percent. Eighty percent times 30 million that means 24 million. Economic growth is at 0.7 percent and we are talking about Prosperity For All!

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Nandala for giving way. I would like to tell him that economic growth in the agricultural sector was 2.7 percent and not 0.7. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am very sure there is data. Everybody has his or her figures. I am sure of what is happening.

Economic growth, if I can help Madam Minister, is the total value of goods and services produced in the country. Are we together? (Laughter) Anyway, the economic growth in agriculture, as far as 2007/08 is concerned, was 0.7 percent. You have your figures and when you bring them you will dispute mine.

When we talk about education, it is very unfortunate that in the public universities now, where many of our children go, it is the rich ones who are benefiting from Government sponsorship. I think that is wrong. Why should the poor continue paying? I know the Bible says that he who has will be added more but why should the poor continue paying and the rich go without paying?

I think the best way to go about this is for Government to come out and handle what we call fixed costs irrespective of what, so that every child who goes to Makerere, Gulu University or Busitema, pays for variable costs. These fixed costs are the ones which are being transferred directly to the private students. Government is running away from its responsibility of providing education.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my brother that in our budget for this year, Government is going to spend over 100 billion to support 4,000 students. I just want to inform him that Government is working hard.

I also want to inform you that we only want to urge Government to come up with a system because now we are spending 100 billion for only 4,000 students. Why don’t we divide this money and spread it? We could be supporting over 20,000 students if we can use this money properly. But now, one student is costing us Shs 25 million because we have a poor system of work. The Ministry of Education should take it on; otherwise we are not doing well as Government.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my brother hon. Okot Ogong for supporting me by using the reverse order. It is true that 100 billion is sponsoring 4,000 students and the remaining students, say about 30,000, are supposed to pay. Imagine those 4,000 students are for people on the frontbench! What about us who are from the villages?

I think the best way to go about university education is for Government to handle the fixed costs so that everybody who goes to the university and is a Ugandan - who qualifies - should only contribute to variable costs. Fixed costs must be held by Government so that it reduces the tuition fees for all students who are going to the universities. Instead of paying three million, you will find that every student might pay half a million and parents will be able to help their children to go to school.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think there is a need to debate this issue of funding university education and how it should be done? Should Government spend money on just infrastructure and remuneration of professors so that people only pay the minimal fees? Instead of maybe selecting 4,000 as he has said, then you have 20,000 being private students. I do not know. The minister is here.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleagues in the House that Government is working out a strategic plan for sponsoring students at university level in this country. 

Honourable members, you remember last year we had a debate here – or we are able to have a debate on the Government White Paper on a report of the visitation committee which has made a number of recommendations, including review or reform of the sponsorship of university students in this country. The White Paper is now with the Social Services Committee which will soon Table the Paper for debate and then Parliament will adopt some of the recommendations. But the information I am giving is that Government is already considering the other ways of sponsoring students at these universities in this country. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the fixed costs we are talking about are the ones we mentioned: The infrastructure, paying lecturers, tarmacking roads, and building. But the variable costs are the normal costs for buying things like chalk, water and electricity. Those are the things that every student can be able to afford so long as the lecturer is being paid by the Government. I can assure you this will go a long way to reduce the cost in education. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to tell the Minister of Agriculture where to find this figure of 0.7. It is in the background to the Budget, under Table 2.3: Sectoral Real GDP Growth Rates 2003/04 up to 2007/08. You will get the 0.7 percent I talked about and the Background to the Budget is done by the Minister of Finance. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, Prosperity for All would have reached but the problem is that the cost of telling people about it is too high. I want to give an example. If a President was visiting Buteza, where I come from, he will have 200 soldiers, 50 vehicles, private secretaries – the cost of just the President going into an area to teach is beyond –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The President is mandated to go in any part of Uganda. The budget of the President is separate; it is in the Office of the President and is not part of Prosperity for All. Is it in order for Hon. Mafabi to try to stop the President from performing his constitutional duties, and secondly, to mislead this august House that the President is using the budget for Prosperity for All? Thirdly, not to realise that in 2008 and 2009, agriculture grew by 2.7 percent? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think, what you should do is to give the right information to him. What I gathered from him is that the big numbers of people the President travels with takes money. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the wise ruling. Even recently, we had to increase the budget of State House. That money could have gone to Prosperity For All; but instead it went to State House. That is common sense. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Recently, when I was in Mbale, I saw the local people excited, selling their matooke, the chicken, their sugar to the soldiers and the others. So, they gained money from that visit. Secondly, they were also excited to see the physic of the President. So I am asking, was that a loss? I would have liked the President to come to my area more than twice a year so that my people can sale. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in Bugisu, we were the biggest producers of matooke. The matooke she saw in Mbale comes from Mbarara; they do not come from Bugisu –(Interjections)– on this I can even bet. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank Hon. Nandala for giving way. I would like to inform the House that Mbale still produces matooke in Mutufu, Bududa, Bubulo – all these areas do produce matooke. Therefore, Hon. Nandala should not mislead the House. 

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that for us who grow cash crops in Bundibugyo, we buy matooke from outside Bundibugyo. So there is no problem buying matooke from another district when you have the money. If we have the money and another area is producing food crops, then we can exchange and that is okay. That means Bonna Bagaggawale is doing very well. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and all members who have given me information. As I conclude, it is not true that the matooke we have in Mbale does come from Mutufu, it comes from Mbarara – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you need to give an explanation; if you say that you used to, why don’t you produce more matooke right now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we got Banana Wilt, which Ministry of Agriculture avoided helping us with and our matooke got finished. When it got finished we had to get matooke from Mbarara. I think this was a deliberate policy so that matooke can be exported from Mbarara to Bugisu otherwise we were producing our own matooke. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.56
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I start by thanking the government minister and the shadow minister. But both of them have given extremes; the government minister has given the extreme that our economy is doing excellently by calling it a robust economy; something of the kind. In the dictionary, robust means healthy and strong. This can create a wrong picture to our citizens that everything is well. But when you look at the indicators, all is not well. 

Though we appreciate the fact that the economy is growing, all is not well. When you look at the per capita income, the terms of trade, the balance of payments, the infant mortality rates, the maternal mortality rate, famine in most of our districts, literacy levels, distribution of wealth and all other things, they indicate that all is not well to be painted in such a way. 

Mr Speaker, I appreciate that Government is doing everything possible and we are growing. But my caution is that if we create a picture that is not true, then we are being unfair to ourselves. 

On the other hand, the shadow minister also painted an extreme image as if nothing is happening. This is not true because it is evident that this economy is growing. But what you should have said is that it is not benefiting the majority of our people, and you should have emphasised this. 

When you look at what the government minister said that we have competitive advantage in food production, then it becomes ironical because many people are dying in this country; yet we are a basket, as she put it. To me, I see that there is a problem; when you say that we have a comparative advantage - in economics, when you use that word “Comparative”, it means that in that field we are really excellent. It is common knowledge that people are dying in this country! Therefore, it wouldn’t be good to create such a picture. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you Hon. Kagwera for giving way. The information I would like to give this House is that some time back, some newspapers reported that people in Teso were dying of hunger. I travelled in the whole of Teso and Lango regions; I met with the locals and the testimony that was given was that nobody had died of hunger. So, I would like to put that fact on record that nobody died of hunger although there were food shortages everywhere in the whole country. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my sister for that information. I want to tell you that today, we went for a breakfast meeting on food crisis and the Chairman of Amuria District testified that 12 people died in his area because of hunger. 

In my district, we lost a number of people who ate bitter cassava. Why would one eat bitter cassava if there is no hunger problem? People say that those who have died have died of HIV/AIDS not knowing that when you are HIV positive, you are vulnerable to hunger, and they could have died of hunger. If there was no hunger, they would still be alive! So, I want the Minister of Agriculture to clarify all this; does she think that all these people are liars? Thank you. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I was in Amuria and I was in a meeting where the chairman was with all the LC persons from LC I, and they reported that nobody died of hunger. I am not saying that there was no food shortage; there is food shortage everywhere in the whole country. In fact, I would urge members of Parliament to support me to go and mobilise the people to grow food security crops. As we speak, in every sub-county there is, in between, a range of Shs 13 million to 18 million specifically for materials for food security. Let us not politicise the hunger issue and speak facts. 

I think it is only a post-mortem that can adjudicate between my word and your word. But I went around and with all the genuineness, those are the facts I found out. I wish to appeal to members not to politicise issues. Let us not take pictures of people who are dying of illnesses and call it hunger. I think it is not responsible of us. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, we need to be assisted by Government. I will give the example of my constituency that there is a sub county which is badly affected by the famine and that is Malera Sub-County. Unfortunately, almost in every home, you find a person affected by HIV. And, during our mobilisation visits, we meet the question: “For us, we leave on medicine; but we are positive. Now, if we have nothing in the stomach, what do we do? They tell us that before you take the medicine, you must have taken food; and there is no food; we are burying people daily due to this problem.” 

So, help us to answer the question that, “When we die, what would have killed us?

THE SPEAKER: But my concern is this dangerous cassava which people eat and die. Why don’t you destroy this poisonous cassava? 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, this poisonous cassava - actually the yield is better than that of the edible cassava - it is usually used for brewing crude Waragi. If it is to be used for food, then it has to go through a rigorous process of fermenting and washing it to destroy the poisonous substance. But if you just spread it there in the compound and children are hungry and you are not there to help them, then they eat it because they are weak. They have been weakened by the hunger in the region. They die very fast and that is how we lost some children in my district. Thank you. 

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: I think we have to be careful when we talk about death. If somebody eats poisonous cassava and dies, that person has died of poison. It is not famine or hunger; it is not starvation. (Laughter) If you are driving a car, and are involved in an accident, and you get a head injury, you die of a head injury. It is not hunger. Supposing somebody is in a bus; it crashes and he was hungry; he dies of a head injury not hunger.  (Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the issue of hunger should be treated seriously. Like on Monday, Tuesday, I have not been in Parliament because I have been in my constituency. And I want to inform this House that the rate of death has greatly increased in my constituency. People are dying everyday - one, two, three, four – everyday! 

The rate has tremendously increased; and when we tried to research, we found out it is because of hunger. People are not eating enough; so their bodies cannot support the problems - the diseases that they have. So, this goes to Government. A government that has failed to support our people that are suffering is a disgrace. It is a total disgrace to a government with money; with everything; and they have failed to support people. This is the truth and there is no politics about it. There is no politics about hunger. I support the Movement. This is my Government. But when I go -(Interjections)- You cannot do that when people are suffering; and you have money.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker with a lot of humility, I would not really have requested for this order, but we reallocated money, recently. We even cut money from the Luwero Triangle programme to provide food for the North. 

So, is it in order - and yesterday, actually - (Interruption) Let us not talk about, “Is it enough?” It is the prerogative of this Parliament, if we so wish, that we say, “We stop schools; we suspend UPE; we suspend the universities; and we get money to buy food for these people. Then next year, we shall re-open schools.” It is the prerogative of this House. But what I cannot accept is that we have just raised money to buy food and this Government is called irresponsible? It is a disgrace? I am a person from Luwero Triangle. I lost my house, and I have not been compensated. I am supporting the cause of the North; so what do you think that people from this region will say? 

We have been supporting. How much support do you really need from us? We have just sent money and food and this morning, some other donors - private sector people - have been taking food to these very people. And, some of the leaders in those areas have not been genuine in distributing food. These are issues. 

Is it in order for a Member to call a Government unfair? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, the honourable member is saying your statement is not fair.  It is not fair because efforts have been made to send food - to send money, to help the people. So, you cannot say they have done nothing.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, let me explain; I am from the constituency –(Interruption)
 
MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, let me finish.

THE SPEAKER: No; maybe, you would have said it is not enough. 

MR OKOT OGONG: No, let me say this, Mr Speaker. I am from my constituency.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker - 

MR OKOT OGONG: Sit down, I am explaining. (Laughter)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, two months ago, we went to Kibale and there is a sub-county there - I think. I forget the name of the sub-county. For four years, they have not had rain, but these Banyoro are not making noise, and they are Ugandans. (Interjections) Yes, the sub-county in Kibale; for four years, they have not had rain (Interjections) 

But they have talked to Government quietly. I think Hon. Okot should say, “We need more” instead of saying nothing has been done. I think that is a fair statement. Any effort we make - the position is what Hon. Akol has said; they need more. Instead of saying nothing has been done, say “We need more!” I think that is a fair statement.

MR OGONG: I need to explain my position; and we need to sober up. We are in Parliament, and our people are suffering. I am from the constituency. I want to give you the scenario in my constituency. A sub-county of 8,000 families of 43,000 people were given 60 bags of beans. Each family got half a mug of beans, and they were given 138 bags of posho. 

Is this serious support that we are talking of? Is this what we should appreciate, and yet our people are continuously dying? They are suffering of hunger and they want us to start supporting and praising Government for giving us 60 bags, 138 bags (Interjections) This is abnormal and it is a shame. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform this House that the people who have received the food supplied by us, supplied by World Food Programme, are grateful. They are grateful because we are intervening very appropriately, and we are making an impact. [Ms Aol: “Information.”] Before you give me information - I will take the information, but let me finish. I can at another time bring the quantities we have been able to supply, and where, and give reports to this House of people who received the food and what they say we are doing. 

Politicisation of hunger is an enemy to society. We are exaggerating things just because we want to get political capital out of food shortage. (Interjections) Please, information will come. 

If people are dying at the rate at which we are told they are dying, Uganda will soon be empty. The whole population will be dead. We should get people from other countries to settle because the honourable member here, I do not know how much food she has contributed to those dying people. So, this Government is doing its best and –(Interruption) 

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest we end this issue. What we can conclude is that those people need more food. I think that is the plea we should make. That there is need for more supplies rather than saying no supplies have been given. 

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I continue – actually this explains what I was saying because it started from the point that I had said; that the economy is growing but it is not a robust economy because of the problems people are discussing. So, it really confirms my point. I am not denying the fact that Government is doing everything possible and that the economy is growing, but I am saying that we should not paint a picture that is not true. 

Concerning UPE and USE, I thank Government for the good work done, but I propose that we do much more because the rate of dropouts is very high, and parents have not taken it seriously upon them to support their children. So, I think as Government, we need to come out and enforce this issue of universal primary and secondary education.

Concerning vocational training, I appreciate that the Government takes it seriously, but we need to put in more money because this is the only remedy that can give employment to our people. 

On health, I appreciate the work Government is doing, but there is a lot to be done. Because when you go to these health centres and even the referral hospitals, you really wonder. We still have a lot of problems, and we should not paint a picture that all is well. 

I thank Government for having considered adding Rwenzori region to Luwero Triangle – to support or take affirmative action, because this area suffered during the time of insurgency and now that we have been considered we now implore Government that on the Shs 10 billion, some money should be added for its impact to be felt by the people.

On security, I thank Government, especially the Ministry of Defence because insurgency has gone down, especially in as far as rebel activities are concerned. However, on the side of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there is a lot to be done. Thuggery has increased both in villages and in towns. 

On corruption, this is a major constraint. I appreciate that Government is doing a lot, but a lot more is still desired. We really need to take serious action on people who embezzle Government funds. 

On dedicating the Budget to our fallen heroes, this was good for the Ministry of Finance to recognise them. But we really need to do a lot such that these people, even in their graves, can appreciate that what they fought for was correct. 

As for the Opposition, I think that they went into the extreme because Government has done a lot, though we still need to do a lot more. For instance, the idea that the economy is growing is a fact. We cannot challenge that, except that we need even distribution. Some people are very rich. 

On the other hand, Mr Speaker, we should appreciate that while the economy was declining during the period of insurgency, the population was growing, and by 1986, Government was caught in a trap. So, we should appreciate our history. 

The idea that we are a Third World country is a fact; we cannot challenge that. So, for someone to desire that we behave as if we are in the First World is not proper.

On scrapping NAADS, I would say that this too is not proper. We should only make amendments to it. I admit, I am a member of the agriculture committee. I know the problems in NAADS, but scrapping it is not the solution. We only need to improve on NAADS. 

Separating politics from Government programmes, I think this is not possible. We only need to practice good politics. For instance, when we have a programme that is in a party manifesto and the party is in Government that is already politics. What we can do is –(Interruption)  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague for accepting this point of clarification that I would like to seek from him. He has come up to say that when we talk about non-politicisation of Government programmes, we are not being right because it is inevitable that programmes must be politicised; yet these are Government programmes, funded either with support from development partners, in the form of a loan or a grant. At the end of the day, the entire population of this country, whether you are in FDC, NRM, UPC or in DP, or whether you are an Independent in this Parliament, you will still have to shoulder the burden of paying taxes. And, it is funded with resources from the ordinary tax payers’ payments. 

Now, if you are telling us that it is inevitable that programmes be politicised; a situation where a programme like NAADS; where at the time when six families per parish had to be selected and the Chairperson of NRM of that village is to oversee it, and in most cases ensure that only NRM are the beneficiaries; what do you think will happen? Is that being just when you know very well that these are programmes fully funded by the tax payers’ sweat? 

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Thank you my colleague, Hon. Wadri. Actually you are supporting me. I am saying that you cannot separate the two because if you define politics, as being the science of society management, there is no way you can say that a member of Parliament will not get involved in the programme. This is already politics. What I am saying is that good politics should be practiced. In other words, why should the FDC be discriminated against? Your problem is that you have not defined what politics is, otherwise you are supporting me and we are moving together.

Mr Speaker, providing lunch for UPE schools – (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much my brother. Mr Speaker, I do not think there is anywhere where FDC have been discriminated from benefiting from Prosperity for All.  Because Prosperity for All covers the whole country and we know that NRM did not win in the whole country. There are areas which are governed by the Opposition. The fact that we wanted Prosperity For All to involve everybody is a clear manifestation that the programmes Government is bringing, targets to benefit all the people of Uganda. I wanted this to be in the Hansard.   

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I agree with the Shadow Minister that we need to do a lot about corruption. We need to fund hospitals; we need to increase the funding in the agricultural sector; and we need to have a national tree planting day. We need not to have extremes. The minister from the government side should be objective and tell the country that there is a problem, but that we are not doing badly and we can improve. 

On the other hand, it is not good if you are in the Opposition to look at every Government programme as a failure. Surely, this is not proper. We need to be objective. This is our country and we shall always live as one. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.23
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. In around 382 BC, one of the philosophers - Aristotle - wrote in the book titled “Politics” that the role of the state is to decide what is in the public interest, because resources are scarce. I am saying this in the context of the debate that is going on. I have not been around and probably I cannot coherently follow a number of issues that members are debating, but what stands out is the fact that our country suffered because we depend on rain-fed agriculture. We have suffered significantly because of the recent drought across the country, and I think what we should be discussing as Parliament is to invite Government and the different ministries to understand what efforts and what strategies are being put in place to address potentially disastrous cases like this, and I am happy to hear from the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness that money has been organised and efforts are being made. But what would be important is to come up with a strategy; to know how many people are affected, and how much money we have raised to address this problem. What if the next rains do not do us well? What are we doing strategically to focus, and not to allow our people to be distressed further? I think this is the most important kind of issue to focus on than to look at different micro situations in different constituencies. 

Obviously, people die because they are stressed about food; because opportunistic diseases take advantage of the lack of nutritious foods for people and they die. But probably not directly like somebody on an island who dies purely of hunger or of lack of something to eat. 

The second issue, Mr Speaker, is the issue of education as a public good. This morning, I was running around with some students that I brought from my constituency yesterday - those who failed to be admitted to various universities, and those who were admitted but the fees were very high. I went to Nkumba in the morning, and a Diploma in Public Administration and Management costs about Shs 1.12 million. At Makerere it is different, and in Kyambogo, some people have been running around. When you think about the numbers - the proportions between those on whom we use the public resources, of and those that we don’t - where is the public interest? Where is the public good in trying to help a significant number of Ugandans to access higher education? I know we have to focus strategically - which is very important - on primary and secondary education, in order to pull the numbers up; but I think it is time Parliament thought about the importance of higher education; whether it is, in the science field; but significantly giving adequate resources to cover a good number of people other than leaving only 4,000 people. We may come up with a formula where we spread whatever it is – whether Shs 100 or 200 billion – across the board; whether in the science field or agriculture or whatever it is, so that a good number of people benefit from the greater public good. Otherwise, it is attracting animosity among people. A neighbour’s child is paid for by the government yet 10 other neighbours are suffering to look for money; while another laughs away and drinks away his money instead of sharing the cost of education. 

Mr Speaker, I think this is a very important one, and I am very happy because a few weeks ago, I was in the US and at the University of Taft, where we were presenting papers, Uganda is rated high for its intervention in Somalia. A lot of people asked me many questions, and I wished Hon. Dr Kiyonga had been there to answer -(Applause)- because they kept asking how some small country they can’t even find on the map, succeeded to do so much and to sustain a very fragile Government to this extent. I think Ugandans must be proud. I felt so proud that I participated in the passing of a resolution that allowed the UPDF to go to Somalia, and it was really refreshing to hear from different professors. I did not know that a lot of them had sent so many students to study about how Uganda in East Africa is working so hard to bring about sanity and the rule of law and governance in Somalia. I think it is congratulation to this Parliament; that many people are happy that we did what we did to send UPDF to Somalia. 

In that context, I am also happy that despite the lack of a signature from Kony, Government has gone ahead to implement the PRDP by providing resources. There are actually some important aspects in the Juba Peace Agreement and in PRDP that I think we need to focus on, particularly the issue of reconciliation. It is not only those areas that were affected by the LRA that need this reconciliation; the fighters that were in the bush and those at home, even in some parts of Uganda like Luwero and Karamoja, need this reconciliation. People had guns and now that the UPDF has removed guns from the people of Karamoja, the old wars, the old killings, and family feuds have come back, and there are a lot of processes that we need to undertake across the country. I think it would be important through, probably the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, to bring an instrument that will allow different families and to undertake this process of reconciliation; whether it is through the traditional justice systems or through other mechanisms that they understand, to bring together feuding clans and families that continue to kill or to undermine each other because of the historical problems we have had in our country.

On the issue of disarmament, Mr Speaker, I can confidently say that in my constituency, people move up to 2.00 a.m. in the night; something that we could not do before. Disarmament has succeeded. In a recent visit to my constituency, there was a change of leadership of the different commanders; I moved from detach to detach, but I will tell you that when I got stuck in one of the detaches, I slept in those mama ingiya pole – I had the best time to discuss issues with the officers on what goes on there.

And, I would like to report, when disarmament was passed by a Resolution of this Parliament, it became a Government Policy. People were supposed to disarm and protect the property and life of the people.

But I think it is high time this Parliament reviewed the success and challenges of the disarmament exercise in Karamoja. I am saying this because we always review all programmes. For example, in the health sector, when new strategies emerge, we always come up with reviews. So, it is high time disarmament is reviewed so that Parliament is informed about the extent to which it has succeeded. Is it by 40 percent or it is by 80 percent or 90 percent? I am saying this because each of us is guessing. I may say in my constituency, the success is 90 percent, but in the others it may be just 20 percent. Disarmament must be reviewed to enable us identify the challenges so that we can address them to certainly reap 100 percent success in three or five years to come.

I would also like to say that this exercise needs to be expanded politically, and not limited to Karamoja, because we now have a challenge of dealing with guns that are coming from the neighouring districts, after being abandoned by either LRA or other people – children are picking bullets from the local wells; some people are busy moving and selling some of these guns. And now, because of the disarmament exercise, just one gun can terrorise awhole sub-county in Karamoja; it has become as serious as that.

I also discovered that the UPDF – they have not had fuel for the last three months. I remember there was a raid in one of the villages near where I was, but when I asked them to intervene, the commander said: “I have the equipment, but there is no fuel.”


4.33
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by reflecting on the theme for this financial year, which says thus: “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Prosperity For All.” Now, if the theme is about strategic priorities, I would like to ask this House to examine the budget allocations, which will tell the members the percentages per sector to let them understand whether the allocations correspond with the theme.

When I look at the Budget, I realise that priority number one is about public administration. The other one is about roads, education and so on.

However, to me, the strategic priorities that should have accelerated Prosperity For All would have been agriculture and microfinance. But when you look at the Budget, agriculture is number nine, while microfinance is number seven.

What I am wondering about is, whether the Minister, while drafting this theme, looked at the content of our Budget. I am asking this because if you want strategic priorities to accelerate Prosperity For All, and you just give agriculture only 3.7 percent of the total Budget; you give Prosperity For All, which falls under microfinance only about 1.2 percent; would that address what the Minister calls strategic priorities to accelerate Prosperity For All? 

I think we are being taken for granted. If we are to develop this country and the rural poor, we need to address the core strategic priorities of this country, which most of my colleagues have mentioned as agriculture – 80 percent of our people depend on agriculture, but only 3.7 percent of the total Budget is allocated to it. Then how are we going to develop the rural poor?

The second issue, Mr Speaker, is about examining this growth. The statistics from the background to the Budget give distribution of the growth according to the sector. Let me give the highlights on the areas that have benefited most from this growth.

One is what they call the service sector, which has been allocated 13 percent of the Budget. Under this sector are wholesale and retail trade services; hotels and restaurants; transport and communications; roads, railway and water transport; air transport and support services; post and telecommunications; public administration and defence; real estate activities; financial services; and other personal and community services. These are the sectors that have benefited most, according to the Minister.

The second highest beneficiary of this growth is the industry sector. Under the industry sector are: Mining and quarrying; manufacturing; formal industry; electricity and water supply; and construction. 

Now, what is the least beneficiary of this growth? Isn’t it agriculture? Under agriculture, forestry and fishing are: Cash and food crops, livestock, forestry, and fishing.

My question is: Of the highest and lowest beneficiaries from this growth, where are the majority of our voters located? Are the majority of the people of this country in the service sector, industry or under agriculture, forestry and fishing? The answer is with you. If the majority of the people in this country fall under agriculture, forestry and fishing, which has benefited only 1.6 percent of this growth, then this growth is not benefiting all Ugandans. 

The Ugandans under this sector are not benefiting from this growth. Those who are in real estate, if you examine, who are they? Who is in the construction industry? How many Ugandans are building estates or houses that you go and rent or buy? How many are Ugandans?

4.39
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on the land issue and the way it was covered in the Budget Speech. 

Government covered land issues under measures to improve the business environment. Government talked about computerisation of the Mailo Land Registry – the Minister talked about 160,000 titles for land in Kampala and the neighbouring districts of Wakiso and Mpigi. However, the issue of insecurity does not auger well with the business environment when landlords are being killed right now. It means that even the business environment is not secure because the violence that is escalating around the land issues in this country is appalling. 

Like the Shadow minister said, citizens have started killing each other over land, and land wrangles are escalating. On one hand, tenants are being evicted especially in Buganda or the Central Region; and on the other hand, landlords are being lynched. This trend is going to escalate further, especially with the population explosion, and the appreciation of the scarce land in this country. 

So, I was wondering what business environment we are going to talk about when there is no security over ownership for either the landlord or the tenant.

Actually, I do not think that banks are going to be accepting land titles as security, because they are not secure either. So, I do not know what Government is going to do about the land situation. We talked about the land committees which have not been financed. We cannot leave the citizens to iron out their differences - that is, that the tenants should iron out their differences with the landlords, without putting money and operationalising the land committees. 

I think we are going to see violence and some form of civil strife, especially on the land issues. We know of regions that have undergone this like South America, and we are seeing this unfolding before our eyes. 

So, I would like that issue clarified by the minister, especially the financing of the land committees. Is Government going to finance the land committees or are we going to see citizens constitute themselves into committees of violence, especially in the rural areas here? 

Also, is Police going to be positioned in every village, especially with the institution of the police squad on land? Is it going to be in every village so that the land wrangles are done away with? Right now, security is for those who have the guns. If you have land and you have the guns, you can protect your land. But if you are a landlord and you do not have guns you risk being lynched. If you are a landlord or if you have bought land and you have guns you can evict. Either way, it is for those who have security and those who have the guns, to protect themselves. During evictions, they are there to stand by and watch the evictions, or if they are landlords or they have bought the land, they are able to protect themselves. So, I think we should come out clearly and Government should come out and explain what is happening with the land situation in this country. 

I would like to talk a bit about education. We have talked about education, but we see escalating tuition fees in public universities. We also have an alarming situation in the Dental School. We know very well that there is an issue unfolding in the Dental School in this country, but the Minister of Education has not come out because the students have not reported back. 

4.45
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to make my comments on the Budget Speech from the two ministers whom I wish to thank.

It may be true that the economy of Uganda is growing, but the big question is, how many people are growing?  In the 60s, 80 percent of the population of Uganda was engaged in agriculture, and that 80 percent contributed 80 percent to the GDP. In the 90s, 80 percent was still stuck in agriculture but their contribution to the GDP had dropped to 40 percent. Last year, according to the minister, 80 percent were still stuck in agriculture but their contribution to the GDP had dropped to 50 percent. Eighty percent of the people of Uganda who used to contribute 80 percent to the GDP today contribute 15 percent to the GDP. This means that productivity has dropped by 65 percent from the 60s. In other words, we are bragging that while 20 percent of the people of Uganda are growing at a rate of over 8 percent, 80 percent continue to wallow in poverty.

In the 60s, 20 to 26 percent of the budget was allocated to agriculture- 

THE SPEAKER: But, this poverty; is it true that the standard of living of people has become better than it was say 30 years ago? And if it has improved and, therefore, their standards have gone up, isn’t the problem really that there are many demands that they cannot meet? Could it be the reason?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That answer can be given to you if you consider a school teacher of the 60s and a school teacher of today; a nurse of the 60s; a university student of the 60s and a university student of today; a patient in Mulago Hospital of the 60s and a patient in Mulago of today.

In the 60s, 26 percent of the Budget used to be allocated to agriculture because the President used to travel using East African Airways. The ministers of the 60s used to travel economy. The President of the 60s used to live in the house currently occupied by the President of UPC and when he fell sick, he went to Mulago Hospital, Ward 6A. 

When the President fell sick in the 60s, I was a little girl nursing my grandmother in Ward 2 Mulago Hospital and the President was in Ward 6. At that time, a doctor would come from treating the President and come down; the same doctor would come down to treat my grandmother – in the same lift; from the President to my grandmother. 

THE SPEAKER: But would you like to consider the villages, how many people sleep on mattresses and those of 50 years ago – how many people now sleep on fixed beds, “Komerera”, and how many people had radios in the 60s; these are considerations you should make.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just quoting official statistics from the Minister of Finance. I am glad she is seated there. Eighty percent of the people of Uganda can only contribute 15 percent of GDP. 

Mr Speaker, if you think that is a good thing, then we have a completely different understanding of the term “development”. If development means that 80 percent of the people should produce only 15 percent –

THE SPEAKER: I am not contributing, but I am only trying to guide you. Don’t you consider the increase in population, doesn’t it affect these figures? 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, all I am trying to say is that, it is possible to reserve or to have 26 percent of the budget allocated to agriculture. But today, we can only reserve 4 to 3 percent of the budget to agriculture where most of the people depend, because of reckless expenditure enjoyed by only 20 percent of the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, we need to note that there is just not enough attention to expenditure control. This should have been a major item on the budget. We need to have been told of the benefits of the 1.1 trillion investments in roads –(Interruption)

4.52
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development for this budget presentation on behalf of the President, more so because it emphasises outputs. I hope that Parliament, through sessional committees, is going to make sure that there is follow-up on outputs, and that we can really start getting impact out of our Budget. 

I would like to emphasise the point of focusing resources, because Uganda cannot afford everything. We cannot afford scattering and sprinkling resources as if every sector is a priority. 

So, I would like to thank the minister for that emphasis, and also for having mentioned the need for financing the agriculture sector. Most of the ventures in the agriculture sector have a long gestation period. So, they cannot be financed by commercial banks, and the upcoming micro- finance banks which expect monthly recoveries from farmers who may at times need two years to harvest their produce. 

Mr Speaker, we are discussing budget and financing famine, but I think as we do the fire brigade, let us focus more on the preventive approach. Uganda is not vulnerable when it comes to drought, because we are lacking water. Uganda is an upstream riparian state, sending water downstream; people downstream are not having this problem because of irrigation.

I was happy when the minister talked of irrigation. But I would like to see Parliament voting enough resources for irrigation; after all, we are talking of sessional draught irrigation. 

I would like to take most of my time discussing the land question in this country. Mr Speaker, the 1900 Agreement still rules us. One century and a decade ago, we are still suffering from the problems of absentee landlords. The 1995 Constitution and the 1998 Land Act just attempted to give an Aspirin, but do not solve this problem. 

Even if we wanted land for investment or extensive farming, we cannot find it because we are increasingly littering this land – in this debate of landlords vis-à-vis lawful occupants. I would like to request – and I want to thank the Ministry of Finance; in the last two years, we have seen resources focused on CHOGM. Last year, we saw resources focused on roads. But why don’t we acknowledge that land is a priority. 

We need to find money to disengage the landlords and the squatters. We need to find money to plan and comprehensively organise our urban centres. If possible, we need to put in place an urbanisation settlement policy, where most Ugandans would live in planned and well serviced areas with water and roads. 

If we cannot go for a radical reform; we must find money, whether it means budget cuts from other sectors to solve this problem. This problem is so rampant that even if we find money for a pipeline from Eldoret to solve our energy problems, Ministry of Energy cannot get access to Kampala because of land compensation problems. 

We gave Hon. Nasasira trillions, but he still has problems because people have built in the road reserves, and they have titles to this land. 

Even in Energy, we have a project where access of transmission lines is also a problem. So, we cannot have this as the status quo in the land, for a country which is moving from the people arrangement to a National Development Plan. We need to help the National Planning Authority if we are going to have a useful National Development Plan (Member timed out_) 

MS BITAMAZIRE: Hon Nabila was cut off when she was making a statement that the Dental School at Mulago is not starting. 

I just wanted to inform her through you, Sir, that the Ministry of Education is investigating the matters at the Dental School at Mulago, and we shall be giving a statement to clarify what is going on.

The students who are instigating the strike are no longer students; others were those who were dismissed, but they now want to create heat. We have information that there is a plan to burn the medical facilities at Mulago. So, we are investigating actively and if there is a delay by a few days, there are causes for it. I thank you. That is just information, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Education. There has been a lot of destruction of schools, especially Government schools, by rain and wind. Mulago has been mentioned, but what about those schools which have been destroyed by natural calamities? What have you done?  

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you so much. I want to inform the members that we are handling case by case. We do not have a blanket cover policy for all schools. If we learn of the local circumstances - the ground realities - we handle such cases accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. It appears those present here have exhausted their contributions.

5.01
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a comment on an area that is under Prosperity for All, that is, enabling the SACCOs to perform under the cooperatives. As much as the funds have been put in the regions that are supposed to facilitate these SACCOs, it is very difficult for these SACCOs to obtain documents that are supposed to make them access the funds. The problem originates from the office of the Commissioner for Cooperatives. 

In my area, specifically, I have been trying to assist some people to come and register their SACCOs, but you find that people make many journeys to Kampala just to obtain a certificate, and yet Government has a target to achieve. The funds have been sent to the regions for people to access, but the office of the Commissioner for Cooperatives is a bit tight in ensuring that people are helped to access the funding.

I would also like to comment on the area of NAADS. The Minister of Agriculture has been telling us that she provided funding for people to access planting materials, but when you ask people down in the sub-counties, they say that they have not received these funds. I do not know whether the funds are still at the district, or in the ministry. But at the grassroots, especially in Busia, I have checked at various sub-counties, but the money is not there, and yet the rain is here. 

Also, planting materials are not yet availed. We are going to have the same problem of shortage of food because of delaying to plant. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Well, the Minister of Agriculture is not here, but I think she will have to make a statement on that.

MS SEMPALA: I rise on a point of clarification which I seek from the Minister of Education. The issues on the ground indicate that the Principal who heads all the eleven paramedical schools is holding individual paramedical schools at ransom, and he is not only expelling students individually, but also lecturers if they do not agree with him.

So, the issue of the Dental School is much deeper than the official communication that the Ministry of Education is receiving from the Principal of the eleven paramedical schools. I think a stakeholders’ meeting should be called so that the minister herself goes to talk to the Principal of the Dental School, and not the overall Director of the eleven paramedical schools. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This matter came up the other day from Hon. Sebuliba, and we were promised a statement would be made. We hope it is made this week or next week; but it should be made soon.

I think then, with this, we are coming to the end of today’s business. We shall continue tomorrow. But we have a notice to all members of Parliament, about a workshop for Global Parliamentarians on Habitat for Humanity, tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. The venue is the Parliamentary Conference Hall.
 
Fortunately, we are not sitting in the morning because I will be presiding over the Appointments Committee to vet the new judges who were appointed, and there are also some commissioners in the Education Service Commission. I will be dealing with these two issues. So, we shall not sit in the morning, but we shall sit in the afternoon.

So, with this, we come to the end of today’s business. I thank you very much because today was a bit lively. Members were willing to contribute. We adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. for further debate.

(The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 August 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 
