Wednesday, 13 August 2008

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I hope there is sufficient rain in the weather stations. (Laughter) 

Apart from that, I would like to give notice that when we adjourn tomorrow, we shall reconvene on Monday morning. So, I want to say, especially for the sake of the Executive, that we shall be using both mornings and afternoons starting from Monday to enable us debate all the committee reports. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:  

I	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008 

II	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE ESTIMATE OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/09 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before that, Minister without Portfolio, Government Chief Whip, you had something to say?

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not a minister without Portfolio. I am the government Chief Whip. I rise to correct the record in response to the 2008/2009 Government budget estimates by the Opposition in Parliament which was presented by the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Nandala- Mafabi. 

I would like to draw your attention to paragraph 72 on page 20, which reads: “…Parliament had recommended a select committee to review the allocation formula for the equalization grant but the committee selected by the Speaker to be headed by hon. Okupa did not take off as a result of confusion created by the government Chief Whip. We recommend that the committee be cleared to work as per its original mandate.”

Madam speaker, for the record, on Thursday, 6 September 2007, while we were discussing a motion to approve the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2006/2007 and the budgetary proposals for the estimates of the revenue and expenditure of the fiscal year 2007/2008, during the Committee of Supply, the issue of whether the formula for sending grants to districts as enshrined in the Constitution Seventh Schedule, was being followed. The matter was never about the formula as hon. Nandala puts it but it was whether the formula was being followed or not, in the disbursement of the grants. 

I quote the Speaker, then the chairman of the Committee of the Whole House. This is how he guided and many Members were here that time. I am quoting the Hansard of 6 September 2007: “Honourable members, most of us may not really follow this discussion yet we want to find out whether a formula is being followed in giving money to districts. Why don’t we have a committee of say five people, these people can get the figures of the respective districts you may choose and then study them and see how the allocation has been going on? They will report to this House from the investigations whether the formula is being followed.” And at the end he said, “People knowledgeable about formulas like hon. Okupa should head this committee.” And of course there was a lot of laughter; it is indicated in the Hansard.

The Chairperson was very mindful of the words he used because he knew very well that there were many MPs in this House that were knowledgeable about this formula. So, hon. Okupa was just a candidate to lead that committee but he was never appointed. Indeed, the Speaker did guide and I quote: “…anyway the chief whips will give us the names.” 

According to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 163 (1) says, “Every select committee appointed under Rule 162 shall consist of at least five Members who shall be designated by the party whips on the basis of proportional party representation in the House taking into consideration interests of the Independent Members.” At that point, hon. Nandala-Mafabi stood up and announced –(Interjections)- I am doing this to show you the process and what happened. 

Hon. Nandala said, “Mr Chairman, I am the acting Chief Whip this side and we already have three names. We have hon. Elijah Okupa, Hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Oduman Okello to deal with this matter. This is a matter of life and death. It is no longer gender sensitivity.” And there was a lot of laughter.

Madam Speaker, towards the end of the day, the Speaker indicated the names from this side and I will quote, “While the minister is looking for answers, let us set up the committee and we get the ones from this side which are: hon. Wopuwa, hon. Okecho, hon. Sarah Nyombi, hon. Frank Tumwebaze and hon. Peter Nyombi.  They are five.”

 Madam Speaker, what is interesting at the end of the debate, hon. Okupa appointed himself chairperson of this committee. I quote: “Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Chairman of the select committee that is going to look into how money has been allocated based on the formula in the Constitution, I want to ask Members to have a brief meeting after we have adjourned here to decide on the way forward. Thank you.

What followed is that hon. Wopuwa did approach me to say that he would not be able to serve on this committee. And according to our Rule 163(3) and I will read it: “At any time after the nomination, Whips and Independent Members may appoint one or more additional Members to a Select Committee and if for any reason a Member of a Select Committee is unable to act, another Member may be appointed in his or her place taking into consideration party proportionality in the House.”  

Madam Speaker -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is responding to matters raised against her office in the budget debate.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. I did replace hon. Wopuwa with hon. Yiga through the Speaker.  

On 20 September 2007, I received a letter that was written by hon. Okupa requesting for a committee clerk. I have it. But of course those who knew the procedure of appointing the chairman of the select committee were surprised. Hence the advice by the Speaker and the Clerk that the Whips do finalise the issue of the committee leadership. I have documentary evidence here.

I did propose hon. Yiga to chair this committee.  Clearly, the government Chief Whip has never caused any confusion and is not about to cause any confusion on this matter. But rather the problem was with my colleague who tried without success to appoint himself chair of this committee in total disregard of our Rules of Procedure in this House.  

Adopting this statement, Madam Speaker, will mean that I caused confusion, which I did not and according to the facts given above, the Speaker never appointed hon. Okupa. And if we adopt this statement, it will mean hon. Nandala now is appointing hon. Okupa to head this committee. 

I would therefore like to move that the second parts of paragraph one of the response of this Budget Speech by the Opposition be expunged from the records of this House because it is grossly inaccurate and totally misleading, intended to tarnish the good name and the image of the government Chief Whip. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

And I will lay on Table the copy of the Hansard - it is with Parliament. This is a letter to you by hon. Okupa on the leadership of the committee. I also lay another letter by hon. Okupa with the comments of the Speaker on the Table. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, maybe just for our interest, is the committee now functional?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  That meeting, between the Speaker’s Office, my office and the Office of the Opposition Chief Whip, we know why it did not take off. We did consult and they are continuing to consult, but it has not taken off. But if you need more information, I will let you know. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Whip, this committee was so important. Many issues on the economy were contingent upon the outcome of the report of this committee. Don’t you think we should forget that process and get new nominations and a new committee? Don’t you think we should do that? (Applause)  

Honourable members, I declare that that committee has elapsed with time. I will now invite the Chief Whip of the government and the Whip of the Opposition to submit fresh names and we settle this matter and the committee starts- honourable members, why do you really want to carry this battle forward? You have explained your side and we are satisfied that nothing is happening.  Everything that both of you have been doing has ended. Let us start somewhere afresh. We are going to have fresh names and fresh leadership.  

3.11
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My responses will be submitted in three sections. I had ordered for some copies so that Members can follow but they will be coming probably a little bit later.  

I have three categories of responses. One, responses to the questions raised on education sector plans under the PRDP. The second section will be responses to issues and recommendations made by the Shadow Minister of Finance, hon. Nandala Mafabi. And the third and last section will be responses to issues and recommendations raised by the honourable Members of Parliament on general issues in the education sector.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education with the support of the Embassy of the Royal Netherlands in the country conducted and completed a needs assessments study. This study will guide the Ministry of Education intervention in the Northern Region. 

Certain critical needs were identified.  The first one is infrastructure development, including, classrooms, teachers’ houses, latrines and so forth. 

The second one is supply of instructional materials. Of course this includes textbooks and other materials. 

The third category of needs in the region is utility requirements like water, energy and others. That study which we conducted identified those areas as critical. 

The fourth is human resource. We need teachers for the primary section so that we bring the teacher-pupil ratio to 40 pupils to one teacher. We need teachers for secondary also to achieve the ratio of 35 students to one teacher. We also need manpower for the BITVET and tertiary institutions.

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report to this Parliament that after the Needs Assessment Study, the Royal Netherlands Embassy in Kampala has pledged to contribute 10 million Euros. This will be done in phases. The first 5 million Euros will be in the financial year 2008-2009 and then the other 5 million Euros will come in FY 2009-2010. They have committed that donation for instructional materials, infrastructure, support programmes and monitoring and evaluation including capacity building. So, I am very happy to report that the Netherlands are coming to our rescue. After supporting the study, they have now pledged to help. I think they deserve a clap.

Madam Speaker, under the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP), the Ministry of Education and Sports has planned to rehabilitate and construct 4215 teachers’ houses in 40 districts in the region and a total of Shs 126.45 billion is already budgeted for that programme. We have already submitted our budget under the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan and I am sure that as the money becomes available, we shall be able to put up 4215 teachers’ houses.

Under the School Facilities Grant by the government of Uganda, we have, during this financial year, budgeted for Shs 7 billion to construct classrooms and teachers’ houses. When we get the document that I am referring to, Members will see that we are planning to construct 43 houses in Abim District, 63 in Adjumani, 32 in Amolator, 299 in Amuru, 134 in Apac, and in Arua Municipality we are planning to construct 146 teachers’ houses, Dokolo 65 houses, Gulu Municipality 125 houses, Kaabong 80 houses, Kitgum 65, Koboko 44 houses, Kotido 69 houses, Lira 231 houses, Maracha-Terego 188 houses, Moyo 76 houses, Nebbi 73 houses, Oyam 111 houses, Pader 41 houses and Yumbe 43 houses. We are planning, during this financial year and from the School Facilities Grant, to construct 1658 teachers’ houses in the Northern Region and we have put in the budget Shs 7 billion to do that. We hope that will go a long way to meet that requirement.

We are working with NUSAF and they have put in place the following facilities. This is because I think that if we are to rehabilitate the education services, we have to link up with other agencies, which are operating there. I am happy to report that NUSAF has so far constructed 1953 classrooms and 911 are complete and ready for occupation. They have also constructed 976 staff houses and 487 are already complete. They have constructed 9 libraries, 28 dormitories, 155 laboratories of which 33 are complete and 4808 desks have been distributed in schools. We are very grateful that NUSAF pointed out education as a priority and has already put such facilities in place. 

That is the first section of my response. The second one includes responses to issues raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi in his response. The sector has now put in place a Quality Enhancement Initiative, because he had asked about quality. We have a new initiative to cover the 12 worst performing districts in the country. 

We think that we should now go item by item. Until now, we have been looking at all schools but now we have started identifying those districts, which are performing very badly and require special intervention. These districts include: Amuru, Oyam, Bududa, Bukedea, Lyantonde, Mubende, Kyenjojo, Buliisa, Nakapiripirit and Kaabong. These will be treated separately and with more funds for building up the infrastructure. We hope that this method will work. Kyenjojo will get UShs 55 million; Mubende UShs 177 million; Nakapiripirit UShs 300 million and so forth. So that money is given to those special districts to help them upgrade infrastructure and address any other needs.

By the end of 2007, I have already indicated that NUSAF had made a big contribution to the infrastructure and I am stating here that the reason for their input is that the population always forwarded what they thought their priorities were. I am happy to say that the communities in the region submitted education as their priority and so the infrastructure, which I listed above have already been put in place.

The other area of coverage was about – Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was wondering what we are doing about quality. We are already organising thorough inspections of schools through the local level governance and we are planning to reach every school every term. I hope that we will be able to meet that requirement.

Finally, the last section includes responses to the general issues made by the Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker, we have had several responses. As usual, I am happy that the Members raised a number of questions. Let me start with one by hon. William Nsubuga. He was wondering why we have not used ESA to eliminate misuse of resources. We are saying that the Education Sector notes this recommendation and we are going to compile and plan an inspection that will cover all the schools. This will involve inter-sectoral teams of inspectors looking at every aspect of the school. 

Hon. Bintu was wondering why the ESA, that is the inspectorate, does not remove wastage from the primary and secondary education system. Our response is that it should be noted that it is the responsibility, not only of the Directorate of Education standards, but for all stakeholders including Members of Parliament, to provide an enabling environment for the children especially those from minority groups and disadvantaged areas to make sure that they continue in school and they complete the primary cycle. 

One of the causes identified for girls’ not accessing education has been long distances that they have to walk to school and therefore, we are trying to mobilise resources to make sure that we cater for such needs by bringing services near to the people. 

Madam Speaker, we are operating at a unit of one primary school per parish but Members will realise that there are even more per parish; and at the Universal Secondary Education level, we are providing a secondary school per sub-county and where the population is much larger, we are going to consider providing two or three to make sure that the distance that children walk to school especially girls are not very long.  

Hon. Bintu was wondering about the service tax law. We are saying that this law was brought through an Act and a Statute here and we note that it is going to affect the teachers, but we are saying that we have to review this policy as a country. 

The sector acknowledges the recommendation to provide ICT technology because that was her concern also, and I am reporting that through the Uganda communications Commission, we are making arrangements to provide computers to 80 schools every year for five years. 80 schools will be benefiting from computers and internet connections and if this is done sustainably for five years, we shall end up having enough schools accessing ICT as the hon. Member recommended.

Hon. Anthony Yiga was very disappointed with the poor quality in USE and UPE schools and I respond by saying that the sector acknowledges this because this is one of our party pledges, that we shall improve on the quality of education. But I also want him to know that every other person is responsible for quality and we are appealing for support in this area.  

The high dropout rate; we have tackled that problem very successfully because now the dropout rate has moved from 12 percent per year to 7.7 percent. The measure we took here was to make sure that children below the age of five and half do not go to school so early so that they get fed up with the schools. So, we are trying to cut down on the dropout rate. 

The classroom ratio, well, we are working hard to make sure that we get the classroom ratio to one classroom per 50 students. Hon. Susan Nakawuki of Busiiro County, Wakiso put a complaint that the Busiiro constituency does not benefit from UPE and USE because most of the schools like Buddo, Nabbingo and others are not under USE. But I want to assure her that we are trying to identify areas where the population is not benefiting and we shall be able to identify and locate USE schools in those areas.

Hon. Grace Oburu was also wondering why the teachers are depending on salaries and the salary is so low. I want to say that the recommendation is noted but its implementation will depend on the availability of funds. 

Mr Bayiga has a school without enough teachers; we are saying that we are recruiting teachers to fill all the vacant posts.  

And finally, hon. Agnes Akiror commented that the quality of UPE cannot improve without addressing the plight of the teachers. We are looking at that but it is very difficult to commit ourselves as Government on salary increase until we have looked at our revenue, which we can collect to meet the demands for salary wages. 

Madam Speaker, I know in a few minutes this document will come and I appeal to my colleagues to read the details. Otherwise, it is an 18-page document and I have summarised what is there. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Education. I hope it will be distributed and Members are free to make use of it during the debate when the committee reports come back to us. You can hold to it and use it for debate. 

But before we proceed, I wanted to announce the death of the late hon. Omwony Ojwok’s mother; she died this morning at Nsambya Hospital. The body will be taken to hon. Florence Omwony’s residence in Kyambogo today. Tomorrow, they will travel to Abim and on Friday, the burial will take place in Abim. That is what I wanted to inform the honourable members. Apparently, she has been sick since her son died. She has never recovered from the shock of her son’s death.  So, maybe let us stand for a moment of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank my colleagues for their contributions and also, I want to thank the President who has this financial year decided to increase the budget of the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

I will comment briefly on the policy issues and then I will go into the specifics of the individual Members. The policy statement will be here soon; I hope it will be debated exhaustively. I do not want to repeat what is going to happen that time.

Madam Speaker, on the 1st of July this year, a Ugandan National Road Agency was formed and the road maintenance of the national roads and road development was all transferred to the Uganda National Road Authority. Therefore, my ministry is remaining with only policy issues, supervision and monitoring. 

There are national roads that have gone to UNRA; other roads are already under the districts and those are district roads, and also urban roads under the urban centres and the community access roads with LCIIIs. But I am hastening to add that all these roads will benefit from the road fund. 

Madam Speaker, this year the government will take over from the districts 9,800 kilometres. We envisaged taking 5,000 kilometres but when we consulted the district leaders and Members of Parliament they made a useful contribution and we found it necessary that we increase the national road network from 10,500 to about 20,000 kilometres. The list of these roads is being finalised. It has taken long because of the technical issues, including - I think I can leave this. I do not want to embarrass some of our colleagues. 

After saying that I want to go straight to the specifics because how the Shs 1.1 trillion is going to be utilised will come in the policy statement. I know every Member has it and I appeal to every Member to read it very well so that you can contribute meaningfully when the real debate on the policy statement comes on the Floor of Parliament. 

Going to the specifics, I will start with hon. Muwulize Norman. He mentioned Mukono-Katosi being mentioned in the policy statement and he said, “Why not continue to Nkokonjeru-Muyenga”? I want to assure the honourable member that perhaps there was a typographical error in the policy statement but the road we have on our list, which is supposed to be upgraded, is Mukono-Katosi-Kisoga-Nkokonjeru- Nyenga. That is the road we have. This is the road which is going to be upgraded.

Hon. Kasamba said there is too much delay in projects implementation and that he thinks this is due to lack of technical staff in designing the infrastructure projects. To some extent, yes, it is true. However, another problem has been using money which is not ours and which has got some conditionalities attached to it. When you consider our development partners especially, they preferred to use consultants. And you know the reasons: it is because the money was coming from their countries and most of the consultants are from their countries so it was one way of taking back their money. But we have created a unit within UNRA, which will be tasked with only designing roads and those roads will be tendered out as and when the funds are available. The funds this time will be from our own money; our own Government. Therefore, that conditionality of using the consultants, which was being imposed on us by development partners, will no longer hold.

Hon. Grace Oburu, Jinja-Bugiri road is being worked upon but in the Budget we know that from Tororo to Katuna it is going to be a dual carriage. “Why are you doing it now? Why can’t you start with the dual carriage straight away? Why do double work?” Madam Speaker, constructing a dual carriage road from Tororo to Katuna is a process and a process which will take long because it is a very expensive venture. It is the policy of the government that this road should be a dual carriage but of course with the backing of finances. We have, however, started that process; we have already procured the consultant to start the work on the Kampala-Jinja dual carriage. We are going to start with that section. 

Then Kibuye roundabout to Busega, we are likely to start the construction of that one before the end of this financial year because the study is already in advanced stages. Therefore, the process has started but we cannot rush it. By the time we reach Jinja-Bugiri perhaps it will be five years also.

Another question was, “When will Uganda have its own airline?” When are we going to have our own airline? Madam Speaker, as I talk we have now got a national carrier, which is Air Uganda, although it does not belong to the government -(Interruption)- yes it is our national carrier because it is carrying our flag and once it is carrying our flag then it is our national carrier.

Hon. Lulume, it was the same question you asked me about Kisoga-Nyenga road. I think I have answered that one. 

Then, repair of access roads to fishing communities; when you look at the list, which is about to come out, of the roads that we are going to take over you will find that most of the roads leading to fishing communities will be taken over by the central Government.

Hon. Nalule, representing the people with disabilities: “Roads should have access facilities for people with disabilities.” Well, I have been looking at this and as an engineer I am still failing to get the exact facility, which I can put on the roads, for people with disabilities. If I put a flyover it will be an obstacle to people with disabilities. If I put underground tunnels it will be the same story. It is only the zebra crossings but knowing the behaviour of our drivers in this country who do not even respect simple regulations on the roads, it might be disastrous to put a signpost somewhere that, “This is now a crossing for people with disabilities”. They can be knocked down and killed. So, we are still thinking about this and how it could be done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think I really must take exception to what you are saying. Have you really done serious research about this matter? Have you gone to the countries where it happens? You cannot just say, “You know, we made a law in this country to accommodate the disabled”; you are supposed to put room in the buses for them to sit; you are supposed to put signs in the taxis for them to sit; in the trains, in the toilets. Really, minister, please withdraw what you have said. No! 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, the question was very specific on roads. Therefore, if I can talk of transport -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go to Europe. If your minister has no money let him find you money. Please, go and find out what is happening in other countries. Please! (Applause)

MR BYABAGAMBI: But in my final statement I said we are going to study this and see how it could be done. 

Mityana-Busega road, I do not know who raised this question. I did not capture his name -(Interruption)- oh!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nakawuki.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Okay, hon. Nakawuku -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, it is true this road is in a very sorry state but as I mentioned earlier, we had tendered out this road. However, the day we were to sign the contract, the Denmark Government changed its position and chose to direct that money to the North. We have been trying to get money to do this road and finally it is now incorporated into the new budget. The tendering documents to reconstruct that road will be out on Friday.

Let me comment on the Jinja Bridge because one Member wondered when it will be constructed. This year, using our money, we are going to do remedial repairs on that bridge. A feasibility study is going on. The study combined with detailed engineering analysis is going on under the Japanese grant and we hope that within one year this will be concluded so that tenders are given out for the construction of the new bridge to start. We are putting up a new bridge on the upper stream of River Nile. This will be a modern bridge, most probably a hanging bridge with dual carriage and not the one we have now, which has a single carriage way.

Hon. Kwebiha said that every year Mityana Road is budgeted for, worked on, but that after a few days, it goes bad again. I would like to say that that is not true. The work that has been done on that road was just patching work aimed at keeping the road motorable. The reconstruction is just going to start. When it gets completed, Mityana Road will be given the lifespan of a normal road of between 15 to 20 years.

Our rural roads are indeed in poor condition especially after the abolition of Graduated Tax. Since the abolition of that tax, these people have not been getting enough funds to maintain access, community roads. But now that a Road Fund is in place and they are going to have a share, I am sure the problem will be rectified with bridges put in place, let alone making the poor roads good.

Hon. Arumadri complained about Government spending too much money on rent and wondered why Government cannot build its own offices. I think this question was supposed to be directed to the Prime Minister or the Minister of Works. Anyway, let me say that I think the government policy has already changed; we are putting up Government offices. Some of you who are familiar with the area behind here, which is the former CID Headquarters, will realise that there is a building, which is going to start soon to house the Prime Minister and the President’s Offices. It will be a twin-tower of ten floors each. And there will be a connection to Parliament to enable the President to just walk from his office to Parliament. 

On –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. I wish to seek some clarification form honourable engineer Byabagambi. Now that he has seemingly told us good news that Government plans to build offices for the Office of the Prime Minister and the President’s Office, will that mean that the long running battle between the Parliamentary Commission and the Office of the President will be settled? That Parliament will now take the whole Parliamentary Building as was constructed by the colonial regime? Is that going to be the case so that we will no longer suffer from inadequate office space due to the take over our offices in the adjacent building? Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, after the completion of that building, I do not see any reason why the President’s Office will remain in that northern wing –(Interjections)– you will be there. I have said that I will not be seeing any reason why it will be there.

Hon. Perez Ahabwe said that he is equipped with facts from the Africa Development Bank that the design of Kisoro Road has changed and that prices are going up. He also said that a new survey is going on; that water systems have been cut and that now people are drinking water from the swamps.

Madam Speaker, we got a loan from the Africa Development Bank to upgrade this road. If a design of a road is to change, it must originate from the Ministry of Works and Transport; it does not originate from the Africa Development Bank. This is not a grant; it is a loan, which we are going to pay. I want to say that I do not have anything on desk to the effect that the design of the Kabale-Kisoro Road has changed except that before, there was a design, which had been done poorly in 1998. That design was reviewed and I want to make it clear that we tendered according to that new design. Therefore, there is nothing like a new design being made.

As for water pipes being cut, I would like to say that this is the responsibility of the contractor. He has to put good what he found in place and he has assured me that wherever they cut such lines, they replace them. Therefore, if hon. Ahabwe, by the time he passed by that place the water pipe was leaking, it did not mean that the whole system was cut and never replaced.

Hon. Bada said Government promised to improve the Kalangala-Bukakata road and that it also promised people to take there water and electricity. Yes, the government has designed the Kalangala Improvement Infrastructure Programme, which is going on. I can tell you that my inquiry indicates that the contract has already been signed in respect of Kalangala Road. I am told that within one month from now the contractor will be on the site. I was told that they are going to provide more ferries to operate between Bukakata and the other landing site: Luku. There will be three ferries plying that route; they are big new ferries.

MR KAWANGA: The honourable minister appears to be in great need of assistance [Hon. Byabagambi: “No, go ahead.”] I have been pleased to hear the kind of statement you have made about Bukakata and Luku, but if that is going to be the case, what is happening to the road between Luku and Bukakata? Because getting from Masaka to Bukakata is such a nightmare; if the ferry is not there, you cannot get there –(Mr Byabagambi rose_)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is until the minister allows me to speak that he will know what clarification I am looking for. I have been wondering who will finally make mention of this concern; and my concern is about Awoja Bridge. This is the bridge that gets you into Soroti and the rest of Teso and Karamoja and it is the bridge that finally – hon. Omara Atubo thinks that you have to go through Awoja to get to Kumi; no, you first reach Kumi and then go to Awoja.

What I want to say is that Awoja got devastated by the floods and Government came here and said that we should approve some money for repairs and the money was approved. Unfortunately, Awoja was not attended to and I do not see Awoja being mentioned anywhere. But as I talk now, over ten vehicles have had to fall into the swamp at that spot; the road is so bad right next to the bridge. And when the President came to Teso during the floods, he assured us that they were going to fix the bridge. Fortunately or unfortunately, he is going there next week and we are going to ask him the same questions and I do not know what answers he is going to provide. But I think the road needs to be fixed before that bridge gives way totally. 

So I want the minister to tell me; at one point they even said that they were going to provide counterpart funding with the European Union so that emergency repairs could be done, other bridges in the region were done and Awojo was left out. When will Awoja be fixed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that all these matters are important, but the minister is responding to the questions that were raised in the general debate on the budget and I think for other things, we could hold on, but I hope he can answer. However, if you all start questioning him, I do not know what he can say. 
 
MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This same issue was raised by my colleague the shadow minister – it is among the responses I was supposed to give but I can give it now that SPENCON is already on site working on that one. You know how long the tendering process is in this country. But we have tendered it out and actually the contractor is already on site. So you better send your people there to find out what is there but as we talk today, they are already mobilised and they are working on that bridge. 

But they are going to work on access roads that were destroyed by the floods. The structure of the bridge itself is still very strong; it needs only a few repairs that are going to be done under the European Union. But the access roads need to be raised and putting in more access culverts is what we tendered out and is going to be done by SPENCON services.

Well, Masaka-Bukakata; hon. Kawanga, if you read the policy statement you will see that Masaka-Bukakata is one of the priority roads to be upgraded. 

Hon. Piri, my good friend, I want first to extend my thanks to you for appreciating the efforts of the government to work on the roads in Karamoja. I thank you very much for the good compliment. And starting with December, we are going to work on these roads. We are going to make a bridge on Giriki River and then Rokale Kalita; we are going to do Loro, Katekekire Road, Moroto-Nakiroro-Kenya Border, Lokicha, Lutuko, Nyakweye –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, just a minute. Are these people from Kayunga – okay the youth leaders of Kayunga are touring Parliament. I thought I would wait for you to finish before I announce, but they seem to be going away. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR BYABAGAMBI: We are doing Nyakweye Road and Karapata Pire Road. That is under EU and it is in addition to those, which are in our policy statement. 

Hon. Kasamba  –(Mr Wadri rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, why don’t you allow the minister to finish; you are anticipating what he is going to say and we cannot finish that way. Why don’t you allow him to finish and then you see the loopholes? We are continuing with the policy statement. For the pledges, you catch him when you are dealing with his money – you wait for him when he is looking for money then you can squeeze in your needs.

MR BYABAGAMBI: For Hon. Oboi, I will not answer the other one which he asked because hon. Alaso has also raised it. He talked about road reserves. Madam Speaker, this is a very big problem to the government and mostly it happened during the time of turmoil, most people built in the road reserves. It is becoming very difficult for the government to build roads in this country. To given an example, the Northern Bypass, we paid Shs 21 billion in compensation. Busega-Masaka, I think a preliminary list has come out and it is about Shs 35 billion and to me it is money being wasted. 

Therefore, the ministry has decided that for all the new roads are building, we shall put concrete marks on it, those who have moved on Entebbe road should have seen them written on, “Ministry of Works and Transport”. Whoever will build inside that line will have their structures demolished and will have to compensate us for the demolition costs. We are doing it also for the Northern Bypass -(Interruptions)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is making a very serious statement as far as financial accountability is concerned. Government is in the process of compensating a lot of people who built in or used the road reserves. I am wondering whether there is now a policy or whether the minister is telling us that all those people who actually knowingly constructed in the road reserves are exempted or cannot be penalized and the future culprits are the ones who will suffer! Because this is like what happened in terms of the motor vehicle licenses: we had a cut-off date that, “People who have not done this will not pay or will pay”. But what is the position of Government as far as people who have been using road reserves knowingly is concerned? Are we paying them also? Is it in order for Government to compensate people who used our road reserves when in fact they did it knowing that they were using road reserves?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, I think I cannot rule on that; let the minister answer why he is paying people who are committing illegal acts - if he is paying them.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The situation was also complicated by the land policy in this country whereby land belongs to the people and some people have attempted to take us to court, but they have not succeeded. But, Madam Speaker, let us not confuse the issue of planning and that of ownership. It is very clear in the Road Act that there should be a road reserve, from the centre line of the road, of 15 meters or 50 feet, and some people violate it and they say, “We did not know”. But now that we are putting our stone marks, there is a demarcation line where you should stop even if land is yours. If you go beyond that, we shall destroy the structure and you will have to pay us.

Hon. Oboi said that the ministry does not have emergency funds in case of floods and what have you. It is true, the money we have is not even enough for road maintenance, how can we have the money to put on the side to wait for the floods? If we had enough for maintenance maybe we would have put that provision in place. But as we talk now, it is true we do not have that provision.  

Tirinyi Road: he says it is not in the budget for maintenance. Yes, Tirinyi Road is due for rehabilitation and it is within our policy statement; it will be rehabilitated.  

Sironko-Kapchorwa Road. Madam Speaker, here we have got a very big problem of overloading from Tororo Cement Industry. It is a small section - they get their lime stones from a certain place in Kapchorwa as you climb the hills and they are using very heavy tracks. I think these tracks might be 60 tons plus. We have talked to this company; at one time I even forced them to put a concrete structure where they turn from, but we have decided to buy a weighbridge to put it in that spot, to check the axle load. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you very much, hon. Minister for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from the hon. Minister is on compensation. On Kabale-Kisoro Road, constructions are going on. But since it started, the compensation has become a problem and people have not got their money as yet, and yet construction is still going on and people have been displaced. So I am wondering how we plan to begin compensation of these illegal people who have been in road reserves, because we compensate where we are doing construction right now and people have been displaced. So if the minister could clarify on that, the people of Rubanda and those along Kabale-Kisoro Road would have their minds at peace.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is only those people on that road who have mixed up identities. Our people are very smart. Some people claim pieces of land, which do not belong to them but those whose documents were clear have received their payments; and the other ones, they are being sorted out, they will receive their payments as we construct the road.

I think the same was raised by hon. Oboi that the government promised roads to district headquarters to be tarmacked and the question was, “When will this be fulfilled”? I think the government policy was to have a national road to every district headquarters, which the government has fulfilled or is about to fulfil by taking over these roads. Thereafter, the process of upgrading them will take place.  

Hon. Nsubuga said that Masaka-Kyotera Road was done by Idi Amin and it is still okay. My answer is that it is not true. Actually, the road was done by Obote. Obote is the one who started that road and it was completed in the early days of Idi Amin, and Idi Amin opened it. Madam Speaker, this road was resealed in 1989 by a company called SIETCO and the consultant was GIPSI and by that time my boss hon. Nasasira was the assistant resident engineer on that road. So it is not true that the road was not worked upon since Idi Amin’s time.  

Hon. Kyatuheire Jacqueline and hon. Baryomunsi raised the same issue of Kanungu road. Ishaka Road was included in the budget. Madam Speaker, these are the facts, which I told you about that road, and I think hon. Akena can support me.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true, as he said that the road was started by the Obote Regime, just like the Obote Regime started the new Airport; but he never finished it; then Nile Mansions and the UCB. Since 1974 when that road was finished, there is no major repair; this is what I am trying to emphasise; that since then there is no repair that has been done on that road; it is over 30 years now. You should not say that our roads can only last up to 10 or 15 years, this is what I wanted.

Hon. Minister, can you also clarify this? I have tentacles. Recently when I was elected Secretary General of DP –(Laughter)- I have been moving around the country to see my supporters. Recently I was in Rakai and this year when we were in Rakai on the World AIDS Day, His Excellency the President and the MP for Ruhama were there. The President pledged to construct the road from Kyapa to Kanabulemu, where we buried hon. Pinto – most of you were there. I have not heard you talking about this road. What is the programme for it because His Excellency the President confirmed that? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am not going to risk saying today that I will finish and manage 77,000 kilometres of all the roads. All that you are talking about, you open the policy statement, you will find in it what we are going to do on that road. 

I have mentioned – first and foremost I do not know which is which. Because yesterday he said that the road was finished in 1977 and now he says 1974. It was done by Idi Amin. But I have stated here that in 1989, the whole of that road was resealed - 42 kilometres of it, by a company called SIETCO under the highway project by the World Bank. What else do you want?

Madam Speaker, before the extension of the road from Dar-es-Salaam to Dodoma, which is about three years ago, that central corridor never had heavy commercial trucks. Then in 2004, the Movement Government extended the road from Kyotera to Mutukula; then the Tanzania Government constructed from Mutukula to Bukoba. And the central Government corridor started receiving heavy commercial trucks. And now it is a Government policy to upgrade that central corridor to the level of the northern corridor, which is from Mombasa to Katuna. Therefore, in all our designs, which are going to follow now, we are going to increase the road bearing capacity of that road to the level of the northern corridor, which will be class A.

And this financial year, we have already contracted that section from Masaka to Mutukula to Dott Services to rehabilitate it. So they will start soon. I hope you will supervise it and tell me whether they are doing a good or bad job. 

I was talking about the Kanungu–Ishaka road. They say that it is not in the Budget. This road is in the Budget, Madam Speaker. And if you look at our policy statement on page 72, you will find that it is even ahead of all other roads because the design was done under the European Union. We are only reviewing the design – the engineering study, which was done by the European Union when they constructed Ntungamo-Kagamba-Rukungiri road. And you will see that 10 percent of that road will be constructed by the end of this financial year. In other words the construction works are starting this financial year. So it is ahead of other roads. It is not true that it is not in the budget. It is in the budget.

I have said, Madam Speaker, that you cannot include everything in the Budget Speech. The Budget Speech is a small document but when you look at the policy statements of the sector ministries, you can get detailed information. 

Hamurwa floating bridge, yes, this one collapsed. This is the place with a bottomless pit. So, the bridge we put there – they are like suds in lakes; they are floating. It collapsed. The road is being worked on. Again this is a tourist road, from Kanungu, and we have money for this bridge. We are actually procuring a consultant to start constructing this bridge. But still it will be a floating bridge until we get money to construct maybe a fly over on that bridge. 

Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it seems the Kanungu people are not yet satisfied. 

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. What we raised yesterday was that when you look at the Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance, the Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishasha road is not mentioned. There are specifically 20 roads, which were mentioned that will be tarmacked this financial year. When the hon. Minister of Finance read the Budget, I was seated next to hon. Byabagambi, and I asked him why the Kanungu road is not mentioned. And luckily when the policy statement came out, they included it. 

So we just wanted assurance that you are going to work on it. Because since 1986 that road has been mentioned in the Budget up to somewhere in the mid nineties when it was dropped and now you have brought it up in the policy statement. So the assurance we just wanted is what you have given us that this financial year, the construction works will start. And definitely that question will remain hanging on you until we see the works starting.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, what was in the policy statement before was a study. But now what is in the policy statement is construction. So, I think we have moved ahead. The studies have been moving and now we have reached the construction stage. (Laughter)

Hon. Bako, Koboko-Arua is impassable; there is a crater lake there; and the minister of fisheries offered to go and breed fish fingers from there. But that road is heavily trafficked. And we think that if we open Gulu-Atiak-Nimule road, maybe the traffic will go a little bit down as it will be distributed. We are going to work on that road, because we worked on it I think about a year ago. And at the same time, it is the road which is under study for upgrading to tarmack. It was mentioned in the Budget. So, this road is due for tarmacking. 

Gulu to Juba –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you minister. Just about eleven months ago that road was approved; it was just graded. Two weeks down the road, the humps made it almost unusable to the extent that a lot of that heavy traffic was diverted through Terego then to Koboko and to the Sudan. And you are very well aware that during the unfortunate days, you used to use the Arua-Terego-Yumbe to access Sudan. And this road is actually the shortest circuit to the Sudan. What are you thinking about this circuit that your people as well used when we were supporting the SPLA in the fight against Northern Sudan? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, I do not think I can add anything more. I have said we are going to work on it. Those are heavily trafficked roads and they are on our priority list to be worked upon. There is nothing much I can add on to that. I think I have concluded my task. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there something he left out?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Yeah, just one. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which is that?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sorry to take the minister back but on the issue of road reserves, when you take a look on Kampala-Jinja road especially the construction work which is going on in the black spots, you will agree with me that the road reserve has now become the road because the road has been widened. Now my question goes; on those black spots, which have been worked on, there is now no road reserve. Is there a plan within the ministry to compensate the land owners? Because now the so called road reserve in most of the black spots is not a road reserve anymore. The road has been widened and now it has encroached on people’s land. Is there a plan by Government to compensate those areas such that the road can have a road reserve?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is true that we are doing some improvements on the black spots on Jinja road and we have used the road reserve space. But as I have said earlier, this road is now under study for upgrading into a dual carriage way. And when you have such a road, then the road reserve will be on either side; each side will have 15 meters and the carriage way from the centre 15 meters but that one we shall buy that land - we shall compensate. 

Moreover it is within the Constitution - I cannot remember the Article - but there is compulsory acquisition of land if there is a public project. That one we shall buy. We are doing the same with Mbarara-Kampala Road. Those who travel on that road at Lyantonde you see that we are expanding that road; we are adding on four meters. So, it will be 11 meters and not 6.7 meters as it used to be. We also using the road reserve and we shall also have climbing lanes on Kampala-Mbarara Road. So, it is the same thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Minister for Energy.

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few issues have been raised in the energy and mineral sector and I would like to thank my colleagues for raising these issues to which I respond as follows:

The first one was by hon. Anthony Yiga, Kalungu West. He noted that his constituency has two electricity lines traversing the area but there are no transformers to step down the power. Madam Speaker, in doing electrification, my ministry prioritises areas such as district headquarters and commercial centers plus other areas of social concern like schools and health centers. It would, therefore, help us if the honourable member could make a request for specific settlement or institution.

The second one was by hon. Safia Nalule, MP for the disabled. She said that there are currently three companies supplying electricity and it is such a tedious task to get electricity because of the bureaucracy and she wondered whether this could not hinder investors from coming to this country. Madam Speaker, there is only one company responsible for supplying electricity to consumers and that is UMEME Limited. The other two companies namely: Uganda Electricity Generation Company and the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company are responsible for power generation and power transmission respectively. As to the duration it takes to respond to consumers, all is being done to make UMEME more efficient.

The third issue was raised by hon. Huda Oleru, Yumbe and this was to do with oil exploration in the area. She wondered what benefit the people of that area would get from the oil and she also wondered when the oil exploration equipment would reach the area. Madam Speaker, the oil and gas policy clearly spells out the framework for the benefits, which will accrue and we will soon be coming to this Parliament with a Bill on petroleum resource management. And this Bill, currently being drafted, will spell out the benefits to the various stakeholders in the country.

With regards to the equipment in the area, a company called Neptune, which is doing exploration in this area, is already working and the type of equipment to facilitate exploration work at the current stage is already in the district. In other words exploration is a process with different stages and each time a certain type of equipment is required it is taken to the site followed by another set of equipment when the phase of exploration has advanced. 

The fourth issue was by hon. Ibrahim Muwulize that two dams, Nalubaale and Bujagali are all in Buikwe but the people in the county have no power in many places. The answer to this is as I said before; district headquarters, economic centres in the country, health centres, schools and institutions are the priority areas for rural electrification programme. As we have said before, the limitation is the availability of funds. Members are aware that currently Uganda is only 10 percent on average electrified and therefore a lot of resources will be required in order to implement rural electrification up to some meaningful percentage.

Hon. Ebong raised the issue of blending fossil fuel with bio-fuel. I am glad to say that this is already provided in our policy that a fuel company can blend up top 20 percent. There are also incentives for producing bio-fuels, and there are companies which we have already licensed to produce bio-fuel. As a matter of fact BIDCO is soon producing bio-fuel which can be blended up to 20 percent with fossil fuel.

Lastly, on page 16 of the response by the shadow minister of finance, paragraph 57, hon. Mafabi commended our efforts to build Karuma and to study Isimba in preparation for construction but towards the end, he expressed concern that there was no mention of Nyagak mini-hydro. I wish to inform this august House that Nyagak mini-hydro in the West Nile region is being constructed and all the equipment is now on site. Installation of this equipment will start in three weeks’ time and this is after roofing the power house. So, we hope to commission this power station by the end of this year. 

Madam Speaker, those were the issues for my ministry. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you go, in connection to Karuma there was something raised concerning, is it a grant funding or it is a Government funding? You have not touched that one. Who is funding Karuma?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I did not touch it because I thought the Prime Minister answered that question. But I would like, with your permission, to clarify further. The issue that was raised by hon. Simon Oyet of Nwoya County, Gulu; he said that Karuma should not be built from PRDP funds and that alternative funds should be found. As explained by the Prime Minister yesterday, PRDP is a programme and Karuma is part and parcel of this programme. 

Madam Speaker, when we talk of Karuma, we do not mean the dam only. We mean the electrification of Olwiyo, the electrification of Purungo, Anaka, Kamdini and many other places in that area. So, Karuma has been deliberately included in the PRDP programme and I would like Members to differentiate between a programme and a project as was explained yesterday by the Prime Minister.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister. I am up for clarification on this PRDP and a normal ordinary development programme. They are all programmes; especially those of us who come from the North, and if you look at the document of PRDP, it is not meant to cater for the ordinary normal development programme. It is for rehabilitation and affirmative action for the North. If right now, every programme of the North, you just PRDP, PRDP, even if it is something which cuts across and which is national, then we say PRDP. We really would like this clarified properly to us so that we know what is a normal ordinary development programme for the North and what rehabilitation programme for the North is. We need to get proper clarification on this, because we are getting confused and people ask us. We do not have clear cut explanation. Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had gone away to handle international matters, so I may not have captured some of the issues. PRDP is essentially a plan consisting of US$ 606 million and it is going to embrace various plans like KIDP (Karamoja Integrated Development Programme). It will embrace all these plans and as you rightly said, we are rehabilitating the infrastructure, essentially.

The money, for example, this year already Government has given 30 percent of that money. But that money will be given to sector ministers, for example, works; it is the Ministry of Works to repair roads. So, that is what is happening and we are still fundraising; the Minister of Finance is spearheading the fundraising of the money and it started this year. 

Those were some of the mistakes made but hon. Omach may wish to clarify because Finance is more knowledgeable about these things and personally, I am a student of practical politics.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether hon. Omach is ready. Can we follow it up in the policy statements?

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the first note, I would like to say that this is a very important matter that as Parliament we should interest ourselves in. From the explanation given by the Prime Minister, a lot of questions are still lingering in our minds unanswered let alone unasked. When you try to compare PRDP with Karamoja Integrated Development Programme (KIDP), the latter was started because of a cause. It actually came as a result of the disarmament exercise. That Karamoja is infested with arms because in the minds of the ordinary person, it had been left behind in terms of development hence the reason for putting in place KIDP so that it will comprehensively address the development programme of Karamoja.

But PRDP came as a purposeful intervention from Government addressing the issues that not only Uganda has suffered as a result of the two decades of insecurity - Now, when we come up lumping every other development activity even including recurrent expenditure as it were which should have followed under the normal Government budgeting process under the respective ministries, and we are saying this sector is going to receive money from PRDP, health - PRDP; road construction – PRDP. 

The impression people have is that this PRDP is a purposeful intervention to address the imbalances in Northern Uganda as a result of the insecurity that they have experience. But if we are now going to implement major undertakings like construction of a hydro plant using that money, we need to be clarified on that -(Interjections)- I am not causing confusion; I am taking it from the Prime Minister. 

MR D’UJANGA: This is where we must understand clearly that PRDP is a plan. Unlike NUSAF which was a fund, PRDP is a plan specifically put in place to address the needs of that area and this is necessary so that the co-ordination is done by the Prime Minister’s Office in order not to lose sight and have attention to the area. But it is not a fund. For example, Karuma is going to be constructed using the energy fund, which was put in place on this Floor, from the Ministry of Finance. But we must put Karuma in the plan so that we address also the rural electrification as I have already mentioned. 

Let us not confuse this that there was a fund somewhere called PRDP from which we can draw money. PRDP is a plan and this was launched very clearly with a magazine. I would encourage our colleagues to go and read the magazine. There is a clear difference between a plan and a fund. I thank you.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, we were aware that Karuma was going to be built together with the Norwegians called Norplan. According to the minister now, he is making us understand that Government is going into it alone and if that be the case, then I think this Parliament needs to be fully briefed about this whole Karuma, Norplan and PRDP mix up. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his explanation, the Prime Minister told us that already Government has allocated 30 percent to support PRDP. I want him to differentiate between this 30 percent allocation and the budgetary allocation for Northern Uganda. This is what I expected the Prime Minister to explain to us.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want hon. D’Ujanga to clarify as he tries to differentiate the fund and the plan. Hon. D’Ujanga, I wish you could listen because I need some clarification from you. You have tried to differentiate two things; the fund and the plan. As far as I know, a plan needs funds to implement it. If you are saying they are different, where is the plan going to get the fund from? Just help me to address that. 

I am raising this issue because we are getting confused as ministers keep referring to issues that are supposed to be addressed by their ministries that they are being co-ordinated by the Prime Minister’s Office. We have an issue we are battling up with the Works Ministry on the ferry between Kamuli and Kasilo. They told us Prime Minister’s Office is handling it under NUSAF which has even expired and they are telling us the Prime Minister’s Office is going to implement it and when we looked at the policy statements from the Prime Ministers Office, it is not there. When we go to the Works policy statement, it is not there. Where is it?  

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. The clarification I am seeking further is that when this plan was being developed, the Prime Minister wrote to all of us as Members of Parliament to make comments. I just want to know whether the Members particularly from the affected areas made substantive comments to inform the development of this plan. I want to Prime Minister or hon. Wadri to clarify whether they made comments to enrich this plan and settle some of the concerns being raised right now.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I want to respond in part but also submit my fears. Yes, we participated in the process of formulating the PRDP. Secondly, you also know that the attrition rate in this House was very high because some of the Members who are here now were not here in the last Parliament when this formulation exercise was going on. This is the reason why they need to be sensitised on PRDP. 

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that for some queer reasons, I have not made my submissions on the budget speech and all I was going to speak about was the PRDP. My concern and our concern as the 40 districts - Don’t worry about me taking you back. We are 40 districts under PRDP so it is a very big issue. Our concern first of all is the visibility of the funding that is provided for post-conflict reconstruction for the 40 districts in this Budget. You don’t see it as visible. 

Second is the confusion that has now shifted the PRDP from being an affirmative action to the war affected areas. This House set up a select committee in the Seventh Parliament. The first recommendation that we made was for a comprehensive reconstruction and resettlement plan for Northern Uganda and this was launched. During the formulation of PRDP, we thought that PRDP was going to provide an affirmative measure to the war affected areas. Together and in view of all the issues that we submitted, when costed this came up to Ugshs 1.1 trillion budget. We thought that this was going to be over and above the routine issues handled by Government ministries. 

What has happened of recent is that, instead of treating the PRDP as an affirmative action, Government has changed goal posts and now PRDP is being treated as a budgeting framework for Northern Uganda and it includes NUSAF which was there, NAADS and NUREP. All the funds that were available at that time, including conditional and unconditional grants, the monies available in the Ministry of Water as routine submissions to the affected districts - where did we lose the affirmative nature of the PRDP? 

The other thing that has happened is that under the PRDP now, at implementation stage Government has decided to look at all the donor funding to Northern Uganda; the 40 districts whether from European Union or USAID as part of the PRDP. This is wrong because other districts in Uganda outside the 40 have donor projects and they are not looked at in that way. The harmonisation framework is lacking so when we complain here that we should go back to the affirmative nature of the PRPD and that we would like the monies, the 30 percent to be visible - nobody has presented to us in this House which monies constitute the 30 percent because that money should clearly be ring fenced. It should not be money that a ministry will wake up tomorrow and reallocate. We feel so vulnerable and if it continues at this pace - 

PRDP is a three year plan. In the first year we were given only Ugshs 18 billion, in the second year I think we have Ugshs 51 billion. When do we meet the expectations of the Ugshs 1.1 trillion that we need to reconstruct Northern Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have no intention of closing out the 40 districts from the debate of the PRDP and I was hoping that we would go particularly into it when we are discussing the policy statements soon after we close this general debate. I actually intend to give you the opportunity to go into details on that matter. I cannot close you out so don’t accuse me of doing so. Is the government going to say something now or are you going to respond formally?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Under the circumstances, I am going to direct the Minister of Finance so that we can have a separate debate on PRDP. I think that it is so critical and the people from the North have suffered so much that I don’t want to feel that they are being cheated. So, he is going to make a separate discussion so that we can all understand it fully together. I hope you have a copy of those - I gave everybody a copy. Minister of Finance, I hope that it is possible to give them fresh copies so that they may re-internalise it and then he is going to discuss it. There is no cause for alarm.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, all I can say is that I hope we do it before we conclude the debate on the Budget so that everybody goes away satisfied. You are directing the Minister of Finance immediately? Okay.

4.51
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, I want to thank you for the deliberations on the Budget for this financial year and for the guidance that we have received during the deliberations.

I want to first make responses to the statement of the shadow minister of finance about water, sanitation and environment on Section 8 of his presentation. While we appreciate that the water sector has performed quite well, there was concern raised by the shadow minister of finance that we are paying lip service to Karamoja. I thought I should give a response to that. 

Since 2000, Government has been remitting directly to the district conditional grants for water. The water sector benefits from these grants in two ways: one, the district water and sanitation conditional grant for the provision of water and sanitation services in the rural areas and then urban water and sanitation operational and maintenance grants. 

For parts of Karamoja in the last four years, that is if we take 2004-2005 as a starting point, I would like to tell the august House that a sum total of Ugshs 6.205 billion has been sent to Karamoja region as district grants for the originally three districts then five and now six. In this financial year alone, the budget for Karamoja district has increased substantially to Ugshs 4.2 billion in one financial year alone. So definitely this is not lip service but the onus is on the district councils to make sure that this money is put to proper use. 

Of course, we have seen disparities in water coverage where we have the lowest coverage in Kaabong. In some areas, we have about 12 percent safe water coverage and the highest coverage is in Abim where we have a district average of about 65 percent. This disparity is caused by the local politics in the area, because issues of equity were not taken into account, and we are moving in as a centre this financial year, to look critically on the submissions of the district, to make sure that there is equity in the distribution of water facilities in these areas because we think we have provided sufficient funds.

As for urban water conditions, since 2004, a total of Shs 248 million has been budgeted and released to the towns of Karamoja where they have water systems. This financial year alone, Shs 149 million is budgeted for the towns’ water supplies in Karamoja. So, I think this is not lip service. We also have water for production in Karamoja. The ministry is engaged in the construction of water for production facilities in Karamoja. It has been engaged since 1999. We have constructed 16 strategic reservoirs, one per county. (Interruption) 

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister for Water. She has just talked about water for Karamoja. Looking at Karamoja, we know that it is one of those backward areas of the country but I want to point out that water has become so expensive. In Arua, I am hardly able to afford water and Arua is not as badly off as Karamoja because we have got rivers. If it is so expensive in Arua, I am wondering how my brothers the Karimojong can be able to afford water. Is it going to be subsidised?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: I appreciate the concerns raised by the honourable member from Arua and I also want to point out that water is a Fahrenheit resource that can actually disappear. So, the cost of water that you see is not because we are selling water but we are putting the value of delivery to the people especially the urban people who can afford it. In the rural setting, I think water is virtually free, except for the little contribution that we ask at household level, to contribute to the water users’ committee, to maintain boreholes. And when it comes to a huge repair on a borehole or any other facility, the centre comes in. But we want to introduce this idea of contribution to water, because water is a resource and we want Ugandans to look at water not only as a social good but a resource, to be able to make a living out of it. 

Having said that, I want to continue with the provision of water in Karamoja. I was saying that we have been constructing valley dams and tanks under the emergent programme and here, we have been able to construct 16 - one in each county. This financial year alone, a total of 2.5 percent out of a 7.5 percent national budget for water for production is going to Karamoja. So, that is not lip service; it is more than one-third of the total budget of the country for water for production, going to Karamoja. 

All these facilities have been put in place and once we complete them, we pass them on to the local government for maintenance. Most times, we have been disappointed especially in water for production facilities, because a number of them get vandalised. 

On top of that, we have been able to make water supplies in various areas. Matane piped water supply was constructed in 2003/04 to serve a population of 3,500 people. Water supply infrastructure development included drilling the boreholes, putting a generator, putting a sub-immersible pump and establishing at least 28 kiosks in the area. We also have solar installations pumping water in Matane and Nakaperiryomo system in order to provide water services. 

Urban water systems

We have carried out feasibility studies and designs for the towns of Kotido, Kaabong, Abim, Moroto and Namaru towns. The ministry is now looking for donors to fund the construction of these facilities. The Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) has already expressed willingness to finance the project and the proposals are with the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

In the same statement, the shadow minister for finance called for an audit of all the work that has been done in Karamoja. Madam Speaker, I wish to inform honourable members that my ministry undertakes tracking and value for money studies on an annual basis by independent firms to verify the use and accountability of funds remitted to districts in Karamoja and other regions, and so far we have five tracking value for money studies: one for all 55 districts in 2002/03; another one in 2004 which covered 10 districts that we thought we needed to check on; one in 2005 covering another 10 districts; one in 2006 covering another 10 towns, and in 2007/08, we did a post-evaluation study to find out whether our costs are much different from the global cost and even national costs here. These are internal initiatives and Members are free to access them and I offer to submit copies to the Committee on Natural Resources, where Members can examine them. 

Further more, my ministry is subjected to the operations of Government auditing and any audit queries that may have been raised over the years have been successfully answered and handled. So, while the shadow minister of finance is free to call for an audit, I think there are available audits that Members can use to find out exactly what has been happening in Karamoja.

Madam Speaker, there were other questions that were raised on the 6th of August and I am sorry we were not in this House, because on that day I was in Kotido. My sister, the Minister of State for Water, was in Mbale and my sister, the Minister of State for Environment, was in Pakwach. We were all working, so we missed out. We apologise that we were not here.

However, questions were raised. Whether the water sector has plans to improve water and sanitation in Teso region and our answer to that is that, through the support to rural water programmes and district water sanitation conditional grants, we have constructed water supply for Kachumbala, Bukedea and Serere. 

Through the north-eastern water and sanitation project with support from BADEA, the following are being undertaken: The rehabilitation and expansion of water works from Awoja and the distribution system, and the adequate storage capacity on Opiyai Hill to supply centres in the region. We are also planning to extend water supply to Kaberamaido from Soroti, a distance of 65 kilometres, through gravity pipeline. These areas will be served along the line, that is, Katine, Atirir, Otuboi and Kalaki. 

We carried out a feasibility study which was completed in May 2007 to address the Ngora-Nyeko-Kumi water supply. This proposal was earlier presented to JICA for funding but it was unsuccessful. So, the government of Uganda is now soliciting funds from the BADEA to execute the project and this is at the desk of the Minister of Finance. We hope we are going to be successful this time.

With joint support from the government of Uganda and Water Aid, Amuria town water supply is to be executed through the extension of the Soroti water system, a distance of about 18 kilometres from Dakabera. This is currently in its final stage. They are hiring a contractor and soon they will be on site. 

We are also planning the expansion of systems starting from Kichumbara. The private operator at Kichumbara will be supported to expand the supply through support from Government.

And finally, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, hon. Dr Michael Bayiga from Buikwe put a question whether we have any plans for Najja Sub County. Najja Sub County in Mukono District is not a water stressed sub county. There are areas in the sub county which have a potential of ground water development and these should be exploited by the district planner and district water officers. It only required co-ordination and equity. 

However, it is true that the village of Lukalu has no potential for ground water. Previous programmes from the centre, my ministry, and those from the district have been unsuccessful in drilling boreholes in the village of Lukalu. And the alternative technology available is the gravity flow scheme which can be implemented by Mukono district council with the support from the district. And this has got to be made a priority by the district. The alternative is rain water harvesting which we are now incorporating under the NAADS programme and Prosperity for All. 

Madam Speaker, those were the concerns raised by this House. I really want to appreciate the Members for the contribution. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. The Minister of Health.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, a number of issues were raised regarding the health sector. I noticed that most of the honourable colleagues were raising similar questions and so I will try to be as broad as possible as I answer these questions, and not focus on specific issues raised by the honourable colleagues.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised regarding drug shortages in our health facilities vis-à-vis expiry of drugs. I want to inform this august House that in the health sector we are trying our level best to streamline the delivery of drugs to our health facilities and the method we are using is what we call the pool system. This is whereby drugs are ordered according to the demand of the specific health facility. 

We also have in place a number of drugs that we use to monitor the availability of drugs in our health facilities. We call these drugs the tracer drugs. When a team from the Ministry of Health goes to carry out support supervision in any of our health facilities we check specifically for these six drugs to find out whether they are available. These are the drugs that we use to treat the common conditions. So, under the pool system, as I said, we expect the in-charges of the health facilities to order for those drugs that they demand according to need. We believe that in this way we shall not have drugs expiring at the health facilities as it used to happen in the past before we introduced this system.

But also, I would like to inform this House that since 1963, the health sector has actually destroyed expired drugs twice and we are moving away from this method of destroying expired drugs. Other than piling expired drugs, we now want to begin regularly removing expired drugs. What happens normally when drugs expire is that, we store them at the district stores because they are very susceptible to being reused if not properly stored. And normally we send a team from the National Drug Authority and the Ministry of Health to collect these drugs and destroy them. We have one centre in Nakasongola where we destroy these drugs. 

So, what we are now doing is that, since the year 2000 there has been an accumulation of expired drugs which we are trying to collect and destroy. Thereafter we intend to begin destroying expired drugs each and every year so that we do not incur large costs in terms of destruction of these drugs.

Madam Speaker, we sincerely believe that if we properly operationalise the credit line system, we shall minimise greatly the issue of drugs expiry. It is almost impossible, the world over, to ascertain or to make sure that drugs do not expire. What is important is that when a limited supply of drugs expires then they are immediately destroyed to avoid being taken again into the communities for reuse. So, that is what we are doing regarding expiry of drugs and drug shortages. When we operationalise this credit line system, then the in-charges will be ordering what is commensurate with their demand.  So, we shall not see any more expiry of drugs.

Madam Speaker, I would now like to move on to the next issue, which is non-functionality of health centre IVs. This issue was raised by quite a number of people in this august House. I would like to state that all the 150 health centre IVs in this country are operational to various degrees; 35 of them are fully operational as required of all our health centre IVs. This means 35 out of these 150 are able to carry out emergency surgery especially caesarean section in addition to seeing out-patient clients.

Our greatest problem in functionalising health centre IVs has been the problem of attraction, retention and motivation of health workers in these rural areas. There is a new precedent, which is being set, whereby when we advertise vacancies for these rural areas, most of our doctors decline to take up the opportunities. Some of them take up the appointments for just a short time and withdraw. When you look critically at the people whom we are now training, you find it is mainly sons and daughters of the middle class, those from the urban areas and cities. So, this is a big problem that we are trying to tackle by improving the remuneration of health workers so that these people who are groomed and brought up in the urban centres can accept to go and work in the rural areas. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have just heard the minister mention that the type of people they train now are from the middle class and the upper class. Is that the new policy now in Government, that the children of the people from the rural areas cannot access education especially in the field of medicine? Can the minister please clarify that? Because if that is the case, then us who come from the rural areas will never have medical staff in those health centre IVs. Can the minister help me clarify what he meant by that.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, the issue of inadequate health workers is very important especially in Masaka District in the referral hospital. I remember that in the Seventh Parliament a proposal came up that Government should do its best to ensure that the people who are trained should be mandated to undertake an internship programme for about two years so that they are sent to different health centres. I am wondering whether the ministry took that into consideration instead of thinking about raising salaries alone. Raising salaries alone might not help, but you can ensure that people who are trained on Government funding be required to spend two years on internship. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, the Minister of Education told this august House that they are encouraging students to take sciences. He did not differentiate whether it was only children of the rich or the middle class and not the children of the poor people in the rural areas. Today I am shocked that the Minister of Health is telling us that it is only the children of the middle class citizens who will now qualify to be doctors. Can he please clarify? To me that is a very serious statement which is even against the policy of the government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let me help the minister a bit. Hon. Otengo, he did not say that they will qualify. He said that it appears that the people who enter the medical school are the children of the middle class who do not want to work in the rural areas. I think that is what he was explaining. I think he was giving his assessment of the problem they are finding in the ministry. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to inform the minister that even children from the rural parents are looking for money. They also need increased salary. So, it is not only the children from the rich people who do not want to go to the rural area. That is one. 

Secondly, I would like clarification from the minister. There is a new trend when you advertise posts for doctors especially in the districts; the first question they ask is what the district’s top-up is. Indeed, there are certain districts which are wealthy enough and they can add something like 500 or 300, but a poor district like Koboko cannot afford the top-up. Can I know whether it is a new Government policy that the district should really top up the doctors’ pay and where do we get the money? Can we use the unconditional grants so that we attract a doctor to Koboko? Because all this time, our health centre IV is not working because we do not have doctors there. We have advertised twice and no doctors are coming. Thank you.

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, I appreciate the concerns of the honourable minister but I want also to ask, when these consultants go for support supervision, especially in the referral hospitals, why don’t you give them some extra assignments to do some work in those referral hospitals? For instance in Fort Portal Referral Hospital, we have only two gynaecologists - only two - out of the establishment of about 17 consultants. I was thinking, can’t these consultants from the ministry headquarters really be facilitated to go and do some work at least once or twice a week in these referral hospitals?  

Secondly, honourable minister, on drugs - and I raised this issue and I do not know why you did not capture it - there is a problem; when the medical staff requisition for drugs, they will be told the drugs are not available, especially the very essential drugs. Worse still, they do not give them a certificate of non-availability of such drugs yet those drugs are being offered on credit line and money may have already been remitted to the medical stores. Where does this money go? If the drugs are not available, why can’t this money be remitted directly to the referral hospitals, for example? 

In the last two years I have been in Parliament, I have been talking to the Medical Superintendent of Fort Portal Referral Hospital. I want to say that he has always told me that he has got only two certificates in two years yet each time he collects drugs. Out of the 60 million shillings worth of drugs he is supposed to collect, he gets only about 20 million. The other 40 million is usually categorised as non-available but no certificate of non-availability and no compensation is awarded. This is strange given the fact that we keep crying that there are no drugs in referral hospitals. Why are the drugs not available in the medical stores when money is put in place? I do not know whether the honourable minister is addressing that matter. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you are not starting a new debate on this matter because the minister is only responding to the issues which were raised in the general debate on the budget.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek additional clarification but also give information on the issue of the expired drugs that the minister has talked about. 

We are looking at the expiry of drugs either in district hospitals or at the National Medical Stores but we need - and I did mention this last year - to take note that until the Ministry of Health and National Drug Authority have control on the parallel procurements of these drugs, we are going to continue having this problem. I am aware that National Medical Stores stocks drugs for sale and at times for different districts, but also we have third-party procurements which are done by volunteers and donors at times. So, the moment these stocks are not regulated at procurement stages, they will at the end of the day surge into the market and cause a loss to National Medical Stores.  

The second angle, which we rarely talk about, is that of private importers. There are a lot of drugs, which are expiring in these pharmacies. I do not know the names they are calling themselves, but I doubt if there is enough inspection. Where do they put all the drugs from the stock that expires?  

Finally, again because of problems of health care, allow me register this; I have just lost somebody in Buliisa this afternoon. He was a student of senior five who went for holidays last weekend. This was because the people there could not get an ambulance to pick that student from Bugana where a herdsman had hit him to Buliisa for immediate medical attention. So, you can see that we have a very big problem. I now have lost an innocent senior five young man because his life could not be saved from the injuries he inflicted while trying to restrain the herdsman’s animals from entering his garden.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems you are introducing new matters, which were not raised earlier. Let the minister respond to the matters that were raised in the general debate then we shall pick up the others. Otherwise, it will never end.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. Let me now try to clarify the issues that honourable colleagues have raised before I go back to the previous ones.  

Let me start with the issue of ambulances. I would like to inform the House that we have tried to supply ambulances to all regional referral hospitals. I think you will appreciate that recently we relocated the 22 CHOGM ambulances to our regional referral hospitals and most of you were invited to receive these ambulances on behalf of your people. We shall continue to do our level best to make sure that our referral system is improved. Our next target is to equip all the general hospitals with ambulances. Take note that most of our health centre IVs have multi-purpose ambulances and we expect them to be used in situations like the ones that hon. Birahwa has alluded to.  

Regarding the issue of expiry of drugs vis-à-vis donors, I would like to say that we are now trying to prevail over the donors to support the health sector under a sector-wide approach. Under this, we are calling upon them to make their contribution into a common pool so that we can properly budget for these monies other than getting ad hoc donations of drugs, some of which are left with a very short time to expire. Also, I want to say that we currently have a policy that enables the National Drug Authority to monitor whatever drugs enter the country. No drugs with a shelf life of less than one year are allowed into the country. In this way, we are going to curb a lot of drug expiry.  

Accordingly, I want to point out that most of our drugs that expired were anti-malarials. It was because we had already signed a contract with the manufacturers to produce for us homapak, the drugs that we were using for the home-based management of fever. However, when a study was carried out and proved that homapak had developed resistance well above what is acceptable by World Health Organisation standards, we had to shift to a new first line drug namely, the artemisinin combination drugs. However, homapak was on shipment and by the time it arrived into the country, we had changed our policy. That is why these drugs had to expire. We could not continue giving our people drugs that were not so effective. We had to change to better drugs.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, I need to be helped. I am just hearing from the minister that they did sign the agreement before they did a study on homapak. That means we wasted the tax payers’ money. However, what comes first? I thought you would have done the assessment and a research to find out whether homapak was viable. In this case, we decided to sign the agreement first, import the drugs and do the assessment later, which assessment came with the results that homapak was not viable. Are you showing us that there is a level of inefficiency in the ministry? What are you exactly trying to tell us? I am asking this because if that is the case, then we are worried. 

I sit on the Committee of Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and we have been handling the National Medical Stores. I can tell you that it is not only the anti-malaria drugs which have been expiring. My chairman is here; the report is coming to this House. It is a grave problem in the National Medical Stores. Government is losing a lot of money. As if that is not enough, so many people are dieing because of malaria yet drugs are expiring in the National Medical Stores. We may not hold the minister directly accountable here because for the period we are looking at they had not yet taken offices, but there is a problem in the National Medical Stores. When we bring the report here, Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will see that it is not as light as the minister is putting it here.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. He mentioned that the expired drugs are being destroyed in Nakasongola, which is true, because the incinerators are in Nakasongola. The people are worried because of the fumes that come out of these drugs. The people are not protected and you know very well that Nakasongola lacks trees. The ministry did not take any trouble to plant some trees to consume some of the fumes that come out of the incinerators. As the drugs expire, another incident is going to develop where people will get diseases that will kill more people.

Honourable minister, as a representative of Nakasongola, I would like to know how you are protecting us from the fumes that are coming out of the drugs that you are destroying. My people are even more concerned that in the health centres in Nakasongola District, they lack drugs yet here we are destroying drugs. What are you planning to do to ensure that the drugs that are in all health centres are not wasted through such destructive ways?

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is a concern for the citizens of Uganda, especially here in Kampala. He said that every drug that enters our country is checked to ensure that they are not expired. However, about two weeks ago, I got in touch with a doctor who works in one of these pharmacies around Kampala and more so the two streets that are dominated by pharmacies. He bought drugs that had expired and when he reached his clinic, he opened and found that all the drugs were expired. I was almost annoyed with that man, but do you know what that man said, “No, no, I assure you, with the high levels of corruption in this country, these drugs do find their way to these pharmacies”. That is risking the lives of our citizens. We need to protect the life of our citizens very seriously, especially here in Kampala. 

Secondly, you know we give some money to our hospitals and they are supposed to contract some pharmacists to supply these drugs. However, you may find that these same drugs have found their way to our hospitals in the rural areas. Imagine the Clement – the one the budget glorifies - does not know how to read; he is illiterate but he goes to these clinics and buys these drugs; you can imagine! In fact, I wanted that doctor to give me those drugs so that I can present them before this Parliament. So, how sure are we that those drugs are not getting into our country at the expense of our people? 

MR ISSA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have basically two questions to ask the honourable Minister of Health. What regulatory framework do we have in the Ministry of Health to monitor, supervise and control the mushrooming clinics and drug shops in the rural areas with ill-trained medical staff?

Two, the minister has just reported that there are some expired drugs that are going to be destroyed. Why have we been lacking drugs in our health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs in our rural areas? Why couldn’t the ministry provide these drugs to these health units before they could expire? 

Lastly, what criterion is used by the ministry to select the districts and the constituencies that the health centre IVs are established in? For instance, in the whole of Oyam County South, we do not have a Government health centre IV. What is the problem? What is the criterion? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister can just answer those and we conclude. 

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the very last one about the lack of a health centre IVs in Oyam South. It is the policy of Government that in each and every county, there should be a health centre IV, and we have tried our best to establish health centre IVs in all counties across the country. The uniqueness in Oyam is that it is a new district cover – (Mr Issa Otto rose)–

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, Oyam District was Oyam County with two constituencies. So, please proceed. 

DR OTAALA: So, we have Anyeke Health Centre IV in Oyam District. May I take this opportunity also to clarify that we establish general hospitals based on a population of 250,000 people. I have been getting calls from colleagues, especially in newly created districts, that they would like to have general hospitals. For us in the Ministry of Health, we establish general hospitals basing on a population of 250,000 people. So you may have one general hospital for two districts. We do not base on geographical boundaries but rather on the population. 

The question that hon. Otto asked was about the regulatory framework to monitor drug shops and clinics. I would like to inform this august House that the regulatory framework is in place. Indeed, this is the responsibility of the National Drug Authority, which is an authority established by this Parliament.

With regard to monitoring clinics and ethical standards, we also have the Medical and Dental Practitioners Council. So, these two bodies - the National Drug Authority and the Medical and Dental Practitioners Council - are charged with the responsibility of monitoring so that drug shops are not established anyhow. Also, there is a laid-out criteria on how drug shops can be established in the country. It is only those individuals who satisfy the laid-out criteria who can establish these drug shops across the country.

Madam Speaker, there was the question raised by hon. Okupa –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know hon. Otto asked about the established drug shops but you know in Busoga there is something we call okisoni; it is a market. I think it should be an auction but it is a market. You find people have laid out many things there and they are selling drugs and yet they are not licensed. I know you did not say it, but it is there in Busoga. They move from market to market. 

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I think to a certain extent that may be happening in the country, but I must point out that it is illegal for people to go about selling drugs in the okisonis and other places like that. It is not allowed. It is the responsibility of the National Drug Authority to crack down on these people who are trying to endanger the lives of our people. Since the National Drug Authority was established, it has been doing this duty –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. The information I want to give is to supplement the response by the Minister of Health that the National Drug Authority and the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, both of which are established by Acts of this Parliament, are responsible. We are also operating in a decentralised system of governance and most of their functions have been delegated to the district administrations. So, the district health officer, actually on a day-to-day basis, carries out this inspection function on behalf of these bodies. The National Drug Authority has the drug inspectors based in districts so they are supposed to ensure that this inspection takes place. 

Secondly, the Ministry of Health has also prepared a Bill, which is with us in the Social Services Committee, to regulate the pharmacy profession and pharmacy practice. I think after this budget debate, it will be brought for the second reading to strengthen the inspection and regulation of the pharmacy sector which deals with drugs and other pharmaceuticals. I thank you very much. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the minister when he says that the National Drug Authority is responsible. Yes, indeed, it is under the Act. However, when we were interacting with them, when we were looking at their accounts, this was one of the issues which was raised. The problem is the weakness in the National Drug Authority. They have left it to the districts and yet it is not their role to have what they call District Drug Inspectors (DDIs); it is the role of the National Drug Authority. So, I think the honourable minister must tighten the inspection and deal with the National Drug Authority because the statute allows them to recruit up to the village level and to inspect. However, the National Drug Authority has left this to the district councils, which is not provided for. I think it is a very important matter that you, the –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: The District Drug Inspectors are staff of the National Drug Authority, not staff of the districts. That is the information I just wanted to give you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are they there in the districts?

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, there is an anomaly in the reform; the NDA Statute provides for NDA to recruit District Drug Inspectors but what is happening now is that NDA has allowed the recruitment of the staff in the districts and the District Drug Inspectors pay allegiance to the districts. Therefore, NDA has no authority to supervise them. That is the reason they are doing their own things. So, we have recommended – actually the report is soon coming - that the National Drug Authority as provided by the law should be able to recruit staff to inspect drugs in the districts and they should be supervised and held accountable to this Parliament through NDA. That is the position for now.

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just to add to the voice of hon. Odit, indeed it is true we have agreed with the National Drug Authority that they should put in place inspectors in each and every district in Uganda because we realise that the DDIs were rather inefficient. 

Madam Speaker, I will now go to the question which was raised by hon. Okupa Elijah, whether we lost money and why we did not first study homapak before proceeding to get a contract of supply. I want to say that previously we were using chloroquine and fansidar. Homapak is actually chloroquine and fansidar combined together for purposes of making sure that our village health team members are able to dispense these drugs to children who may develop malaria at night and in the rural areas, which are not very accessible. 

There was no justification for carrying out a study on a drug that was already in use. These are drugs that had been used for a long time. So a study was carried out to find out how efficacious they still were in treating malaria and that is when it was discovered that resistance had set it. So we had to move away from chloroquine-fansidar combination or homapak to artemesinin combination drugs. It was not our intention. We cannot be blamed on this fact, that we intentionally made Government to lose money. I think that we did the right thing by saving many Ugandans, in that, we moved away from a drug that had lost its potency to one that is able to treat malaria effectively. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you and I thank the honourable minister. I am just wondering what impression the honourable minister now wants to leave with this House. First of all, he said that the fansidar-chloroquine combination was very effective and so they just continued to keep ordering and ordering. Now we are with the artemesinin combination and so you are going to continue ordering and ordering. Don’t you think you owe this country up-to-date research and continuous verification of the efficacy of drugs while they are still in use? Must you wait and then have that casualty of homapak the way you did, and burn those thousands of millions of shillings from the tax payer? 

Does your ministry have a research section and is it funded by the tax payers of Uganda? Does it have an obligation to this country to ensure that what we consume in the market is relevant to us? Do you expect us, the patients, to continue consuming drugs that do not treat us until you realise that we are dying in big numbers then you say that that contract is cancelled? What is the relevance of your research department if it is there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let the minister wind up.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, we have a department for research under the Malaria Control Programme to monitor the potency of the drugs that we use. Specifically, for treatment of malaria, it was through our deliberate research that we found out that resistance was setting in. As I said, WHO set a standard that if resistance to a drug reaches 15 percent and beyond, then that drug is no longer useful to that community so you should move away from that drug to another drug. That is the reason why we moved away from that combination of chloroquine-fansidar to what we are using currently namely, the artemesinin combination drugs. Madam Speaker, I hope this explanation will suffice on that issue. 

I will now move back to the issue of functionalising health centre IVs. As I was saying, we have 35 health centre IVs which are fully functional. That means that they are able to do caesarean sections, blood transfusions, in addition to seeing out-patient clients. 

The greatest problem that we have been facing is the problem of attracting health workers to go and serve in these rural areas. I did not mean that the NRM Government has a deliberate plan of denying sons and daughters of citizens of this country hailing from rural areas the opportunity to join medical schools. What I meant was that in my own interest, I was wondering why we train doctors and after qualifying they decline to go and work in the rural areas. What is amazing is that some of these doctors would rather loiter here in Kampala than going to the rural areas. That is the gravity of the problem that I was stressing to the honourable colleagues. The problem is much bigger than we may think. 

When I look further into the background of these young professionals, you find that most of them, even those who were born in the rural areas, were groomed in the urban centres so they want to stay within the urban centres. That is the problem that we need to address ourselves to. We must prevail over our professionals. They must portray a spirit of patriotism; they should go and serve the citizens of this country.

MS TUBWITA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has been wondering why the doctors do not want to work in rural health centre IVs and yet he is well aware that these doctors are first of all under paid. Secondly, they have poor facilities in these health centres. They do not even have accommodation and they are over worked. Recently, a doctor resigned from Nakasongola District because he was being overworked. He was working throughout the day and even in the night he would be called upon to go to the theatre. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now what is the point of procedure?  

MS TUBWITA: I am now going on to the procedural point. Is it procedurally right for the minister to continue lamenting here when actually they know that there is a problem that is known in the ministry? Members have always complained in this House and they have not worked on it and they continuously lament in this House without solving the problem.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is nothing procedural in what you have said. He is telling you that he has a problem and wants your help. (Laughter) Please, continue.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. May I also take the opportunity to clarify to my honourable colleague that Government has addressed the issue of accommodation for health workers especially in the lower level health facilities - health centre IVs, IIIs and IIs. When you go to these facilities, you will find very nice staff houses but the doctors still decline to go there. 

On the issue of under payment, we are addressing this. Gradually, we are improving the remuneration of health workers. Recently, you heard about the Shs18 billion which Government allocated to the health sector to give the health workers some additional allowances to motivate them. So, we are really trying our level best to motivate health workers to go to the rural areas. (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you will catch him when he comes back with the policy statement. You complete.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, we are further addressing the issue of equipment at these health centre IVs and the other lower level facilities. This year, working together with the Netherlands Government under the ORET programme we are going to bring into the country enough equipment to make sure that all the health centre IVs and IIIs are well equipped. So, in the short run, we are going to realise all our health centre IVs are fully functional but more so we are also focusing attention on the health centre IIIs as a way of addressing universal access and equity to health care.

There was also a question raised regarding the Hepatitis E epidemic in the North. Finally, as I wind up, I want to inform this House that we have been battling this epidemic since November. This epidemic is transmitted through drinking water or eating food contaminated with faecal material containing the virus for Hepatitis E. The main cure is prevention. We want people to take clean water. We want people to observe hygiene and sanitation in their homes. 

We have worked together with our partners and we have revived the District Epidemic Preparedness Task Force in all the districts that are affected. We are addressing the issue of shortage of pit latrines. I have always talked to my honourable colleagues, the political leaders, to work hand in hand with the local people to ensure that in each and every household there is a pit latrine and people observe sanitation and hygiene after visiting the pit latrines. 

We have provided Waterguard tablets to purify the water. We are providing jerry cans because we have noticed that whereas the water is safe from the source, contamination is happening in the households. On a happy note, we are beginning to see a downward trend in this disease because we have done our level best to sensitise the people of this region on hygiene and sanitation. 

I wish to end here. Those were the major issues that were raised regarding my sector. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think other matters you will answer when we discuss the reports. Tomorrow we shall begin with the Ministry of Agriculture, followed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, then Tourism, the Presidency and then Public Service. After that, we shall go to the reports of the committees. 

Honourable members, I had indicated that next week we would like to start working in the morning. So, I want to appeal to the standing committees to suspend their work. I know that some standing committees are still meeting but could you finish your work between tomorrow and Friday so that all of you are available on Monday so that we run quickly through the reports of the committees. If there is any committee which has not finished, tomorrow morning and Friday is available for you to complete your work. So, the House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 August 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)


