Thursday, 19 August 2004

(Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I welcome you. I am sorry yesterday we could not proceed as planned because of a slight problem; but the problem was solved. I hope the committees have now been able to conform to the changes as indicated in the documents. I have received a communication that the committee on Finance has completed the report. Yesterday reports indicated that the committees on Social Services and Agriculture were ready. Can I receive reports from other committees so that we know how to proceed?

MR BYANYIMA: The committee on Works is ready.

THE SPEAKER: The committee on Works is ready; very good. We shall be able to proceed and maybe complete this programme by the end of the month. So, I thank you very much for completing the reports. 

2.47 
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): I am seeking guidance from the Rt hon. Prime Minister as a Leader of Government Business in the august House. Mr Speaker, not long ago, this august House passed a budget for the purpose of, among other things, seeing to it that justice in this country is done and that the public resources are well looked after.

Mr Speaker, not long ago this government appointed a Commission of Inquiry to look into the activities and performance of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). That commission of inquiry’s report came out, but with some difficulties. Yesterday I was disappointed to see in the media generally that there is a dispute in the Judiciary. Do I understand from the government that, that report in accordance with the ruling of the High Court, is a nullity; in other words, our money was wasted? Or does the government plan to use selectively, certain parts of that report?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know whether the Prime Minister would like to answer this inquiry. But as you have said, this is a matter that has been in court and the court in one way or the other pronounced itself on the report. Unfortunately, we do not have a detailed copy of the judgment. It seems you got this information from the newspapers, and it was reported that the judge declared the report invalid. Therefore, if that is the pronouncement by the court, what would you like the Prime Minister to say; to contradict what the court has said? We just leave it; it will develop with the system of the Judiciary. 

I do not want to quote the newspapers but you have seen that somebody is proposing an appeal. So, if there is going to be an appeal, why don’t you wait rather than asking a lay-person; a lay-person in the sense that he is not a judge, to start pronouncing on an official ruling by court?

2.50
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I am not commenting on that one. I am rising on a point, which I was informed came up on the Floor of Parliament yesterday on the question of the Attorney-General and unfortunately –(Interruption)

MRS RAINER: Thank you for giving way. Yesterday, we agreed that the Leader of Government would address the matter on Tuesday. Is it in order for the honourable member, who was not even here, to start derailing Parliament? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you listen to him then after he has made his statement we find a way to dispose of it? He was just starting, we do not know which way he was going. We should listen to him and then see what to do. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter came up on the Floor of the House yesterday, I am informed - in fact yesterday I was with the President in the meeting with leaders of Buganda. By the time I came the matter had been closed. I did not have the opportunity to respond to it. It is true that it had been indicated that on Tuesday Government would be ready to make a statement. But my understanding of that was that we needed that time to prepare. 
Mr Speaker, I am really ready. Having read what was in the papers today and having been briefed by some members who were here, I am ready to respond to this matter. I am, therefore, seeking your permission to do so.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, as you said, yesterday the matter came up in your absence. It was raised but we did not have the Attorney-General to help us with this matter. The points were made to some front bench members who were thought to have some legal background to assist us on the issue and the request was that, “Give us time and next Tuesday we shall be in position to make a statement”. That was the position. This is why you heard the other member saying, “This is not Tuesday, why do we get a statement before Tuesday?” So, I do not know how to proceed. Is it that you are ready? 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I would have no problem if we knew whether the honourable minister is making a personal statement, making a ministerial statement, or whether he is now playing the role of Leader of Government Business to give a report requested of the Government by the Leader of Government Business. This is important because since he is the subject matter, I cannot see him replying on behalf of the Government; there is a conflict of interest. But obviously if he is making a personal statement, then we need to be advised whether he is making a personal statement, a matter which should have been on the Order Paper; and whether in view of the business we have on the Floor we should entertain a personal statement at this material time. Sir, I need your guidance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You mean guidance on this; how can I give guidance on this?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance. If the hon. Amama Mbabazi is to make the statement, will it attract debate?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it will depend on the kind of statement he is going to make. I think the rules are very clear as to how we should deal with the statement. But then one question, which was asked by hon. James Mwandha, is: are you making a personal statement or are you making an official statement? I think that is the point you must clarify.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I was informed that the hon. James Mwandha was one of those who made a presentation on this point yesterday and I am surprised that –(An. hon member rose_) let me finish making my statement. Let me finish this sentence at least - I thought he was in search of answers and my attempt here is to precisely give answers.  

Am I the Leader of Government Business? Of course not! The Leader of Government Business is present. Mr Speaker, I want to say that he is the one who in fact prompted me to come and make a statement now because it is such a crucial matter that he did not think we should wait until next Tuesday, and we are ready.  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, it is true that when this matter came up yesterday it was taken very seriously by most Members of Parliament, actually to the extent that talk and exchange of views continued after the plenary. We have a number of colleagues who are still sitting in their sessional committees trying to finish their reports and they are very eager to listen to what Government has to say on this subject, on Tuesday. That is what they know. So, procedurally, it is looks like we are trying to pre-empt what was agreed upon yesterday when people who are interested in this subject are not in the House. I want you to guide us. It looks like an ambush.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think we have to be very fair to one another. Let us wait, honourable members, on Tuesday the statement will be made. But if you want information now, it is certain –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO OMARA: Mr Speaker, guidance. The letter that was written to hon. Amama Mbabazi was written by the President to assign him duties to do the work of Attorney-General, and it was copied to you. I think this is the letter you read to us yesterday and on the basis of that letter there was a lot of discussion in the House. It was not hon. Amama Mbabazi who wrote that letter, it was the President. Unfortunately the President does not sit in this House and the Leader of Government Business is the Prime Minister. Therefore, it was expected that the Government would make a detailed statement on how hon. Amama Mbabazi came to be appointed or to do the duty of the Attorney-General. So, as far as I am concerned we are still expecting a written statement from the Government next week on Tuesday.  

Notwithstanding that statement of Tuesday, my good friend here who is now doing the duties of the Attorney-General would like to say something to the House, and it will be very useful because it will be a pointer. In fact, I am begging my colleagues that if you allow hon. Amama Mbabazi to speak out impromptu, he is going to help us to go into the minds of the Government and of the President; but we shall insist on a statement on Tuesday. It does not matter whether it is a statement or something, but let hon. Amama Mbabazi say something. It appeared in the newspapers and he wants to respond. He is now doing the duties of the Attorney-General and he can say something. But we shall still insist on the Government statement on Tuesday and I think there is no prejudice.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have heard the honourable member. Is there any objection? We shall have a statement on Tuesday, but let him make his statement now. Well, no matter how you categorize it, we shall have a statement. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, it is very important for us to know whether it is a personal statement or a ministerial statement.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you make a personal statement.

MR MWANDHA: If it is a ministerial statement then we have to debate it. Yes, so it has to be either personal or ministerial and then we decide the manner in which we are going to treat it.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, it may also be necessary to amend the Order Paper. We should not just proceed anyhow in this House, not anybody takes up the microphone.

THE SPEAKER: Make the statement.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall have a statement on Tuesday.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I must say that I am grateful to my honourable friend, hon. Omara Atubo, for making the point that – you know, I am surprised by my honourable sister –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Please make the statement. Honourable members, this is on understanding that the statement, which was promised on record yesterday, will come on Tuesday.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am making a statement that yesterday when all of you spoke you were not restrained because I was absent. I was not here. In this House really we must continue to practice with a deep sense of justice. That if you could feel free to speak all this in my absence, surely, it is only fair that I am given an opportunity to speak and not be stopped from speaking by those especially who spoke. So, Mr Speaker –(Laughter)- I want to make a statement in response to what was on the Floor yesterday on the question of the Attorney-General.

Mr Speaker, I understand you did read a letter addressed to me by His Excellency, Museveni, the President and copied to you, which if I may read says:  

“This is to inform you that I have decided, using the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution, to assign you in addition to your duties as Minister of Defence, the duties and functions of Attorney-General of Uganda. You will hold this office with immediate effect, until otherwise advised.”  

This is dated 4 August 2004, and it is signed by President Museveni.

Upon receipt of that letter I immediately commenced performing the duties of Attorney-General, and in that capacity I have looked at the issues that have been raised both in the media, and which were repeated here on the question of appointment of Attorney-General, and whether this particular appointment conforms to the provisions of the Constitution or not. I would like to inform you, Mr Speaker and the House that I have absolutely no doubt in my mind that it conforms to the provisions of the Constitution.              

The establishment of the office of Attorney-General is covered by Article 119, and with your permission I will read it. Article 119(1) reads as follows: “There shall be an Attorney-General, who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President, with the approval of Parliament.”  

“(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed Attorney-General unless he or she is qualified to practice as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda and has so practiced or gained the necessary experience for not less than ten years.”  

Then the subsequent clauses define the functions of the Attorney-General. So, when you read this Article, the critical question is, what really are the operative words in that Article? The operative words are that, “The Attorney General must be a Cabinet Minister, appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament”. Therefore this automatically –(Interjections)- I read it, Mr Speaker, I can read it again. It says; 

“There shall be an Attorney-General who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” 

I was giving you my interpretation of this, and I wish hon. Katuntu allowed me to give my interpretation since he has his. My interpretation is that, of course, there must be an Attorney-General, who must be a Cabinet minister, appointed by the President, with the approval of Parliament. What are the operative words in this provision? The operative words here are, “Who shall be a Cabinet Minister, appointed by the President, with the approval of Parliament.” This, therefore, automatically leads you to the other provisions that relate to Cabinet and Cabinet minister, and I would like to refer you to Article 111. 

Article 111 of the Constitution reads at follows - this is under the heading, “The Cabinet” in the marginal note. It reads as follows: “There shall be a Cabinet, which shall consist of the President, the Vice-President and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State.”  

So, that is what the Cabinet is. They name the President and Vice-President and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the state.

The next relevant Article is 113, which reads as follows: (1) “Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament.”  

(2) “The total number of Ministers shall not exceed 21, except with the approval of Parliament.”  

When you combine these provisions, Article 111, Article 113 and Article 119, it is obvious, Mr Speaker, that the Constitution limits the President to 21 Cabinet ministers. The Attorney-General under Article 119 is among the 21 Cabinet ministers. This has been the interpretation we have given throughout the duration of the operation of this Constitution. In fact, Mr Speaker, you will recollect that the President came here seeking approval of this Parliament to increase the number of Cabinet ministers beyond 21 and it was turned down by Parliament, and it has remained 21. So, it is obvious that the Attorney-General is one of the 21 since he must be a Cabinet minister and the number of Cabinet ministers is limited to 21.

Why is it that the Attorney-General’s office is treated separately under Article 119? Again, Mr Speaker, it is rather obvious to me that the reason is that the office of the Attorney-General is the only office among the 21 Cabinet ministers that requires professional qualifications. There is no other office of a cabinet minister that requires professional qualifications in accordance with the Constitution. It is clear, therefore, that what the framers of this Constitution intended was that, when the President appoints a Cabinet of 21, he or she must appoint a cabinet minister who has professional qualifications to perform the duties of the Attorney-General. Then of course, it goes on to explain the Attorney-General’s duties. 

Let me also say we have had precedent, Mr Speaker. In 1996, which was the time the first Cabinet was appointed under this Constitution, Mr Bart Katureebe was appointed Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and Attorney-General. Subsequently, when the office of the Attorney-General was separated from that of the Minister of Justice, a minister of Justice was appointed and Mr Katureebe was assigned duties of the Attorney-General without coming back to seek approval of Parliament. 

The second appointment we have had is that of the late Francis Ayume. In the case of the late Francis Ayume, when the President presented his name - Members if you recollect it was presented together with the name of the Rt hon. Apolo Nsibambi. Why?

One, because the name of the Rt hon. Apolo Nsibambi was presented as minister but obviously the intention was to appoint him Prime Minister and the idea was that he should be treated separately and differently from the crowd of ministers since he was going to be Prime Minister. Otherwise, there was no requirement or no constitutional provision for that kind of treatment.

Two, the hon. Ayume, if you recollect, had been Speaker of Parliament. In the hierarchy of Uganda, Speaker of Parliament is number three in the country and since the proposition was that he moves from Speaker to Attorney-General - which is a lower office - the President decided to treat this office and this particular holder differently. Mr Speaker, I can see that there are people who may be hearing this for the first time. The President decided, because of the status of Mr Francis Ayume who had been Speaker of Parliament and now was going to be put in a lower position in terms of hierarchy, to treat him personally differently. Therefore, his name came up and it was handled in that manner. 

I would like to say this. If the framers had intended that the office of the Attorney-General should be treated differently all the time, then they would have handled that office like other constitutional offices have been handled, and I can give the example of the office of the Speaker. 

In the case of the Speaker, if you look at Article 82(7), it talks about vacation of office by the Speaker or Deputy Speaker and they say how that office is to be vacated and if that office is vacated, how it is to be filled. The Constitution treats other constitutional offices like that. In the case of the Attorney-General there is no such treatment. The vacation of office of the Attorney-General is handled under Article 116, which talks about vacation of office of minister. There is no other provision in the Constitution that handles the question of vacation of office by the Attorney-General. It is obvious, therefore, that the framers of the Constitution spelt out the office of the Attorney-General for the purpose that it is the only office, which the Constitution commands must have professional qualifications. 

Should the President appoint 21 ministers and all receive approval of Parliament – let us say hon. Mwesige was Foreign Affairs Minister and hon. Mwesigwa was Attorney-General and Minister of Trade. Should the President in the course of management of Government affairs feel that hon. Mwesigwa may perform better as Minister of Trade and hon. Mwesige may perform better as Attorney-General, since they have the basic qualifications and they have had the approval of Parliament, surely this Constitution does not command the President to seek a second approval for hon. Mwesige to be Attorney-General or it does not say that he must come back to seek approval to swear again for the second time, having sworn in as a cabinet minister.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, when the President acted as he did, he was very well advised and I have absolutely no doubt in my mind that in assigning the duties of the Attorney-General in the manner he did he was squarely within the Constitution. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But you should have cleared Article 119 too. Do you have the qualifications?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, thank you for that one. I think I will read that Article 119 about the qualifications. It says, in clause 2:
 
“A person shall not be qualified to be appointed Attorney-General unless he or she is qualified to practice as an advocate of the High Court and has so practiced or gained the necessary experience for not less than ten years.” 

Mr Speaker, I would like to state very clearly that I have all these qualifications. I am an advocate of the High Court of Uganda; I have been on the roll of advocates for a very long time. I have a very current practicing certificate. I do actually practice law because I am attached to some firm as a legal consultant. But even if I was not, the work I have done as state attorney, I was secretary of the Uganda Law Society.

THE SPEAKER: When were you enrolled?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was enrolled in 1975, was it ’75? (Laughter). I am ready to receive information on this. Mr Speaker, let me tell you what I mean. There are two ways one can start practice. One is when you are appointed as a government lawyer, in other words, when you are appointed as a state attorney either as a people state attorney or in whatever position, then you will begin practice. You do not need anything else; in fact, you begin practice. For those who want to do private practice – by the way, when you are a government lawyer you need not enroll, you can continue practicing for 30 years like that. 

When you are in private practice, then you have to enroll. You must be put on the roll of advocates. In my case, the reason I was saying I was not sure about the date is because I actually was appointed by the then Attorney-General, Godfrey Lule –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on, please. Let us exhaust these facts.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was appointed by –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When did you qualify as a lawyer?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: In 1975.  

THE SPEAKER: Is that when you got legal practice?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: In terms of being appointed by the Attorney-General to practice as a government lawyer, it was in 1975. I later enrolled on the roll of advocates, which was not necessary, but nevertheless I did it. I have since, except for the period when I was unable to practice, been getting my practicing certificate and I am up to-date now.  

In this provision, you need not be in direct practice in terms of being a lawyer as a state attorney or even a practicing lawyer in town. You can do legal matters and that is why this provision is also talking about either practice or gaining the necessary experience. So, I have no doubt in my mind, and anyone of course could challenge that if they so wish, that I do have the qualifications. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.24
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I must say we are at a small loss as to how to proceed now; but let me make two or three comments. I had very high regard for hon. Amama Mbabazi in his other portfolio but if this is the sort of legal advice we are going to get, maybe I have to rethink my respect for him.  

Mr Speaker, the reason why the Constitution insists that a person who is nominated to be the Attorney-General should be vetted by Parliament is exactly what has happened just now. Hon. Amama Mbabazi does not know when he qualified, when he became entitled to be called an advocate, and whether he has the required qualifications for the post. The Constitution was actually assisting people like hon. Amama Mbabazi not to be embarrassed. That is why the Constitution, under Article 119, requires that before he is appointed Parliament approves him. Now, all of a sudden we have become the Appointments Committee of this Parliament, something that was never envisaged by the Constitution or our Rules of Procedure. I think the President would have saved himself the embarrassment that this appearance has put him. That is number one.

Number two, I was slightly surprised that my colleague, hon. Amama Mbabazi, thinks that being a member of the Cabinet is a prerequisite, it is a fundamental qualification for being appointed Attorney-General. I thought the Constitution was very clear that on appointment to the office of the Attorney-General you become a member of the Cabinet; that is clear. Not the other way round. But if you want to bend the law, you put yourself into problems for nothing. 

The reason why I did not want this statement to come from hon. Amama Mbabazi is exactly what has happened. He is trying to protect himself and yet Government should have come and explained to us the circumstances under which he was appointed. Mr Speaker, I find myself in difficulty on this. I hope the Prime Minister will go and advise the President that the proper procedure should be followed. I am sure nobody in the Appointments Committee, by the way, will reject the appointment of Amama Mbabazi but what we are insisting on is that the proper procedure should be followed. There should be a fundamental precedent set in following constitutional provisions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in these proceedings we are not becoming an Appointments Committee; we are not here to approve or not to approve. I think the statement, which he has made, is to tell us his view on this matter. As far as I am concerned in the letter, which I received, he was assigned duties. Substantively, he is not the Attorney-General but he is acting in the office –(Interjection)– yes, the letter I have is that he was assigned the duties. Of course, when you look at the chapter on interpretation, when they talk about a public officer, it will include a person acting in that capacity. 

So, the exercise we are doing today is not really approving, and we are not going to decide on this issue by vote. The only thing, if you have a doubt about the legality, the constitutionality of this matter, I think it will have to go somewhere else. But we are waiting for a statement on Tuesday. So, I think we can rest it here and wait for a statement on Tuesday.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, this officer we are talking about is supposed to be the person who looks after our legal interests as Parliament, therefore I have a vested interest in the matter. 

From the letter you read it is quite clear, and I agree with your observation, that it is only in acting capacity. That being the case, Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister, who is now acting Attorney-General, when he was challenged by the bench, in what capacity was he appearing in the courts of law or before the bench? Could he tell us what his answer was?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, a couple of days ago there was a National Resistance Movement Promoters meeting and His Excellency the President said that the hon. Amama Mbabazi was acting Attorney-General. I challenge the hon. Amama Mbabazi to tell us what he replied to that reference.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, we are debating the statement that hon. Mbabazi has just made. Is my conclusion right that by debating this we are saying that we do not know the statement that is on record that they will be coming back on Tuesday? Shall we open up debate again because we have very important business waiting and the House must proceed? I need your guidance on this matter.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, my understanding of the statement made by the hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Minister of Defence also holding the portfolio of Attorney-General is that it is a ministerial statement and being so, it is subject to debate and I want to make some contribution to this debate.  

I am not a lawyer and I am not going to indulge myself in the legal gymnastics of his appointment. However, my concern as a Ugandan arises from the Constitution. Not from the Articles, which my colleagues have been quoting –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament very clearly guided the House on how we should proceed on the matter of the acting Attorney-General. I think it would be unfair to ourselves and also to the Speaker if he now indulges in a protracted debate when in actual fact we have major national issues. We have the matter of the committee on Social Services and the Budget, and the timeframe we have to pass this Budget is by the end of this month. Mr Speaker, I seek your due guidance on this matter so that we either proceed to debate this matter now, or we wait and have a government statement placed before this House on Tuesday and we can proceed thereafter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what happened was that when hon. Mbabazi stood up the matter of what you decided yesterday came up. Then hon. Omara Atubo said, “No, let us hear this one provided we are going to have a written statement on Tuesday”. So, we received this statement on the understanding that while we are getting this information from him, there will be an official statement on Tuesday. 

But, honourable members, whatever we say here, we are not going to rule on this matter conclusively because this Parliament is not the court of law. I may hold this interpretation and another one may hold the other, we may vote, we may carry the vote but that will not be the interpretation of the Constitution. The Constitution can only be interpreted by the courts and for anybody who thinks that the appointment is irregular, the best way, rather than taking our time here to challenge it, is to go to the Constitutional Court for interpretation. But whether we have 150 people saying he is not this, and 30 saying he is the other, that will not make a change. So, I think let us save this situation. 

If we feel very seriously about this, anybody be it Member of Parliament or any person in this country, can invoke the provisions of the Constitution for a proper interpretation, which will be binding. Can we move on to another item?

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2003/04

II) The Budgetary Proposals for the fiscal year 2004/05 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/05

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am going to proceed in hearing the report of the Social Services – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  I beg your pardon.

MR NANDALA: We are now going to listen to the report of the Social Services Committee but some of us - I do not know about others – have not seen the report.

THE SPEAKER: How come this matter was raised yesterday?  

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, it seems the reports were given to a few members selectively. (Mrs Hyuha rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Chairperson, can you please tell us something about this if you –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, once my committee finishes the report and members sign, my role of duplication ends there. It becomes the technical work of the Clerk and since some members have a copy that indicates that I submitted the work. But knowing that yesterday we had technical power failures, as we were here in the Chamber the copies were being duplicated. I would suggest that those who have the copies could continue as more are being duplicated.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, we are 304 Members of Parliament with pigeonholes and all of us are entitled to all documents, which come to Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me see. How many members have copies of this? Just put up your hands because I had thought that the chairperson would summarise because you have read the report. So, now we cannot proceed, apparently.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, you are aware that when members receive reports and they go with them the next day  -(Interjections) – I want to put it on record that once my committee has finished and signed –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, nobody is blaming you! Honourable member, we are trying to find out what happened because some have got copies and others do not. My problem is that, how do we proceed because what I expected you to do –(Interruptions)- hold on, please. What I had expected is that if everybody had a copy, we were expected to have read the report. The chairperson would only have given us a brief summary, we seek clarification and then we proceed with the Committee of Supply. But if members say they do not have copies, then it becomes a problem. It means –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, this is the beginning. Most of the committees, which have already finished their work are not yet through with photocopying. So, it is better that we get a solution now otherwise we will not be able to run through the committees because the photocopying machine is just one, and I think it is breaking down at a fast rate. Unless we improvise we will not have reports in this House.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this social services sector greatly impacts on the people we represent. It would be most unfair if the report were read when we have not internalised the contents. So, I beg to move that we postpone until we have internalised the contents of the report.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, while we are debating here, papers have started trickling in. I suggest that the chairperson starts presenting the report, as more copies will be coming in. We should proceed.

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we need to internalise this report thoroughly in order to contribute because it is a very important report as, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, has stated. For us who come from a war-ravaged area where education has suffered greatly, and the recent introduction of free secondary school education for children from IDP camps has been badly handled by the Ministry of Education, we have a lot at stake in this report. We need to know how the ministry is functioning, how this erroneous handling of these schemes can be put right, and if we rush without even internalising –(Interruption)- these few, which trickle in, most of us have not received them and we need to read through. Mr Speaker, I would suggest that we postpone the discussion until everybody gets a report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, how are we going to meet the deadline set for us? Let us –(Interruptions)- please, listen to each other. Are we going to put in Fridays and Mondays?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. In that case, since members complained they have not seen the report they want to and they are entitled to anyway -(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I would really seek the due indulgence of the honourable colleagues. I am very sure that every time we sit in this Parliament the expenditure charged on the consolidated account is about –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the Minister in order to come and tell us that when we do not sit and we are going to do a wrong thing, we should continue to do it? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the Minister was just expressing that it is very costly to sit without doing work. That is just how he was putting it. But now what do we do, honourable members? You do not have copies of these reports and you are entitled to have them. Personally I see no solution other than now -(Interjections)- they have refused. So, I am suggesting, can we put in time tomorrow morning? Oh, I see the problem because holidays are starting tomorrow and, therefore, members will say they are going to do this and the other.

In the circumstances, I am going to adjourn the House to Monday. I think that will give us sufficient time to get the copies to each of you. But when we start, honourable members, I will assume that you have read the reports so that the presenter will only make a summary. And what will be expected of you is to seek clarification because we have had a general debate on this matter so that we can deal with as many reports within that week as possible, and see how we proceed. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Monday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.46 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 23 August 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)



