Wednesday, 17 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr J. Ekemu, in the Chair.

QUESTIONS

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Deo Zabasaija, if you look, hon. Member, you cannot ask your question in the absence of the Minister responsible. (Interruption) Order. I would defer the matter to an appropriate time.

MOTIONS

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE POLICE BILL, 1994

(Debate continued from 16th August 1994.)

MR MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Chairman. As you might know, in this House I am probably the only one representing a county that does not have a single policeman. Nor indeed, does it have a prison.  I am not lamenting.  The absence of those services - because lamenting in the absence of prisons in my county would be as absurd as one saying that the country has a shortage of coffins.

I have three points I would like to talk about in relation to both, the police and the Police Bill.  The first one is about police brutality.  The second one is about alienation of the police and the third one is how to avoid crating a police state in Uganda.

Let me start with police brutality.  I know that Members have talked about if but I am not sure that they have talked about it as to why happens.  The causes of police brutality are the ones that I would like to point at.  These are based on research, which several countries have done after suffering Police brutality.  One of the reasons is mistreatment of Police by the governments for which they worked particularly in housing.  A policeman who has spent years in a uniport cramped up with his family, in the heat of that who has been so miserably underpaid is finally asked to go and put down an uprising when students at a university riot for boom.  (Interruption)

MR PINTO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I want to give the hon. Member is that the policeman is not only cramped up in this uniport alone but it is not unusual to find two families staying in one uniport. Two or three wives, three homesteads crumpled in a miserable house. I believe this is an abuse of the family values if these people are exposed to such conditions.

REV. ONGOLA ATWAI:  Supplementary information.  Mr Chairman, the supplementary information I want to advance is this that, the Africans are not living the nucelus family, they have extended family units.  Not will you find only two family members sharing  a uniport, they are also visited by their relatives who should also come and share the same uniport.

MR AKURE:  Mr Chairman, it is not only that even if you went to Nsambya Barracks now you may find that the policemen are using the bathrooms as their houses, even the toilets have been closed and they are being used as houses.

MRS MASABA WAFAANA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to inform the Speaker and the hon. House through you, that actually the situation with the police families is very critical.  The problem is that in that uniport you find so many children and in such an area it is very difficult for mothers to discipline the children and in that house the fathers and mothers you know what they indulge in and the children, of course, may sometimes learn from their parents what they are doing.  So, the discipline becomes difficult when it comes to sexual problems as well.  

Another problem with the police in having such houses, you find that women suffer because sometimes they are left behind, because they cannot be accommodated in those uniports.  So, you find that the marriages wrecks.  This applies also to the military where their women, their wives are left behind.  You find that everywhere a policeman goes or a military goes he has to acquire another family and that brings problems and hence increases aids problems When it comes to education of these policemen’s children, it is also a problem. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Member.  Please you are contributing now.

MRS MASABA WAFAANA:  No, actually I am only informing that bringing up the children in such an environment is not in the interest of the human rights for the children and the mothers.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Tom Butime): Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking especially from hon. Mayengo is that when he is discussing this subject, let him include in his discussion the question of the economy of Uganda, the question of the budget, the question of the numbers of policemen in this country, the question of construction and history of the Army, the Police, the Prisons, as far as housing is concerned and also the question of the African extended families.  

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I will need an extra few minutes because he has given a large task and I will discuss all those provided I am given an extra five minutes.  

That is the policeman who comes out of that uniport, the policeman that all the Members have described, armed with a club and being sent on duty to put down an uprising of the rioting students rioting for additional boom. That is the policeman who suddenly realises that now he has a chance to revenge all the mistreatment he has received from this world.  What does he do? Beat them up.  That is what we call Police brutality. That is one of the causes.

There is also another distant cause which psychologists have been able to dig up.  It is the education system in which the teachers appear to derive great delight in beating children.  Those children are beaten from the time they start going to school up to the time they leave school and psychologically they build up a feeling that beating people is a normal thing.  Eventually they get into the Police.  What do they do? It is normal to beat people and they go on cracking the people.  This, of course, one would say what do you suggest can we just surmount this one?  How do we avoid it?  

That is included  in my next point on Police alienation.  I am going to combine that with houses and I trust that the Minister will be satisfied with the explanation that I am going to make because, as far as I can guess, he is saying where is the money to provide housing for the Police.  The immediate short answer is do not house only a few of the policemen and leave the others to house themselves, pay them well.  He is going to say there is not enough money to pay them well. I am going to answer that indeed, in the suggestions in his Police Bill there is something called the Police Welfare Fund.  If that one can be worked out carefully it is not different from an ordinary mutual fund that will be able to assist the police.  (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you my Neighbour for yielding to my giving you information. I did speak in this very House, this august House, that the policemen in some parts of the world are recruited in the areas where they come from.  As a result of the areas where they come from except top officers in the police force, those can be transferred literary anywhere in the nation but here you have a policeman from Kotido being transferred to Kisoro. 

Now, if you are paying him Shs10, 000 and this is where I come in because I had informed you about this before, these people turn out to be almost not going to their homes and, therefore, they can do literary anything they want in order to survive.  So, the best policy as I did say last time is only top officers who can be transferred from one part of the country to the other but for an ordinary policeman for heaven’s sake we must have a policy where these people can work near where they come from and they can be given loans to put up small houses.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, what the hon. Wenendeya is saying is that we amend Clause 22 (d) of the Bill we are discussing because that one says ‘A policeman should be willing to serve in any station where be is sent.’ That is part of what I was going to say on the subject of alienation.  After you have brought him from Kotido as the hon. Wenendeya is saying and you send him to Rakai, he arrives at the station and finds difficulties in the first place the people where he is working do not understand his language, he might be speaking English and Swahili and the language in Kotido but most of the community in which he might be working might not be speaking any of those languages, that automatically alienate the police.

Incidentally another point which also alienates the police, is their training almost always only in Swahili.  Why should we train the police only in Swahili? Why should we be worried -(Interjection)- okay, in Swahili and English  -(Interruption)- the Minister is provoking me to address him instead of addressing the Chair.  (Laughter) 

It is a policeman who fits in the community where he works that becomes an effective policeman.  A policeman who is supplanted and taken to an area where he does not work is one of the reasons we have had so much tribal conflicts here in Buganda you have had so much animosity from Buganda against people from the north mostly because it has been almost standard all the Police are from the north.  Why? (Interjection) That is the way it has been.  Things are changing -(Laughter and Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, let me finish the point and then I will receive plenty of information. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Go ahead and finish your points, please. 

MR MAYENGO: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, the misunderstanding between these groups is enough to create gaps. (Interjection) These misunderstandings are simply a mere result of the language problem on most occasions and then that creates the big chasm between so many of these tribes.  It is a realistic thing.  How can we avoid that?  We can avoid that by going back to the question of housing.  If, -(Interruption)

MR OKODI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Sir, I would like to inform the hon. speaker that in the past recruitment into the forces were based on height and chest and so most of the people from Buganda could not qualify for it.  Thank you.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I want to give is that, that old Policy changed and that recruitment in the Police of recent was based on quarters from districts and, another information I want to give is that it is not true that the training of Police is done in Swahili.  Most of the reasons are in fact conducted in English and for you to join the Police he must have finished senior four I would like to invite the hon. Member maybe to visit the Police training school at Kibuli and see for himself.  Swahili is just secondly, thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, any casual observation will reveal the percentage of Ugandans who can understand English is below 20, those above Senior Four we can only take from the recent education White Paper we discussed, on 2 per cent of those who go to school managed to go to secondary school.  So, how many come out of senior four is a very small percentage.  

Housing the Police, I am suggesting could be done by just making an improvement on their pay and then requesting them to find housing for themselves except for the big officers of the force those are the ones who we would have to house.  It would then be found that those policemen who are staying within the community in which they are working are understood by the community they are regarded as decent citizens of the community who even are able to grow some food and supplement their income and when they supplement their income by the additional food the grow they also get a chance to reduce the tendency for corruption. 

I finally make one remark on corruption, especially the taking of bribes it is so realistic and so interesting that last year towards the end I had a driver who had a traffic policeman as a friend and they used to drive together, he came one day and told me that the traffic policeman told  him about his best day and his worst day.  The best day the traffic policeman said, he went home with Shs375, 000/= net. The worst day that he recorded was when the Pope visited this country and he was asked to escort the Pope and for two days he worked for nothing -(Laughter)

LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA: Mr Chairman, we have to reduce this tendency by giving them a decent salary and asking them to look for where to stay.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information.  I wanted to inform hon. Mayengo that the day the Pope come when the traffic policeman was involved in the traffic and escorting then that policeman did not work for nothing because there was a budget a security budget for the Pope’s visit and all the days the Pope spent here every policeman who was involved in escort duty and traffic control and crowed control etc were paid very, very well and therefore, that policeman was lying to have to say that he worked for nothing.

LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA:  Mr Chairman, the word nothing is relative in this case.  Compared to the three hundred and seventy five he had made on his best day whatever he might had been paid officially was not in his opinion.  (Interruption) 

Let me wind up by the last point on how to avoid creating a Police state.  Since we have young Members of the House maybe, I should describe what a Police state is.  

A Police state is that state in which the state uses  - the suppress people’s opinions and the subjugate them and dominate them using the police using private armies and that type of thing we have seen it in history - Germany, NASA here, the general service the member is mentioning here the state research, the public safety unit such a fine name and the KGB.  In order to avoid this I would feel that in this Bill we have let us name what would be the police force, what to be made of.  Clause number 4 states what would be the component of the police force, what is wrong with naming them exactly and exhaustively and say the regular police and I take this on to be the name who are working in bits.  

The Special Branch; there is no mention of how the special branch comes except where they are said to be represented somewhere. Let us save the Special Branch if we still need it.  If the Fire Brigade is part of the Police let us include it.  The CID let us name exactly without leaving any loophole without leaving any chance for whoever will come to have just the liberty to create a Police Force of his own a special force to turn this country into a Police state.

Lastly, let me make three quick remarks.  The police in this country are more visible during day time than at night, this gives the impression that probably the same policemen who were walking a bit during day time are the ones who remove their uniforms and come around in the evening to do havoc what would prevent people from making guess of that kind.  Another one, the last one exactly, it has become a modern feature of almost of all police to track down fringing criminals going on foot, to track down those who are carrying drugs. In this Bill there is no single mention for the Police dog.  Thank you very much I support the Bill.

MR ONGOM ABEDNEGO (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you Mr Chairman, for giving me a chance to have some comments on this Bill.  Before I come to the Bill itself, allow me to say one or two general things about the Police Force. One, which I think this House should do, is to thank the British Government for the assistance they have given towards development of our Police Force to date.  If you go to Nsambya Police Station at the moment you will find that the only bright spot there is the Police Training Wing and that I understand were assisted by the British Government to renovate and they have also contributed quite a lot in training of our Police Force. 

So, I think it is right that this House should formerly send a word of congratulation or of thanks to the British Government and the British people for the assistance they have given us.  My appeal, is that place which is described as a dry spot in Nsambya at the moment. I appeal to the Police people and the Police personnel to ensure that at least they use the thing properly so that it does not dilapidate in the shortest possible time.  Some of our places are not very conducive to the maintenance of some of this installations, I appeal through the Minister who is talking now to please encourage our policemen to look after these things.  

We all know this perhaps; not good things to do as far as the morality and morale of the areas are concerned.  But I think we have mentioned here enough of what the Police go through and this I think is the reason why these things are encouraged; these policewomen do not go around selling these because they want to, it is because of the circumstances surrounding their stay there.  

At the moment as we all know the Police we have said here many times, that the Police salary is not enough; they do not earn a living wage and therefore, the women have to do something without it perhaps we would have more corruption so, I think in order to avoid this one is to pay them well as people have been saying and the other one is perhaps to find some alternative activities for the policewomen which will earn them money I do not know what this will be but maybe, the Ministry of Internal Affairs would find something that the policewoman will do profitably to supplement thee wags and salaries of their husbands.  Mr Chairman, I am being disturbed down here so, I cannot concentrate  -(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that it is not the policewomen who sell this legal drink Waragi, it is not the policewoman, but I think the Member may be talking about wives, relatives, extended families, the African style of the policemen and women who carry out that activity.

MR ONGOM: Thanks for the information.  I think the Minister understood me all the same. Although wives are actually women  -(Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, let me now turn to the Bill itself.  I would like to have a comment on Clause 28, that is search by Police Officers. At the end of this Clause they said, this is the Clause that allows policemen to search a house if they suspect something and it says they may before doing that, they could put record things in writing which says that, such officer may after recording in writing the grounds of his belief and specifying such writing so far responsible the thing for which research is to be made for such thing. 

Whereas I agree with this, I also suggest that we should look sometimes to the effect that whatever the policemen officer writes whatever grounds he puts in writing should be neither available to the person for whose premises are going to be searched so that he is aware as to why the policemen - why it is necessary to search so his place, because if he is left like that the whole thing is opened to suspicion.  

In the same Clause paragraph 5 where they talks about whatever is found and recorded should be made available to a magistrate.  This is okay, but I said that the person being searched should also - the Police Officer should also make this list available to him immediately and not wait for the things to go to the magistrate first and then ask for it availed because otherwise a lot of things could happen in between the time of recording and given to the magistrate.  So, I think that Members will agree I hope now the Police Officer to order - make the Police Officer available immediately on such the list of whatever he has taken from the House.  

The other Section, Mr Chairman, which I would like to comment on is towards 33; power to regulate assembly and processions that is 33 (2), it says, if it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector General that it is intended to convene in assembly of so many processions. In other words, if the policemen or the Inspector General of Police suspects that any assembly which is likely to be convened or procession which is likely to cause a breach of peace, we should prohibit it. 

I am saying, if not used properly this could also lead to abuse of the rights of the citizens.  Because, we know that a lot of things the policemen or the Police Force are subject to political entrance and this Clause is left like that could affect the people in power to violate people’s right to assembly and procession. I think the citizens should be free to demonstrate against what they think is wrong provided that the demonstration or assembly is a peaceful one. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point information.  The information I would like to give the hon. Member holding the Floor is that in actually fact in the neighbouring country government in power or the administration in power has used that very Clause to stop opposition parties from having any meetings at all, so I think what the hon. Member is saying is very crucial because the Police will then be influenced and at any single time they other people holding the different point of view will never be allowed to have a procession or even a single meeting.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much, my information to the hon. Member on the Floor is on the other side of the coin, any Government that cannot keep Law and Order is not a Government, and if we want a Government that keeps Law and Order we must be able to give each Police some muscle to stop anybody who is bridging the peace. I do not agree at all, that simple political manoeuvres that are sometimes used to make the Police not work should be used in this particular case. What I am saying is that the Police should not misuse this power but the Police should have this power and they should invoke it whenever they have to keep Law and Order.  Thank you.

MR ONGOM: Thank you for the information given, Mr Chairman. What hon. Babu was talking about is catered for under Clause 34, and what I am saying is that if the Police suspects that there is likely to be a breach of peace surely they can warn the people concerned in writing but they should also try to assist them to ensure that peace is not breeched during the assembly of procession and I will put in an amendment to that effect and I hope when the time comes I will be able to defend it. 

There is another Clause which I think is very serious if left as it is that is the dispersion with Clause 37 dispersion of assembly after it has been ordered to be terminated. I agree that when a Policeman or the Inspector General suspects that peace is going to be breached, he should have the right to terminate that assembly or procession.  But what I object to is that, it is the Clause which says that, the Police Officer may use all such Force reasonably necessary for overcoming such resistance and shall not be liable in anything or - proceeding for having by the use of such force caused harm or death to any person.  This is extremely dangerous, whereas the Police should be allowed to have the power to stop this. They should not be given power by this House to kill at will knowing very well they are not reliable for trial.  I think that this Clause should be removed so that the Police if for some reason, if by use of force somebody dies they can go to court and prove that it was inevitable that the death was caused. But if left like that definitely I think the population will lose hope and even faith in the Police Force. 

I also put some amendment which I hope I will be able to defend when the time comes, and the other one which I like to consider, is the schedule 4(b); which says this effect is protecting the policemen  - gage 46 4 2(b) that is penalty and definition of dissertation.  While absent with the authority from his unity or from the place where his duty requires him to be and during such absence forms the intention of not returning to the unit or place.  This one I find very difficult to understand or maybe lawyers can help.  I do not see how anybody in authority can decide to know somebody who is absent is formed an opinion not to come, without that person further way taken action or do something which will show that he has formed an opinion.  

So, I find that rather - left like that there will be abuse of power by some authorities and again I have put an amendment to delete that, because I think it is not possible for somebody to know without somebody telling him and somebody else formed an opinion without that kind of action to show that an opinion to that effect was formed.  

Those were the points I wanted to bring, but the other thing which is a general, in conclusion, which I wanted to comment on, is the request by the Minister for Internal Affairs that Police units in the rural areas should be assisted by the population to put up small houses for them. I agree that, this is a good thing, and should be encouraged.  The only comment I would like to make is that the population actually is over loaded already with this kind of thing.  You think of any area now of social services they are being called upon to offer this free service; whether it is in education, health, now the Police - and now in our case where lot of infrastructure in Local Government institutions have been damaged. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member through you that, if we are properly organised, the policemen who are from their own areas would be given machinery to get loans so as to put up their own homes or houses rather than expecting the public to contribute.

MR ONGOM: Thank you for the information.  This is obviously good idea which is still being floated around, starting from today, and I hope the Minister is taking note. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR ONGOM: I am talking in a situation where this does not exist.  I am saying, Mr Chairman, that whereas this is a good idea; we should also recognise that the population is now over loaded with these free services, and they are doing their best.  They are building schools, health centres and roads, by themselves, freely. Now, we are adding the Police, and it is good; but let us also do something to help the population to help themselves, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much.

MR OGWANG (Kole County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to put across my views regarding the Police Bill; but before I can do that, I would like to send my condolences to this House and to Members of the family of the late hon. Mzee Balaki Kirya; and also the late hon. Kafumbe Mukasa. This comes from Kole County, where I have just come back.

To go to the Bill, I would like to make a few suggestions here and there.  First of all, I want to comment on the rapid reactive force of the Police Force of Uganda Police.  This is one of the areas that really need to be looked at very critically.  Because, very soon we are going to have elections - next year we are going to have elections, and if this force is not drilled properly, there is a very big chance that, the rights of the common man will be abused by the policemen who are not really trained in rapid reaction.  

I am saying this because in the past we have seen forces - members of the Police Force are touched to the Central Division, going and attacking civilians using live ammunition.  I would like to propose to this hon. House that, in future; maybe, they should use rubber bullets and other instruments which can really not be so violent.

In some countries, Police use buttons.  Police use buttons for quailing demonstrations and an arrests.  But in Uganda, policemen use raw brutal force to suppress people who are not even armed.  And in this way, it has really tarnished the image of The Uganda Police. I think, maybe, in future, the Minister will look at some of the requirements needed for the Rapid Reaction Force of the Police Force of Uganda.  I would also like to comment on the abuse of police vehicles by the police authorities.  

At most times, we have seen Police vehicles being used unscrupulously by police officers doing their own work at the expense of the taxpayers.  Sometimes, these vehicles are donated by our friends abroad.  And it is really a pity when these vehicles are being driven in the middle of the city carrying charcoal for example; last week I saw a Police Highway Patrol Vehicle – UP 1092, carrying heavy load of charcoal which was even loaded very dangerously, and they were driving very fast in the middle of the city.  Now, I do not think our donors will be very happy when they see some of these things taking place at the very knowledge of the government. I would also like to comment on the  -(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that, electricity is too expensive and most of us in Uganda are using charcoal. (Applause)  So, I am sure when he sees charcoal on Police vehicles, maybe they are ferrying it for their home consumption.  Thank you (Laughter)

MR OGWANG: Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is trying to tell me that, the Police vehicle should be loaded dangerously and yet these are the very people who are supposed to protect the high way from unscrupulous drivers.

It is just like somebody - that is why policemen in Uganda even today are holding the law in their hands.  They are always going in the rampage doing things contrary to what they are trained to do.  Some of them have gone up to the extent of destroying lives - valuable lives of the citizens of this country. In future, we should not be surprised to see -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that, the misuse of official vehicles is not restricted to the police only; we heard during the last CA Elections that some people even used official helicopters to campaign. (Laughter and Applause)

MR OGWANG:  Mr Chairman, you can see the extent at which our vehicles are being abused on our roads.  On the 9th of October last year, the President talked about some unscrupulous police officers.  In fact, he talked about people who are supposed to keep the law - but who according to him he said, some security officers have turned into poachers, something like that; he said I mean, police officers who are supposed to be game wardens have turned into poachers, something like that. He mentioned it last year on the 9th of October.

Immediately after that, some police officers attached to CPS were arrested in connection with the robberies, which had been taking place along the Gulu-Kampala Highway.  It is a pity our police officers are engaged in this kind of business. Some have built bungalows, when we are talking about the numeration of the Police Force, when we are talking about the low payment of the Police Force; others have built bungalows, others have bought vehicles very expensive vehicles, others are living beyond their means.

Now the general population of Uganda has started to question; where these people are getting all this money? It is a pity to note that, some Police officers are engaged in very duty business as far as law is concerned. (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, there are very many other public servants who have got farms, who have got big houses, who have got animals.  And if you begin to count what they possess to what they earn officially, you really go nowhere. So, it is not only the police who have things that you cannot explain but there are many people who are living on government salaries. So, I think the Police alone should not be blamed; we should blame all other people who are corrupt. (Laughter)

MR OGWANG: Mr Chairman, as we talk about corruption, I would also like to mention the role of the CID of the Uganda Police Force. I would like to very much commend the work being done by these people.  They have pushed us, they have done a lot to recover some of the lost money which had been lost through corruption. 

But, I would like to say that, maybe, we should give these people some special training to handle cases of fraud which really need to be handled in a very technical way, because if you just pick a police officer attached to the CID who does not know anything to do with accounts and you tell him to go and investigate in the accounts section for example with PAC. How will he investigate these things? and sometimes, in some cases, we are forced to call on the Scotland Yard of Britain to come and carry out investigations in Uganda.  

It is a pity that some of these Police Officers have carried out their investigations but have never come out with conclusive evidence of crimes committed. So, I would like to say that, Mr Chairman, I am a hon. Member, I am not a young man. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please wind up hon. Member.  Hon. Member from Kole, please wind up your speech.

MR OGWANG:  I hope hon. Tom Butime is not trying to tease me, Mr Chairman.  What I am trying to say is that, the Scotland Yard has really assisted us, especially in carrying out specific investigations.  But to some extent, they have not been very successfully because for example, for the case of one of the expatriates from Canada who was murdered in Arua. The evidence, which was adduced, was not so conclusive, and actually the man, who was arrested in connection with that murder, has been released, and now he is trying to sue the government for illegal arrest.  So, in this case, we are still going to - first of all lose credibility. (Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, in the case of CID before a CID officer is given a case to investigate, whether it is a fraud or something, that officer usually has some professional training as far as that particular job they are giving him to carry out is concerned.  And in the CID, there is no way you can be promoted before you have carried out and attended a course related to the field where you are going to be deployed.  

As far as Scotland Yard is concerned and the CID, I want to inform him that, the conclusions, the findings of all Scotland Yard officers who have come here, their findings have been virtually the same findings by our own Police.  They only come to reach the same conclusion, which our CID has already reached, but they take more money. (Applause) 

MR OGWANG:  Mr Chairman, why do we invite these people if it takes even more money? Why do we not use our people here for this job? I hope the Minister is trying to say that, our people are as much qualified as the people who come all the way from Britain to come and carry out these investigations.

I would like to end by - I would like to comment just a little on the uniforms of the Uganda Police Force.  Much as you may argue that content is completely different from uniform; but I would like to say that the Police uniform - the Uganda Police uniform needs to be revised.  Actually, we should go back to the blue and white uniforms of those days, other than the uniform, which is sometimes even shared by members of the armed forces.  

This has been so confusing and in some cases, the Police Force has been mistaken - sometimes they are mistaken to be military personnel.  And in some cases, some military officer have go ahead and sometimes they put on uniforms belonging to the police force, sometimes uniforms belonging to the prisons, in fact, there is a lot of confusion in our forces. Sometimes I see uniforms belonging to other countries - in fact the question of uniforms has to be revisited and even the numbers which are supposed to be attached to each and every Police Post must turn out conspicuously for everybody to see, so that in any case, if this police officer commits a crime or does anything wrong in the public’s eye, he can always be apprehended and investigated.  I thank you, very much Mr Chairman. I beg to move.

MR J. NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I raise to support the Motion but before that, I want to tell you that, I have just come back from my constituency where I spent a weekend, and I had an opportunity to have a little chat with some of the policemen who live in my town, and I told them I was coming to participate in this Bill.  They said, Sir, before you think of passing a new Police Bill, why do you not look up the miserable conditions under which we live in our barracks.  I have shouted about this several times and I am not going to repeat this.  

But more importantly, they showed me a place where they are operating as a police station, as you know, The 1979 war destroyed our Police Station in Mbarara, and since then, the Police have been operating in a uniport as a Police Station; and this is supposed to be housing not only the Mbarara Police Station, but the regional headquarters of the police.  Sometime back, about ten, twelve years ago, government allocated a plot for the police to build a new police station in Mbarara, and I think money was allocated but Ugandans being what they are, I think it was embezzled.

I want to give a warning to the Minister of Internal Affairs that, they had better build a police station at that site, before I am tempted to suggest the Mbarara Municipality to allocate that plot of land to people who can put that plot of land to better use.

I come to the Bill.  I have been going through this Bill and I find a few loopholes.  I want to talk about a situation where a policeman in the course of exciting his legal duties, might break a law.  For example, a policeman might be riding a motorcycle, driving a car and trying to chase and apprehend a criminal or to stop a speeding motorist and in the process the policeman exceeds the legally permitted speed limit.  So, what do we do? He is breaking the law, but are we protecting him since he is doing a necessary service? 

In some other countries, policemen are told you are not supposed to exceed the speed limit, even if you are chasing a criminal, but you over speed at your own risk.  So, imagine a policeman driving on Parliament Avenue, at 150 kilometre per hour; in order to chase a criminal and in the process he knocks down the Member of Parliament who is coming to legislate here, so what happens? (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order. 

MR NTIMBA:  So, Mr Chairman, I wish the draft Bill had made provisions where may be the police can be protected if he is carrying out his law for duties.  I would also like to talk about the fact that, policemen are required to be on duty at all times.  Now, my interpretation of this at all times, means that they should be on duty 24 hours.  But I am inclined to think that, the good men of our policemen tend to knock off at 5.00 o’clock in the afternoon.  Specifically, I am referring to traffic policemen who knock off at 5.00 o’clock and some of us, who happen to be driving after dark, have experienced that in Kampala.  There is a big nuisance of cyclists - pedal cyclists who run around the city streets of Kampala without lights on.  I wish the policemen could occasionally mount surprise checks -(Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, the question of driving and what have you, are covered on the road, the traffic and of safety act.  So we have contravenes; there is a law in place, and we do not need another law in the Police Bill.  Thank you.

MR MBURA MUHINDO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor and the House that, although he says that, after five; cyclists without lights start mingling in the streets.  The fact is that, even during the day, policemen have never bothered about cyclists and they have cause us a lot accidents, they only chase those of us who have cars because we have big pockets.  That is the information.

MR NTIMBA:  I thank the hon. Member for the information given.  Now, Mr Chairman, I want to turn your attention and that of the hon. Members to clause number 68 on page 41 of the Bill.  Clause No.68 of the Bill says that, it talks about somebody giving false information to the Police.  

I think there was lack of seriousness with regard to deciding on the punishment being given by somebody who gives false information to the Police.  I just want to compare two possible cases where somebody goes to the police station and tells a lie and says, so and so has been speeding, driving at 100 kilo meters in town.  So, the Police given information, they came and arrest a person and fine him a few thousand shillings and that is the end of the matter.  But, we compare this with a case where somebody goes and gives false information to the police about somebody.  That somebody is arrested and imprisoned for ten years or something like that, and if you permit me, I will just give an example of what happened to me a few years ago, when somebody told a lie against me, and said, I have lost a file; I was picked up, taken to Naguru Public Safety Unity, tortured for a whole month, and in fact I almost lost my life.  Now, compare these two cases.  If I had been killed in Naguru Public Safety Unit, would my widow and other people are happy to see the person who told lies against me, nearly getting away with imprisonment of one year?  

So, I think Article No.68 or Clause No.68 should have related the offence of giving false information to the gravity or the consequence of the police action.  I go on to article No.69, which says, (b)’ A person who knowingly entertains or supplies intoxicating liquor to a police officer on duty extra; he commits an offence.’ I want us to look at a situation where there is a reception, official reception at Nile Hotel, and policemen come there on duty, and after they have been doing the duty, the Manager of Nile Hotel, decides to serve them with each a bottle of beer, or police officers come there dressed in police uniform to participate in the celebrations, being hosted by a government.  Now, what happens is the Nile Hotel is guilty of breaking a law of entertaining and giving liquor to a uniformed policeman who is on duty. So, I wish this had been looked into and no loopholes had been left.

I want to talk about the retirement age of the police. Here the Bill stipulates that, policemen shall be required to retire at the age of 55 years.  If you may recall, recently, Clause No.16, if I may recall this House recently I amended whatever we did, and changed the mandatory retirement age of the civil servants from 55 years to 60 years.  We had valid reasons for doing this.  And in the case of the Police, I am inclined to think that, there might be officers who may even after attaining the age of 55 years, are still capable of carrying out and offering useful service and it will not be proper for us to loose their services merely because they have attained thee age of 55 years, when there are other colleagues in the traditional civil service who have been allowed to stay in the serve up to the age of 60 years. And I want to appeal to the Minister for State for Internal Affairs to consider amending this and scrutinizing this with the retirement age of the traditional civil service. (Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to hon. Ntimba is that, those 55 years was a recommendation from the Police Force itself.  The Police feels that, at the age of 55 years, if a policeman has really been active in his work from training, up to attaining the age of 55 years, and given the hazardous work of the police constable, a corporal sergeant, at the age of 55 years, he is weather beaten the part and parcel of a policeman, he is really no longer productive physically, and therefore, it is wise and good for that police officer to retire so that, the rest of the 15, 20, 25 or 40, if he likes to go up to 85 years, could be used productively at his place of birth and try and make up, and we have had a lot of examples. A lot of examples where police officers have retired and eventually have nowhere to go because of the part and parcel of the work they have been doing.  So, it is a recommendation from them and that is why we included it here.

MR NTIMBA: I thank the hon. minister for the clarification given. So, finally, Mr Chairman, I would like to observe that in the recent past, the police has been getting some external assistance from friendly countries and I would like to propose that, in the process of utilising this external assistance, let the ministry responsible consider development budget, consider using some of the assistance obtained from outside, in putting up permanent structures, like police stations; and I happen to be a member of the Public Accounts Committee and what we saw at Nsambya Barracks and other places like Naguru and so forth, really shocked us, and I think all of us who have police stations in our constituencies, are very, very concerned about it.  I want to suggest that, the hon. Minister considers this question of putting up structures under his development budget very, very seriously.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I support the Motion. 

CAPT. BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to start off on a different note.  One, I would like to start off by saluting the men and women of the Uganda Police; for the contribution they have made to this country.  Why do I say so?  A lot of circumstances have been described here. They have one uniform, they sleep in bad accommodation they are insulted; they call them all sorts of names, but these men and women continue day in and say out to toil and keep peace in this country.  You might say that they have a few things that people describe, but sometimes I describe the policemen of this country as reflection of our society, and if we are going to describe a policeman in this country in his position, you better look at yourself first.  Those policemen are a reflection of us, and therefore, we get what we deserve.  If we would like a better Police Force, we have to sit down and come up with a police that we all like.  I do not see why, we are always sweeping everything under the carpet and having to name somebody else. The responsibility is ours; the responsibility is of the people of Uganda.  We want a good Police and, therefore, we better make one. 

I was surprised a few minutes ago when somebody said; oh certain areas get policemen who cannot speak the language. Why do we not speak the truth here that, there are certain people in this country who will not join the Police?  There are certain areas of people where this has been brought and people have failed to join the police.  In fact, when I was with RC III, we were asked to give a number of people for the police recruitment, we advertised through all our RCs we never got anybody.  Now, when you turn around and you say that your area should have policemen, when you have refused to provide people as candidates to police, you are being unfair to the police.  I would like therefore, to suggest, Mr Chairman  -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I think I would like to inform hon. Member that it is not such a matter of aversion against police work.  It is entirely economic.  If given the choice between being a teacher who might earn let us say Ushs 10,000 and a policeman with all his dangerous work earning Ushs 5,000 what would you take?  And my county is not having any policeman.  It is not that actually we are yearning for policemen.  No, there is actually no work for them. (Interruptions)

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give the hon. Member on the Floor is that before people offer their services, they have confidence in the system of the time.  So, some people at that time did not come forward to offer themselves for police recruitment because they did not have that confidence.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: I would like to thank the hon. Members who have given me information.  I am very grateful that they have just made my point.  One was talking about the opportunistic attitude of having money before duty.  Another one was saying that at one time - anyway you heard what he said.  I do not have to go very far.  But all I am trying to say is that let us not give excuses.  The Police is ours.  All I am saying is, let us go back; let us ask our people to join the police. In fact, I have a saying, whenever I go to my RCs and they are complaining about the Police.  I always ask them, how many people they have given in to work in the police and the chances are in my area nobody has joined the Police.  

Therefore, if we want good policemen, I would like to request that all leaders in this House should go back to their areas and get people to join the police force.  The Police in this country is faced with the same problems that our government is facing.  Whenever we look at government expenditure and day in and year out, we pass these bills, the expenditure Bill here, we passed our budget and we have a complete committee of this House that works on the police budget. What I have not seen yet is why they have not increased that budget so that our policemen can stop suffering.  Why is it that they have not come to this House and told us?  Let us not mourn here.  

We have a complete committee that should go back and tell us how we can try and help the Police to come out of its demise. I would like to request that we find ways together.  I would like to give you one way of getting the police to become more efficient by giving them slightly more money.  How can we do it? People like us who stay in cities and municipalities have a very nice way we could do it.  For example, in Kampala City Council, we have an enforcement agency.  It is part of the Kampala City Council.  This enforcement agency is paid money by City Council.  

I am saying let us have something called metropolitan Police.  Let us get that money from City Council and give it to the Police and boost their revenue. The Police in Kampala City and municipalities will do two jobs.  They will enforce the Penal Code and at the same time, they will enforce the by-laws of the Council; the councils, which are Municipal, the councils, which are City Council. Now, this will help the Police to get some money and therefore get the equipments they so much need. 

I would like, therefore, to propose that in Section 4 Clause No.4, we will put there metropolitan police and this metropolitan police will be on the same level as the district police. The metropolitan police will be controlled by the police itself but will work hand in hand with the Council to make sure they enforce the bye-laws.  We will have killed two birds with one stone. (Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member. I believe he is probably quoting the metropolitan police of London.  When Sir, Robert Pill started the metropolitan police of London, this is the one, which has its headquarters at Scotland Yard.  The intention was not that there was to be another police and the metropolitan police would then work.  It was that that was the police for the 15 miles radius around London and it was adequate.  Is this that the hon. Member is suggesting that we get the kind of police such as one we would have in federal systems? Thank you Mr Chairman.

CAPT BABU:  Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member for the information. His information is more or less correct.  We would like to make it even better.  My model is better than that one of London.  (Laughter) Because my model I am looking at the finance, the economy, I am tying the two together. I am saying if our budget cannot sustain our Police very well, because we have nearly 20,000 of them, I am saying that the cities and municipalities should try and contribute towards the Police because the policemen cities and municipalities work more. Therefore, they face more hazards than the ones who work up country.  I am saying and it is exactly the same in London that the London policeman gets more money than the up-country Police. If we work together, we will have got a better policeman because you will have better remuneration.  He will therefore, enforce council laws and by-laws and he will be able to force the Penal Code.  

I want us to go a little further than this. The excuse we are giving that government cannot pay the Police enough money is not good enough.  I am saying that we should look around in the budget; where the government is overspending and bring that money and give it to the Police.  Because we all want law and order and therefore we must look at where we are expending excessively.  I want this House to reflect very carefully. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the amount of money which is lost by not bringing cases to courts of law of which money is embezzled and the CIC much as I would want to give them credit, that money could go a long way in paying most policemen rather well.  In fact I would very much want police to be paid very well if we want the security in this country and peace in this country; because without the policeman being paid very well, we will never have genuine peace and therefore the country may not take off quickly economically.  I thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, hon. Members must have received a copy of the duties of some of the security organs especially in case of ISO, I am sorry to be more specific, After writing, it was written down that the duties carried out by ISO are the same in most cases as those done by the CID and Special Branch. And since the budgets for ISO and ESO are so large, if they were reduced and given more to the Police, I think we would retain more law and order.  Why am I saying that? The information I am giving is that we are not yet a super power to involve ourselves into foreign intelligence.  We are not an economic power yet to involve ourselves in industrial espionage.  The amount of money we are spending, if half of it was given to the police force of this country, we would see an impact being felt in the performance of their duties.  

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Members for their information.  However, I would like to go to the other concept, which was proposed yesterday; that within the police and within the law, we should try and find a way we could accommodate a special section that is going to police the policemen. I am a great supporter of this one.  When somebody was saying about brutality a few minutes ago.  Those would be the organs that would make sure that the Police did not violate the freedoms of the people. Now that group we should get them.  In most countries, they are called the internal services in the Police.  I would like to find a small place within the law so that it is included; within the department and we must not send this law out and say we leave it on administration, no. I do not agree. I think we should put it there and as the Minister thereafter when time comes for him to form it.  

But it must be in the law and he must get his best policemen to be on this little group because we know that the Police can use all sorts of methods to try and fight the population. I want to be a little bit more candid.  I do not want to gloss over the issue of intelligence organisation and I think time has come and sometimes if we could get a specialist to tell you. Even the countries that we so respect so much have got more than one intelligence organisation.  All these countries that we talk about, although they are developed, they have had these intelligence organisations for years.  Some of them are not even mentioned publicly.  

So, when you talk about intelligence organisation, we should try and be a little bit more realistic. I do not want us to come and pretend here that Uganda does not require intelligence organisations.  That all the problems we have had, had it not been for our intelligence organisations, we would not have come out of them probably.  Therefore, I do not want us to gloss over the issue of intelligence organisations.  

In the United States, they have the FBI and CIA which are very well known.  But on top of that, they have special branches in every police station. I want to say that this is the same in Britain where they have MI 5, they have MI 6. Not only that, they even have other organisations which are not mentioned.  I do not want us to gloss over these issues. If you think these organisations are not good, let us streamline them but let us not say they have not done a good job. 

I would like to say this, that sometimes when you are in government - and let me finish my point - you must get intelligence information from as many people as you can to be able to get the right information.  Therefore, a country like Uganda can get their information from ISO, from the Special Branch, from ESO, from Military Intelligence and this gentleman who sits on the Security Committee can then sit down and he can amp their strategies much more effectively. (Interruption)

MR DRANI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member who is on the Floor of this House that intelligence organ as far as my knowledge goes are addressing the issue of security. There is a small difference, it is not much but there is a small difference but very, very significant one between security and defence.  You can have an army which is well trained and it can do all the work but the security aspect which must be there at all times has to be addressed by the force which is not necessarily an army.  Therefore, it is justifiable to have an intelligence service but what is important I think is maybe the numbers and the amount of money, which they consume. Maybe, that is where the concern can be.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, it is not that there is total opposition to the phases of these organisations.  We are suggesting that let us have them formally included in our laws so that it is not for each administration that comes in to create one little intelligence force for itself.  Let us have them properly formed.  The ones which the hon. Member is talking about, the CIAs have been there for years and when Governments change, they stay on and incidentally the CIA never spies on Americans.

CAPT. BABU:  Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member. Whilst he says that CIA never spies on America, FBI does and I would like the hon. Member not to confuse this House. Whilst the CIA is an external organ, FBI is an internal organ and some of us have taken trouble, to make sure that we understand how these organs work.  I want to tell him that furthermore, apart from those two which we all know, they have others which we do not know about, which are specially put there to do certain tasks and I would like us to be very careful when we are glossing over this intelligence issue. I have always said that when you are walking over -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  I want the hon. Member to clarify to us.  If these intelligence organs are so secret that we do not know.  How does he know that they exist? (Laughter)

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the issue of security in this country is very delicate, delicate in a sense no government organ has ever known what is happening within the intelligence organ.  Even the Cabinet does not discuss.  It does not know what is even happening.  So in a sense there are actually four governments.  There is this Parliament, there is Cabinet, there is NEC, there is intelligence, which nobody knows what is happening behind.  We only see the results. (Laughter) We only see the results and these results are not subject to - either you end up in Luzira, you end up in many other dubious places without proof and there is no way you can check.  You cannot what they say is final because after all, it is said behind you the victim.  Then you are charged and if you are lucky, you can come back and talk about your fate.  

So, I am saying that secret intelligence should not be special.  I disagree since they are spending public funds, they must be answerable to the Parliament or to certain group.  Because they are supposed to deal with very sensitive matters and security issue is sensitive.  So how do you control internal security for example? But they are spending colossal sums of money. So the information I am giving to Babu, he should not over exaggerate.  One day he will fall into that pit hole.  (Laughter)

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Moses Ali for having given me this information.  I am one of those who agree that we should be suspicious of these bodies; I am the one who agrees that they should be streamlined.  I also agree, that this House should be able - our committee on security should be able to call these committees and ask them what is going on.  I have no objection at all. One hon. member asked me how I got to know.  You have to be interested to do some research.  (Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, whereas the Statute 10 of 1987 created the establishment of security organisations, their constitution, management and functions.  Is it therefore in order for Members of Parliament to turn over and say they do not know an Act they made in this House?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members who made comments about that they were making comments.  They were not confessing ignorance.  So, we are perfectly in order.

MR KAYONGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and the entire House that these organisations were set up in this House and they are very well represented in this House. Hon. Muhwezi in charge of ISO is a Member of this House; hon. Col Kahinda Otaffire is a Member of this House.  If there is any Member who is not satisfied with the performance of any of these organisations, I see here question put by hon. Byabasaija.  I would like to advise that Members do the same that they question those who are concerned about the issues of these organisations; how they perform, whether they perform well or not.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, let me make one point which is very, very important and I finish.  With your permission, I would like to go slightly off the topic now; something important that happened in Thai Town.  We are having a problem.  Some years ago in this House, we passed the Custodian Board Property Resolution.  In that Resolution, we said that we will not disrupt the socio-economic life of our people and that was one of the clauses.  

As I talk right now, new developments have taken place in this country in the name of investment. There are people who have come here, who are genuine, legitimate owners of these buildings and they have got them back. Among those, we have got imposters who have come to this town, set up little estate agents and they are claiming properties even for people who have died.  It is causing so much problem that this morning, in South Street, other people their things were thrown on the street and these people have been doing very good business.  They can even afford to pay for those shops.  But the methods, which are being used, are twisting tactics where they are using all institutions of our government.  

As I finish, I have been sent strictly by my people here that the game that is being played in Kampala is not only annoying but it is beginning to get our people on the wall and our people in 1958, I would like to remind you, did come out with something called the movement and that movement was to fight against Asians. I would not like to see this beautiful peaceful climate, which has been created by this government, to be abused.  Our friends who have come back, who are not the legitimate owners are the worst imposters in this town.  

Furthermore, some of these people are not even genuine citizens of this country.  For some reason, the Immigration Department is on full swing giving everybody who claims to have been a Ugandan citizen Uganda citizenship.  Before I finish, some of these people, although they have been given Uganda passports, they had not relinquished their citizenship with their countries where they have come from.  Most of them have maintained their Canadian Citizenship, they have maintained their British citizenship and they have Uganda Passports in their pockets.  I am saying this, not in the genuine investors.  Among them, we have some very good genuine investors but the genuine investors are very unhappy with this particular group of people. (Interruption)

MR BAMBALIRA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, as a Director of Immigration Control Board that the Immigration Board does not grant citizenship.  The 1984 Act removed the Board to grant citizenship.  That is directly under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is true that the Minister for Internal Affairs grants citizenship.  But the Minister for Internal Affairs does not re-grant citizenship. It is the courts of law that take a decision and give back somebody citizenship status and therefore, it is not at the whims or having had a nice dream that all of a sudden the Minister decides to make an Asian a citizen, who had been here before but that is a legal process which ends up that Asian going through court and succeeding to recover his citizenship. And any denial of signing such a certificate would be a violation of the human right of that particular person.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I just want to quote example of people, one gentleman who owns an estate agency in Kampala has claimed 700 properties.  I want to give you an example. The Indian community, the Asian Indians who went back to India were compensated by the Indian Government. They have as I talk right now, a building on 6 Katonga Road, an Indian who died in India, which has been claimed and has been restyled.  Now these are the kind of things that are going to spoil the name of these people because we are having dubious gentlemen in this town.  There is one man for example, who has gone around claiming all the institutional houses and he has got them now and we would like, therefore, to appeal to all Members including government, to please investigate these things before they get out of hand because our people are being purposely thrown out of these shops and they are being given to people from other parts of the world at a lower price.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Than you very much.   Mr Chairman, before I talk about this Bill, which I am going to support, I would like to mention one important thing concerning retrenchment.  Last week before I left Bushenyi, 52 teachers, some of whom have just qualified and others have been upgraded, received letters of retrenchment from the Ministry of Public Service and I personally went to the District Education Officer to find out what had happened and I was told that the retrenchment is not being carried by the Ministry of Education but is being carried out by the Public Service.  I even got a copy of a letter used to retrench these people and they are supposed to have been retrenched by His Excellency the President using Article 104 of the Uganda Constitution.

This retrenchment does not only affect just the teachers; even the civil servants.  As we talk, civil servants are not concentrating on their jobs because they think that any time they will be retrenched. They are called for interviews and when they come, they are worried.  I would like to propose to the Government, that if retrenchment must be carried, I think , it should be carried out and finished so that those who are left in the Service know that they can continue to work, instead of working with fear each day.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR ALAI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the -(Inaudible)- ever involved in this exercise is too large, and so, the Ministry or the Government is going stage by stage - It cannot be done at ago. Currently, the sort of retrenchment which is actually the laying down the excessive labour is being carried on in conjunction with the restructuring of Civil Service that is going on, but most of the civil servants that have been interviewed; because so many of them have in Service for a long time without being promoted; some of them have been in service for 10 years without even being confirmed.  

So, we are trying to verify the records and put them right.  That is why it is necessary to interview them and get the records, right, get some of them promoted, get some of them actually put - of course in the existing Statute, there has been a lot of problems many of the teachers have been in Service without proper qualification; some of them my not be on record - the way they entered there, the way they have been posted in the schools, we have been checking with the Ministry; some of them are not on the record of the Ministry at all, that is the problem.  How have they been paid? That is how we have discovered so much money was being lost in the Ministry of Education; because the way they were being paid, the way they were entered on the payroll, was not much known. (Interruption)

MR OMADI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, teachers have been counted three times and the names have been submitted to the Ministry of Education; and therefore, the Ministry of Education is aware of the qualification of the teachers.  

Secondly, therefore, the question of retrenchment should not arise at all; if they are retrenched, where are they being sent.  Are they being sent outside Uganda? What are they going to do?  It seems the hon. Deputy Minister for Public Service is completely ignorant of his Ministry. (Applause)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Omadi to use unparliamentary language by referring to the Minister as -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Cries of order.

MR WANENDEYA:  Is it in order, Mr Chairman? (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. member, you have put your point.  Hon. Omadi is saying it seems so he is perfectly in order.  Please, proceed.

MR OMADI: Mr Chairman, I have been in this House much longer than my friend and, therefore, I am quite conversant with the fundamental language. The word ignorant is not unparliamentary.  I said, the Minister is ignorant of what is happening in the Ministry of Education because in my own district there are licensed teachers and, therefore, those teachers had no records except the list was sent the Minister for approval.  If the Ministry of Education does not approve the names of those teachers and licensed teachers it is not the fault of the teacher.  Therefore, the Deputy Minister should liaise with his friend so that he gets to know the teachers who are licensed and those who are qualified.  

There are two things; there are qualified teachers who go through the normal training and come out and they get their number.  There are those teachers who join the teaching section as licensed teachers; those are the school leavers without proper qualifications.  Therefore, the question on saying they do not know how they are paid, they do not know where the teachers came from the Ministry of Education has representatives in every district.  Therefore, he should not be deceived by mere papers in his office; he should go deeper than what he knows now.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Hon. Members, the hon. Tiberondwa as a by the way, hon. Tiberondwa, can you come to the Bill?

DR TIBERONDWA: Thank you Mr Chairman, before I was interrupted by the hon. Deputy Minister whom I would like to thank I only wanted to say on this particular point that we are now creating a new class of people called ‘house husbands.’  We normally have housewives, but we now have many men who have been thrown out of jobs and they are still young, they were qualified in particular jobs and they are now looking after babies at home; the roles have changed. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.  Hon. Member, please come to the Bill.

DR TIBERONDWA: I will come to the Bill.  Mr Chairman, this group of people is referred to in developed countries as househusbands. I wish to congratulate the Uganda Police force for being pro-people and for doing a very, very good job.  I think we should send a signal of thanks to the Police instead of condemning them here and there. It is true they had problems, but on the whole, they have done a very good job and that is why you find that the Police Force continues from one regime to another and to another. But when you come to the Army, when Government comes in, the Army goes, then another one comes in, the same applies to intelligence systems; but the Police have been consistent; they have been pro-people and whether there is a new regime or not, you normally feel very comfortable with the policemen and policewomen wherever you find them. 

I would also like to support my colleague from Kole County, that maybe; they should go back to the blue uniform, because it is more pro-people and more impressive. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that after any Police uniform, which is reasonably smart, is good enough and as far as the Public is concerned, generally speaking, the Uniform is the Police.  I will give you an example, during the World War II, my hon. Member on the Floor might remember, the entire Uganda Police was almost sent to the war and the Government went to Kings College here, got all the boys, put them in uniform and they marched in the streets here and almost the entire public believed police was present.

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information. I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that in fact this is congratulating the Police, then if he insists they go back to the blue uniform, he is anti-them, because we have tsetse flies all over the country and the blue colour attracts tsetse flies -(Laughter)- unless, the hon. Member is suggesting that we should enforce our policemen and women as targets for the tsetse flies for us to control that terrible disease which afflict animals and man.  Thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA:  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for that information, but this is very serious about tsetse flies, I would like to inform her that the NRM Government has worked very hard and tsetse flies have been eradicated. (Laughter) Definitely, they are not in town, and I would like, therefore, on the Bill to propose that these Policemen should be facilitated.  For example, those who work during rains and the night, they have no raincoats, you find them getting wet; all these little things; some of them have no raincoats with covers on top.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to now come to one important thing about the Bill.  I definitely would like to congratulate the Minister and our Committee for the very good job done on the Bill.  They have done a very good job and I think they deserve congratulations.  

There is a Clause, which creates the Police Authority.  I would like to propose that Clause 10 and Clause 11; Clause 10 creates the Police Authority and Clause 11, creates the Police Council.  I think it would be better to have one body; one body that is the Police Council and then, all that is done by the Police and the Police Authority is done by one body. I have personally studied the Draft Constitution of Uganda and it is very, very systematic, they have the Police Council, they have the Prisons Council and they have got the Army Council and they are very well articulated.  In the same bodies, they also have body which deals with appointments A body equivalent to the Public Service Commission, the Teaching Service Commission, and to the Judicial Service Commission, and in the security force, we would also like to the Police Service Commission and the Prisons Service Commission, and these are provided for in the old Constitution and the Draft Constitution.

This Bill does not include the body which is responsible for appointments for recruitment and for promotion.  I am, therefore, proposing introducing a new Clause and a very important Clause here of the Police Service Commission, in fact they call them Police Service boards and once you introduce that one, much of the work which is supposed to be done by the Police Service Board; so that the Policemen do not become judges of themselves, you appoint your selves, you promote yourself, you punish your self when you make a mistake.  It is very difficult.  

So, I would like to ask my colleagues to support the idea of having the Police Service Board responsible for appointments, for promotions, and for disciplining the police; and once you introduce these ones, much of the work which is on the Police Authority could be reduced - almost nothing will be left and you also form the Police Council those jobs which are supposed to deal with appointments and with discipline; since we have too many bodies - the Police Service Board and the Police Council. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information.  I just wanted to inform him that he is the Chairman of the Sectoral and Legal Affairs Committee has advised him not to bring this amendment, because he was party to the discussions during the Sectoral Committee and we agreed that therefore, it is a bit of indiscipline and intransigent for hon. Tiberondwa to bring.

Secondly, the very Section he is quoting says that subject to the Constitution, the functions of the Police Authority will be as follows, subject to the Constitution, that does not stop us from going ahead and passing this law today; because the Constitution he is talking about, is not yet in place and this one we have - and it is a Draft - this one we have discussed with him, but these are in his view, ideas - since he is the famous man, he always says that wisdom did not begin yesterday. So his wisdom only begun I think two days ago on this particular point.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Minister, but I think it is not fair for him to joke on a very serious matter like this one; this is a very serous matter, it is division of responsibility for you to really joke, appoint you self, dismiss yourself rewards, I think the point I am raising is very, very important.  

Also, it is true that I did submit my view to the Committee, it is true but I had not seen their product.  I took my views rather affection and those have been taken care of.  I had assumed that they would not mix these two roles.  So, the fact that I gave my views the Committee does not stop me from sporting some other problems in the Bill; I am still qualified, as indeed I have done. (Interruption)

MR MARWAS:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, it is true hon. Tiberondwa did appear before the Committee.  I wish to inform him that although he is not a Member of the Constituent Assembly like me, I think he should give the Members of the CA to do their own work and whatever laws we are making now, will be subject to the final promulgated Constitution.  It does not mean that any law we are making now could not be affected by the coming Constitution.  So to say, we should go by the provisions of the Draft on my part, I think he is not being serious.  So, we make the laws and we the next Parliament shall amend accordingly after the promulgation of the new Constitution.  Thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, even if we did not have a new Constitution making process going on, I think it is not right for the people to appoint themselves to promote themselves and punish them when they make mistakes.  I am suggesting this one, in its own right, whether thee Constitution is in progress or not.

Clause 28, talks about the police searching a suspect I would like to propose because of the experience we have had; that as much as possible, a local leader such as a chief or village chairman, or RC chairman in the case that we have RCs now, should be involved when there is a search going on, because what has been happening, is that people who do not like you, they search, eventually they tell you that they have found a gun in house; when you did not even know that it was there.  They come with it, search, and tell you that there was something in your house when you did not know; so we had to include a local leader when a search is taking place in a home and finally, the Minister is given power to declare an area, a gazetted area, and to give certain directions in this particular area regarding the number of people who are allowed to hold meetings; and it goes on to say the Minister may declare an area a gazetted area by Statutory Instrument.

I would like to propose that in the course of this Statutory Instrument, this Statutory Instrument be approved by Parliament. Why I am proposing this is that, it is possible that a Minister may decide to gazette an area when Parliament does not know.  It is almost like declaring war; you cause problems in particular areas, for political reasons, without Parliament being involved. (Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Tiberondwa, that the type of Minister, we are talking about in this Bill are those ministers after 1986.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, in the same voice, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that some time back hon. Grace Ibingira was in this House organising a law to arrest other people and he was the first person to go to Luzira and I want to pray for hon. Butime. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Hon. Tiberondwa, please wind up.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, as I wind up, I would also like to comment on one area; it was raised by one of the Members that when we make these laws, we should realise that some individuals can become victims of the laws from time; so that we should not, when making laws think about such people certain people we want to arrest, we should know that these rules and these laws are being made for ourselves, for our children and for posterity.  We should not think about a good Minister now, the bad Minister tomorrow, or a good citizen now, a good citizen tomorrow. Today, you are stopping Michael Kaggwa from addressing a political rally at the City Squire, next day, or next year, it could be the hon. Cosmos Adyebo being stopped from addressing a rally. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, I thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): I would like to add my voice in support of this Bill.  First of all, I would like to join others who have appreciated the contribution by the Police in maintaining law and order; in spite of the very many problems that they have face in doing their job.  In fact, there is no way we can look at the Police; without looking at society in which the police is embedded.  The Police is an institution it reflects weaknesses existing in society.  

Sometimes, I wonder when people stand up and say the police is corrupt as if the policemen stand on a road and corrupt themselves when in fact, policemen are corrupted by the very public they are supposed to defend, they are given money, to overlook certain things by public and sometimes, they very people who do contribute to corruption of the police are the very ones who come and complain.

I want to look at the police in the context of three areas. I would like to first of all make my contribution. I think we are looking at the Police as an instrument of a modern state -(Interruption)

MR OLAL LATIGO:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, knowing very well that the Police has been given an instrument of death, is it in order for the hon. Professor to state that the Police do not coerce at the end, to make the general populace intimidated?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, this reminds me of one important thing - that if you have to make a point of information, please make it, but do not attempt to convert a point of information to a point of order. It becomes an abuse of the processes.  So, the hon. Member is in order, please go ahead.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to look at the police in context of the modern state.  The modern State, until it is tamed to become an instrument of the people is a very coercive institution - is a very coercive machinery.  So, I hope when we are taming one of the organs of that State - the Police.  

So, we have to be very clear that we are dealing already with something that is coercive and it is part and parcel of a modern growth; we cannot walk away from it, we live in modern state. Now the question is how to tame it and tame it properly.  On the one hand you cannot say - I am not going to do with the police; you will be too a historical but at the same time if you have a police that is contrary to the modern values, then you are also contrary to the society. 

Secondly, in that modern state, we have the whole concept of justice.  Now, traditionally pre-state societies, had justice but it was based on different procedures.  There were different instruments and so on.  Now, we are talking of a Police, which would be equipped, which will be in a position to help the administration of justice in society.  Now, do we allow the Police to disperse a mob? By definition, a mob is contrary to order.  Do you disperse an illegal meeting?  By definition, an illegal meeting has gone contrary to law.  Now, if the law is good, and a mob or an organisation or group goes contrary to that law, the police must be in a position to disperse that law legally.  Now, so if we do not have the right law and we are trying to make good laws in this House; if we do not have the right law, then the Police must not be - it is difficult to judge it.  You will not judge a Police if you do not have the right law.  

Now, if the law is very clear, and it is just law and it is law that is for people, any group that may come up which is anti people will then be defended under the law as the police will be defended under the law.  So, I think more than focus on the Police as such, we must focus on the quality of the law. The law that we pass, the extent to which that law is pro-people which the Police is supposed to implement in the name of justice.  

The next area that I think we should look at is modern crime.  Some people are saying - oh yes, why should we have these investigative organisations. As if to run a modern state is an easy affair.  Surely you could be lying here in today’s Uganda.  You could be sitting here, as we are sitting in this House and somewhere someone sitting in Alaska is actually even observing whether one has a jigger in one’s foot inside the shoe. That is modern knowledge now.  Many of us who watched the recent World Cup, could see how the whole world could be focusing on one football ground to a minority.  

Now, we are saying it is only those super states, which should be involved in investigating, and yet we are all trying to run modern states.  We cannot be serous, we must have those machineries, however inadequately equipped - we must attempt to be able to fight against certain types of crime.  Take for example, I have read it in the newspapers that this county, Entebbe Airport is beginning to be a conduit for drugs.  Now, people even swallow some of these drugs and transport them in their stomachs. Now, if you do not have people who are specialised in undressing people, even to see inside them, you will never control that crime.  So, it may be inconvenient but the extent to which crime is sophisticated, the investigative machinery the Police must be sophisticated equally.

Lastly, the Police must be seen in the contest of modern society.  We are citizens of Uganda.  To what extent are we socially responsible to assist the Police in their job? To what extent are we, in fact, crime proof, not to need the interference of the police interfering in our own homes? We are saying even in Ssese, the Ssese people are known to drop people who are supposed to be criminals into the lake without any procedure of following justice.  So, I am not so sure that my friend here from Kalangala belongs to a modern society. (Interruption)

MISS NAMUGENYI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I think it is unfair for the hon. Member holding the Floor to make a statement in this House, that Ssese people throw people in the Lake.  Can he please clarify it?  Even in the past, let him clarify it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, I am relying on the observations made by our friend here, the hon. Member from the area who says that the Police is irrelevant in that area, and as a Ugandan  -(Laughter)- I am very much aware of what goes on in this country. I do not believe that, that area is created so specially as to be crime free because those who come from the islands, when they come here and sit in this House, I see them breathing the same air and behaving in the same way like all of us; so I am not so sure that crime there does not exist.  I was talking about the context of modern society.  

The responsibilities of the citizen and it is on that point of view that I want to alert which I have fortunately done already informally, to the Minister responsible for the Bill; that there is something missing in the Bill - to handle citizens who observe crimes being committed and do nothing. There is nothing in this Bill - from what I have seen to ascertain.  If you are watching a crime committed, and you do not do anything about it, is that not a crime?  There is a provision, but I think there should be some direct hint and a punishment.   (Interjections) I am talking of a modern society and even modern society, people are supposed to be responsible.  We are supposed to be so responsible and jealous for your freedom that nobody should interfere with it.  

Now, if anybody is interfering with the freedom of others, it should be a matter that concerns you intimately, Watching a crime being committed, must be a concern for every citizen and therefore, reporting it must be a necessary condition for normal behaviour.  If you do not do that, I think he should be punished.  Because the cohesiveness of the state becomes very rough if the citizens are not armed against it.  We are doing something now - in this country; trying to tame the state by enhancing the sovereignty of the people.  

So, equally, if the citizens are not conscious of their own role in combating say, crime and so on and, therefore, assisting every action against crime, they will not be able to take the state against them.  Here I welcome the point by hon. Adonia Tiberondwa where he says, perhaps if you are going to enter somebody’s premises even though you have a warrant, perhaps this should be witnessed by a local authority. I think this is good. I think it is a good idea that as justice is being done, that the citizens should see that it is being done instead of leaving it to a policeman who may have come from outside the area and may even go and enter a House wrongly and actually cause confusion an even hurt a person who is not supposed to be hurt. So, I believe that this is a very welcome idea. That is even if there is, in the Penal Code, this whole question of the responsibility of a citizen; I would want even the policeman to feel armed with a participation of the citizen, in combating crime. (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I do not wish to interrupt the hon. Professor who is distinguished learned man in social sciences, but as he talks of a modern state, if I may pick just on one - the United States; it is relatively a tamed society and yet the American people have rejected the idea of being forced to report on one another because, whether they have created a Police State and as such I would pray, as him to consider the State Police motivating the population to report voluntarily, not compulsorily and punishable when you do not report any such crime. (Applause) 

What he asked about the Ssese Islands, again in the pre-state formation, the society sustained itself and motivated itself and worked against crime.  Perhaps the people of Ssese Islands, being still less than 15,000 people in a whole district - they say we do not need a police station maybe.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, the other information which I want to give Prof. Kabwegyere is that, he should also consider a purpose of a detective.  A detective’s job is to arrest a suspect without that suspect being suspicious about being arrested and the police may come from far, as you did say to go and arrest a person at a certain village.  The problem is - if they have to inform the local authority in that village, it is possible that, that person may run away before he is apprehended and the job of the policeman will fail there.  

So, you should consider all those things; that the main point is to arrest the suspect. But not to have the paraphernalia of how one enters the village and the drums they have, you arrest them, which is not the issue.  The issue is to arrest the person and if that one can b done, with collaboration with the RC official of the area, well an good but if the Police Detective feels that he can do it without being accompanied, then that one should be left to be.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  I welcome contributions for hon. Gasatura; but hon. Gasatura is still talking from above motivating the people.  Suppose now, somewhere they would be the wise ones who sit down and go and motivate the people to do it voluntarily.  That is again still a problem.  If you are talking of the people having the values - the very values.  In America, you remember this crime in California where they were beating this black man.  Now, a voluntary person with his own camera takes a photograph and takes a film of the whole thing and the film becomes evidence in the case against the police.  

Now, that is the participation of the people voluntarily but already knowing that the Police beating the citizen is no good.  Equally there was a case in that plane clash in Britain; where again a private individual in his home was able to record the noise and even take photographs of what was happening, which assisted in investigation.  Now, this is the modern state we are talking about.  The modern society that is already permeated with certain values, which help the society itself to move.  

Now, this man who takes his own camera and makes a photograph, he is not told by anybody, he is not even given money at the end of it but society rewards him by recognises his contribution.  Now, this is part and parcel of the modern values, which we must build a din which context we assist the police, for the Police to run efficiently.  

Therefore, this question of hon. Butime - of how does the detective do his job without causing unnecessary stir in the community?  I think if the RC System worked very well and the Secretary for Defence was as efficient as he should be, then coming to the Secretary of Defence, who should have a familiar knowledge of his area, we would be entering through the right channel and that person would not be able to vet for the escape of that person because he would be part of the security system. Otherwise -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  The information I would like to give about that aspect is this - in actual fact, in some cases, those local members of society can do that.  We had a case recently where some people went and hired a policeman. They came with a sharpened knife, came to a house of an old man in a place called Kikuto.  The RC system in the area had not been informed. They came with policemen, entered the house and then left that Panga in that house saying that this man had a Panga, which he wanted to use against another citizen. In that case, the RC system helped because the chap who knew that, that man never actually live to buy even a big knife was the only defence that they lied upon.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much for the contributions.  Now, this is precisely why the nature of society, the quality of society, and the quality of citizens is very much relevant to the working and success of the Police.  So, sometimes we are very unfair as if the policemen are not our children, they are not our brothers, they are not our wives, they are not our husbands.  We seem to think, they are there; then we want them - like I was corresponding with hon. Ongom. The Policeman should not use excessive force but what if it is used against him?  What happens? Who redresses him who has been killed in dispersing a mob?  We had our policemen killed here during the Tabliqs.  Who is supposed to compensate? (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the sentiments of hon. Prof. Kabwegyere about the possibilities the policeman himself trying to defend him and maybe dying.  What hon. Ongom was saying was that we should not give the Policeman a gigantic cheque to kill.  It is stated in this law that if he causes death, no problem. What hon. Ongom was saying was that if it is proved that it was necessary to use force to kill then this man would be free but if he goes knowing that killing is not a problem, then he will find no problem in killing.  In other words, he should be able to prove afterwards that this man killed because there was no other way; but for him to know very well that he has got a licence to kill, he can kill without worrying about it. (Applause)

MR ASIKU:  Point of information. I would like to give more information on these guidelines which are given to the Policeman are things which think are reasonable.  It is very difficult in a mob; a mob that has stones and Pangas and a policeman is there.  These pangas are used to kill.  The stones will be used for damage; the mob is already there.  I do not know in which way you would you ask the policeman to be so patient and probably he is hurt and when he is about to die, he says, I must defend myself.  Physically, I see it impossible.  

We are providing a law thinking that all sensible groups of people particularly the Police would know at this particular time, I think it is the stage of action, it is a stage where I must react, otherwise, it will be too late.  We cannot just simply say let us make a law which does not give the policeman the right to defend themselves.  It is so miserable.  You recall what happened here really. I could not see how a policeman is going to be compensated by this state and his family is going to suffer, in that when doing some national service, some mad guys decide to kill him and because he thought he had followed the law until he finds himself in danger, which in actual fact, he was very late.  Thank you very much.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  This question of a policeman carrying arms and policemen defending themselves.  I think we should take a chapter from other parts of the world.  As I talk right now, there used to be only one police in the world that never carried arms and that was the British Police.  Today, not only do they only do they carry arms, they are armed to their teeth.  Why? Because society so demands that they are armed.  People are being killed, people are throwing bombs around, people are having urban terrorism all over the world.  What I am trying to say - as we talk, we should not pretend that we are not part of the global village, we are in a modern society and in countries like United States, as I talk now, in a place like New York, every one minute there are three people dying.  In Chicago, every three minutes, a woman is being raped. We cannot continue pretending that these things are not going to happen to our

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, the interventions given show that we certainly have to be clear about the type of society in which we are operating.  Hon. Babu is right; obviously, the more the society becomes sophisticated, the more the crimes are sophisticated and the more the means of quarrying crimes must be sophisticated; but to inform hon. Tiberondwa - when I corresponded with hon. Ongom, I think he understood me better.  He said; thank you for your note; my point is that when death or injury occurs, as a result of police action, the Police Officer concerned should be taken to a task to explain how and why it happened.  But when he dies, who is supposed to answer? 

Now, he goes on ‘I certainly do not say that policemen should not use force when necessary, I agree with that.  Now, if a mob he goes on; kill is a policeman, I should think somebody in the crowd should be isolate and treated accordingly. Now, if it is a mob or a crowd, and you are going to identify who has killed, I wish we knew those who chopped our policemen here.  So, I leave the whole question; here is the extent to which the policeman is able to help the administration of justice.  

Lastly and in conclusion, if our society is properly managed, if the law is in place and the law is pro-people, if the values of modern society percolate into thee very baseline of our society; in other words, everybody is aware, ideally, the police will do minimum job. People who taught success in the United States, I think show less information than is necessarily.  The American Society is among the most violent and the most unfair society in the world, with at the moment as we talk, more than 30,000,000 living below their poverty line but many of us here are fascinated by America.  America is not even necessarily doing the greatest in the world today but  -(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I wanted to give the Professor is that as he says, the American society is so violent that even the Law governing firearms has been changed.  There is a new law called the Bradely Legislation; whereby, unlike any time before, today you cannot walk to a shop and buy a firearm.  You make an application, you indicate you want to buy, an investigation is made about you, you go back after two weeks and you are told whether you should buy not.  All this is to control but before you could walk to any shop and buy and go.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. I just wanted to inform the hon. Minister that in actual fact, the violent society is resisting that preposition at the moment. They have resisted it, which confirms they want to go on still appealing to them to see sense, even today, this morning, the was still appealing to his people that buying guns like you buy chewing gum is wrong!

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Therefore, in addition to all this, I conclude as follows; let us base our society on the right values and the police and the family because the family is very important indeed; and the army and other institutions in society will then follow a trend that will produce a society that is tolerant.  That is able to handle crisis with minimum force. I thank you.

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(Council rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)






