Thursday, 18 August 2011 

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and I would just want to appeal to you to work expeditiously so that we conclude the business we planned for today, because we need to start on the budget debate on Tuesday. Thank you.  

2.31
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, my Members were trying to rise up because they have issues, which they were asked to substantiate and I think they have brought the documents which they want to lay on Table, one of which, the Deputy Leader of Government Business wanted and my chief whip has brought and the other one which is about foreign affairs, my shadow minister for foreign affairs has also brought it.

In the meantime, I have a small personal statement which I need to make, with your indulgence, of an incident that took place yesterday in the afternoon when I left.

I received an invitation from hon. Ibrahim Semujju to attend a public rally at Kireka trading centre, which is his constituency. The rally was to address the current economic crisis in the country and to pray for Ugandans killed by Police during the Walk-to-Work campaign this year. Hon. Semujju informed me that he had notified Police in writing about his intention to speak to his constituents. In fact, he had held a meeting with senior police officers led by the Kampala Metropolitan Commander, Grace Turyagumanawe at Police headquarters, a day to the rally. The Police, I have learnt, asked hon. Semujju to shift the rally from the taxi park to Kireka PWD Rehabilitation Centre. 

Police had sadly confiscated the public address system to be used at the rally claiming that inviting people to the MP’s meeting would be incitement. Four people, who were operating the public address system, were also detained overnight at Kireka police. 

I arrived at Kireka at 2.00p.m. to attend the rally. I was received by the host and he briefed me that the rally had been shifted to Kireka Rehabilitation Centre and some of his aides had gone to retrieve the public address system to be returned. 

As I got this briefing, Police, unprovoked by anyone, started firing live ammunition and teargas in the air. Little did I know that the firing of teargas and bullets was to disperse the population to give them a clear view of me so that they can sprinkle me with a pink liquid! I was drenched together with hon. Semujju, Moses Kasibante and Nangabo, Tony Sempebwa, the LC3 Chairman. Senior police officers could be heard, and have been captured on TV, quarrelling and wondering who had ordered the shooting and release of this water whose content we must investigate.

As a result, my body is paining and itching. Despite numerous washings of my body, it has remained pink. In fact, generally, I am sick. All my clothes are pink and I am going to deliver them to Parliament as an exhibit. This House deserves an explanation as to why Police employed and have recently resorted to excessive use of force and brutality to disperse peaceful gatherings. We must be informed whether holding a public rally is a crime or it is the Leader of Opposition who must not attend them. Since the senior officers did not know, since they were quarrelling over who had ordered the spraying and firing of the teargas - this incident and similar others must be thoroughly investigated and the government needs to give an answer.

The government must apologise to us, the people of Kireka and the entire country, for infringing on their rights. The government must also explain why they mounted roadblocks and prevented numerous citizens from accessing the venue of the rally. 

The coloured water must be investigated to find out the content and its effect to life. Police must, through its line ministry, explain whether it is still relevant to be notified of any meeting. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the government will probably say something but I also want to seek an explanation from you about your breach of Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure. I deployed the Members of Parliament to go to the sessional committees. Hon. Semujju Nganda did not have my authority to be away from the sittings of the Parliament or of the committees. So, you are in breach of Rule 96.

I want to know why you went to organise work outside Parliament without my leave. And I also want to know why the Leader of Opposition encouraged the honourable member to breach the Rules of Procedure and endorsed his action by going there. You are supposed to write to me to tell me why you are not coming to the House. As far as I am concerned, I deployed you to go to work in a sessional committee. So, I will want an explanation about that.

2.38
MR IBRAHIM SEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually right now coming from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, and I have been attending meetings of both the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and National Economy. But you will forgive me sometimes my constituents will want to have their views represented in both meetings of committees, and Parliament and the only way I can speak to them is by asking them and telling them what is happening in the committees and in plenary. In fact, the intention of organising a rally was to deal with very crucial matters before our committee: matters of roads and urban planning and the people of Kireka will certainly be affected by any physical planning in that area. 

I did not know that by asking them to come around and we discuss their input in the committee work, I was infringing on the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. If I did so, I beg to say I am sorry. Next time, I will inform you. And you can forgive some of us who are new here because we are just learning some of these things. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I have no problem with you consulting your electorate, but you cannot consult them in parliamentary time without my leave. Whether you are telling them about your committee, you should have written to me saying that on Wednesday you would not be in the House because of a, b and c. And I must give you leave if I am satisfied about your reasons for going. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am aware of the rule you have quoted and my Members always attend committees. That rule says: “Where any Member alleged to have infringed sub-rule (5) persists in absenting himself/herself from sitting -”. Hon. Ssemujju has not persistently absented himself. And as the Leader of the Opposition, I do not need to get permission from you to go and attend a rally. If it is there in the rules, I need to know it. 

I also need clarification. If I infringe on any rule, should that mean that Police should come and spray me and the people who are there? I think the first thing that should be done is to determine who is in the wrong. 

Madam Speaker, if you speak like this, it means you are in support of the Police who sprayed at me and the other Members who were there, and I do not think that was right. 

Having said that, my Members are always present and are always supportive of parliamentary activities. Besides, consulting with our constituents is part of committee work.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do not divert the issue. Rule 96 reads as follows: “Every Member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker.” And that is what I am asking. 

I said that I will ask Government to answer, but I also have my issues about Members organising activities that compete with the work of Parliament without my knowledge. 

2.42
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen.(rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to say sorry for the delay of the arrival of the Minister of Internal Affairs. But I have spoken to him and he is coming. He is about to arrive to answer the issues raised. 

I am not aware of this matter. It was only this morning that I saw the Leader of the Opposition somewhere in the corner of a newspaper. I did not even know that it was him until I saw his back part. (Laughter) 

I think these are the kind of things we should avoid at times - but I do not want to involve myself much in that because the minister responsible is going to come and explain the circumstance that led to this problem. So, with your permission, Madam Speaker, I beg that House carries on with other business until the minister comes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we stand over that matter until the Minister of Internal Affairs comes. 

2.44
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the 16th of this month, I rose here on a matter of national importance. It was regarding an organisation called Payment Solutions Uganda, which was deducting money from civil servants and I asked for an explanation from the Minister of Public Service on who owns this organisation, and what remedies they have for the public servants who earn very little yet a lot is being deducted from them. 

I was asked to present evidence to this House. I beg to lay on Table the payment schedule of one of the civil servants from Barclays Bank to that effect. He is a police officer called Atuhe Andrew; he earns a salary of Shs 260,000. He asked for a loan of Shs 4.2 million. Payment Solution Uganda received a charge from him of Shs 177,338 out of the loan he asked for. I beg to lay. 

The other person is a nursing assistant who earns a salary of 237,000. She asked for a loan of Shs 3,700,000. Payment Solutions Uganda charged the nursing assistant Shs 159,662. I beg to lay that on Table and I request that Government takes the appropriate means to let us know who takes that money and let us know how the association came into being.

2.47
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While contributing on the State of the National Address by the President, I restricted myself to the foreign affairs docket, which I hold and I raised important issues that concern that ministry. I did this because the President has always talked of professionalism. 

I brought out this issue because these are the people who represent this country abroad. They face a lot of difficulties. I talked about the nuclear reactor problem in Japan; I talked about the bullets in Libya. I raised issues that are of great importance to this ministry because I did not want unprofessional people to wash their dirty linen that would embarrass us abroad. I have met some of these people and I think some do not match the standards of foreign service officers that should represent this nation abroad. I did not want Uganda to be embarrassed, and that is why I raised the issue of unprofessionalism, which the President has talked about a number of times. 

I said that the President’s Office has extended its hand in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There are many people who have been brought into the foreign service and they are not foreign service officers. The foreign service officers are seated here in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs very frustrated. Some of the political appointees are even paid two salaries: they get a salary at home and a salary abroad and these career foreign service officers are looking on very frustrated. 

I was asked to lay the list on Table. I have ticked the list of political appointees, who are serving in missions and are not career diplomats. I beg to lay on Table.

As if that was not enough, even at the headquarters, there are many political appointees and they have also been made heads of department. I also beg to lay this list on Table. I have ticked all those political appointees. I thank you.

2.50
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance, which has happened in my district. We have got an outbreak of rabies. In the last two weeks, about 100 people have been bitten by dogs. Out of the 100 people, 12 have died. A letter was written by the LC V chairman and the director of health services to the Ministry of Health and another one to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come to our rescue but up to now a slow response has been given. 

Since the dogs, which are in the district, are not immunised and they are continuously biting my people, I request that Government puts up a method of shooting them so that they all die off and we get others which are okay. Or the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries immunises them very fast so that the problem reduces. We have a very big challenge. We share a border with Congo; sometimes, the animals cross the river from Congo to Bundibugyo. Sometimes, they are uncontrollable. We may not know whose dog is causing havoc because most of the affected sub-counties are near the border. 

Since rabies is an outbreak which cannot be prevented, I wish that an anti-rabies treatment or vaccine be sent to Bundibugyo District so that we have it in store. Currently, the affected people are rushed to Kabarole Referral Hospital. By the time they move from Bundibugyo to Kabarole, on our terrain and the bad roads, some of them die on the way. Since they are working on the road, - yesterday but one, when they were taking other people to Kabarole, they found that the Chinese had already put all the heavy stones in the road. After about four hours, the two died.

So, it is a very big problem to the district. I thought I should not keep quiet. I should inform the nation that I have a problem and we seek a solution from you, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who can answer that. 

2.54
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the colleague for raising this very important matter. I would like to assure my colleague that rabies is preventable by vaccinating pets. It is majorly transmitted by canine pets. 

The issue of control of rabies in this country goes hand in hand with the outcry that Members of Parliament have often raised about disease control. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, specifically the Department of Livestock Health and Entomology, is grossly under-funded. 

What we require now is mass vaccination of these pets, especially dogs and cats. There is a big shortage of vaccines. Even when they are available, there is no requisite funding to enable the staff administer the doses. 

I would like to inform colleagues and the entire country that in case of a dog bite, in case of a bite by a suspected rabid animal, the immediate first aid is to wash the site of the bite with a lot of soap and water to reduce the viral load. It is transmitted by a virus. That virus moves to the centre of the brain via nerves. It is not through the blood stream. It goes through the nerves and so, sometimes upon being bitten by a dog, people desperately tie the proximal end of the bitten area as if it will be travelling through the blood stream. No, it is only for poisonous snake bites that you can tie a tiny knot. But for a suspected rabid dog bite, you need to wash the site with a lot of water and soap and immediately take the patient to the nearest heath centre hopefully to get an anti-rabies vaccine, which is also a dream in this country.

I would like to call for serious network between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries over this matter. It is not limited to her district; this is a serious problem that our country requires to address head on. I would like to thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we get commitment? 

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add on to what the colleague there has said from a professional point of view. My job is to coordinate the information that happened yesterday. I was talking to Dr Winnie Kaboyo, who is a member of the National Taskforce on Pandemic Influenza. They have already set up a team for every district to liaise with the district medical officers, to document these cases and work together with different taskforces to see what the district can do and when the report should go to the ministry. 

They were also acknowledging the same problem which he has talked about; lack of adequate medicine for treatment. But those precautionary measures should be taken from both sides. The owners of the dogs and the cats must watch out and report them to the veterinary or district medical officers. The chair of this person is the chief administrative officer of every district. He is the chairman of the district disaster committee. All this is linked through the CAO and the district health officer of every district.
 
I would like the Members of Parliament to work with these people so that some of the reports could be treated as an emergency, sent to the Ministry of Health, then they can easily coordinate and treat some of the cases while they wait for the adequate position. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the valuable information. Where is the Minister of Health? Can we get a commitment to assist the people of Bundibugyo?         

HON. MEMBERS: They are not here.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is definitely no mistaking, I am not the Minister of Health, my name is Alice Alaso and I represent Serere District. I wanted to add that what is going on in Bundibugyo is going on more or less countrywide. The rabies vaccine is not there. What happens in Serere is that when a dog bites a person, we have to transport them up to Tororo. There is a hospital in Tororo where, if you are lucky and God is on your side, you might find the vaccine. Otherwise, the rest of the country doesn’t have this vaccine. And I think this matter is very serious. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is anybody willing to bail the cat on this issue? Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister say something about this serious situation? Rabies may be in Adjumani as well.

3.00
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, since this is a very serious matter, I think we will insist that the minister comes with details and explains to the House. Otherwise, I do not want to - (Laughter) - annoy my colleagues. Thank you. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, fortunately enough, the Minister of State for Health has come, though he has not been briefed on what is been on the Floor. The matter that we are talking about is a serious national problem that would require Government to act expeditiously. In fact, we needed a timeframe within which Government would come up with a statement. Otherwise, if we just leave it hanging, I am wondering how we shall help address the situation that is actually very urgent.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, for your benefit, hon. Ntabazi raised a problem in Bundibugyo about rabies, and people have died. Other Members are saying it is not just in Bundibugyo but it is a national problem and there are no vaccines in the country. Ok, let’s hear from Kalungu.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you. I want to thank the honourable member for Bundibugyo but again, even if we treat rabies, if these dogs are left to move everywhere, there is a problem.

Right now in Uganda, dogs do not have any restriction at their homes. I would be “happy” being bitten by a dog if I encroached its area of influence where it is guarding. But you find dogs moving everywhere. I would like to give you an example. In the past month, I have knocked two dogs, and I would like the Ministry of Health to come out seriously with laws governing these dogs. If you cannot manage to look after your dog or keep it within the perimeter of your home, then there will be a problem. 

So, as we fight rabies, we should also see how the owners of these dogs keep such pets at home, including cows because they move about everywhere. Even if a dog might not have rabies, once it bites you, you develop a wound. I think that should be given some attention. 

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Ssewungu is asking for a serious dog policy. (Laughter) 

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to apologise for coming in a bit late after my colleague from Bundibugyo had made her presentation. However, the information I have is, officially, there is an outbreak of rabies in the district of Bundibugyo. However, we have vaccines – I do not know where this information is coming from that we do not have vaccines. We have vaccines both for humans and animals. And – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I do not know where this vaccine is. I was in Soroti and a child was brought all the way from Lira for vaccination in a private clinic, Soroti Joint Clinic. The whole of Lango and Teso does not have a vaccine except in that private clinic. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, maybe you could tell us where exactly the drugs are.

MR PETER LOKII: Madam Speaker, it may be true that there are vaccines in this country. In the case of Kotido, where the vaccine exists, people have to pay Shs 15,000 for every injection. This is the case in health units of NGOs like Church of Uganda, which are supported by Government. I think something needs to be clarified on this. 

DR NDUHURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the information they are tendering. What I can confirm is that, we have rabies vaccines at National Medical Stores. However, this vaccine is delivered on request. It is not just like any other medicines that we take to the districts. When there is an outbreak and the DHO reports and requests for vaccines, they are delivered. 

In the case of Bundibugyo, the information I have officially is that vaccination is already ongoing. So, unless my officials from the Department of Epidemiological Surveillance are not telling the truth, and this is in writing, I would have to check on this. Otherwise, there is vaccination of dogs in Bundibugyo. There is a sub-county called Wabukwanga and others where that exercise is ongoing. 

If there are other districts where there are outbreaks, I would only be receiving that information now. I can only undertake to go and check the facts and then get back to you. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But minister, what is the rationale of keeping the medicine in the National Medical Stores? Why don’t you send it to the district hospitals? 

DR NDUHURA: The rationale, Madam Speaker, is that this vaccine is expensive. Therefore, you do not simply take it to districts to wait for outbreaks. However, the moment an outbreak of rabies is reported, the vaccine is availed. This vaccine -(Interruption)

DR BAYIGA: The Minister of State for Health is talking about outbreaks. Rabies is not a disease that comes in terms of outbreaks because it comes after a bite from an infected animal, and it is very difficult to detect which animals have rabies and which ones do not.  

We have had several instances when animals bite children or adults and they end up catching rabies and they die. We have also had opportunities in clinical practice where people bitten by infected animals, particularly dogs, are vaccinated but they end up catching rabies which means that some of these drugs may either be expired or they may not be effective- (Interjections) – yes, this is an observation that we have made in clinical practice, so we cannot think about waiting for information about an outbreak of rabies as if it is an outbreak of jiggers like we saw in the last few months. It cannot be. 

What we need to understand from the minister is whether we can have a catalogue of various hospitals with the equipment, where this vaccine can be transferred and where Members of Parliament and leaders can refer patients to knowing that such and such hospitals are equipped and they can have these vaccines ready for vaccination of people, who have been bitten by suspicious animals. Otherwise, if we are going to wait for National Medical Stores to deliver vaccines to such and such hospitals in the whole of Uganda, it will be irresponsibility of the highest order of the Ministry of Health if at all this is not done. 

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a saying that prevention is better than cure. The dogs have now caused a security threat to us. We cannot move freely and when we see dogs we get afraid. My suggestion here is that since the saying goes that prevention is better than cure, let the veterinary department liaise with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and get rid of all stray dogs in the country. That is why I am saying that prevention is better than cure. Thank you very much. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues and add my voice to this. My statement is in connection to what an honourable member from that side said, concerning the cost of treating anybody who has been bitten by a rabid dog. My colleagues here have also mentioned that for one to get the treatment, you need to part with about Shs 120,000 which is way above the cost of living of the rural people. 

In Arua, I have personally been witnessing this. Many times they come to the director of health services to get recommendations to go and purchase or be able to access the vaccines. But the district is all the time out of stock of these vaccines, and so they are referred to the nearest hospital which is private but not for profit, that is, Kuluva Hospital where one has got to engage either an ambulance and upon reaching there, part with some money. I am sure the cost is close to what my brothers have been saying. I am not sure what they are charging now. 

So, the clarification I would like to get from the honourable minister is whether Ugandans must be subjected to these costs when they are paying taxes. We know when you buy sugar, salt or soap you are paying taxes. On top of these taxes you are again mandated to pay for the vaccines? Because we think these are supposed to be free services to our citizens. But a Member said citizens are charged Shs 15,000 in government hospitals. Thank you.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable minister what really happens down there in the villages. Through knowledge and experience, the people themselves know that whenever there is a dog bite, certainly this person is going to catch rabies. So, what happens is that when there is a dog bite they start - if it happens in Lwabenge, where it usually happens, they take these people to Masaka and normally there is nothing in Masaka. Hence, they are told to take this person to Entebbe. Personally, I have transported so many. I do not even remember in my career how many people I have transported to Entebbe for this vaccination. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister said that the drugs are expensive but life lost is more expensive than the drugs. (Applause) As Government, our primary role is to save people’s lives. Therefore, we need to take the prime responsibility and take the vaccine to the health centres because if we wait until the outbreak of the epidemic, we increase the burden. One of the major challenges that we face in this country is lack of pro-activeness. The outbreak of diseases is not a new thing. It has been happening but what have we learnt from it? Why don’t we plan to be proactive before we lose more energy and other resources? Thank you.

DR NDUHURA: Madam Speaker, I may not have made myself very clear when I mentioned that vaccines are expensive. This was in the context of pushing vaccines to areas where they may not be needed and they end up expiring. That is the context in which I put this- (Interjections)- No I am not saying that we should leave them at National Medical Stores but it is very difficult once you have distributed these vaccines, let us say equally- assuming that you are going to have disease A, B, and C and then you push these drugs or medicines to those areas, you may get another area which actually needs more and recalling these medicines or items from the particular area where they are less needed is very difficult. That is why we have this policy- (Hon. Omolo rose_) - let me be very clear now. I want to be very clear this time round. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister finish.

MR OMOLO: I rarely speak. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Omolo.

MR OMOLO: Madam Speaker, I would like a clarification from the minister. My understanding is that there are two vaccines: one for rabies and the other, the anti-rabies. Which one do you have in store? 

And two, I am not impressed when you say you have to wait for an outbreak of rabies before you begin vaccinating. You might end up vaccinating dogs, which are already infected. My understanding is that to handle viral diseases very well, we have to do routine vaccination year in year out. But when you wait for a situation to erupt then you begin to vaccinate, this is fire brigading which I have always talked against. Do not do fire brigading; do routine vaccination for all viral diseases in the country so that you will be able to control the diseases. Thank you. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, I want to find out if the national referral hospital at Mulago does not keep the anti-rabies vaccine in stock? From what people have been saying, if you are bitten by a dog even here in Kampala, you have to be driven to Entebbe. But given that Mulago is a national referral hospital, I would expect the anti-rabies vaccine to be there – just some minimum quantities. Thank you.

DR NDUHURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether the people who go to Entebbe go there for medication from the National Medical Stores or from Entebbe Hospital, because if you have been bitten by a dog and you go to the National Medical Stores you will definitely not be treated there, unless you are talking about the Entebbe Hospital.

Now, all hospitals – regional referral hospitals, the general hospitals and health centre IVs – are free to order for the medicines and other items of their choice. In other words, we do not push medicines to those health facilities; it is only health centre IIs and health IIIs where we have a basic kit and this is very well known. For the rest, we supply on order. So, you will find that if that particular hospital does not have that vaccine as an item in their order, they will definitely not get it. However, the advice I am getting from colleagues here is that we prevail on these other health facilities so that they order for the anti-rabies vaccines and have them stocked. 

I am not going to talk for my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but the vaccination of dogs and other animals falls under his sector.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. The information I am giving is that whereas we have very good laws in Uganda, the problem is that we do not enforce them. In the 1960S, specific laws were written concerning keeping animals like dogs. I am a law enforcer myself – before I came to Parliament, I was a law enforcer in Mukono Town Council. The Urban Authority Rules provide that for anybody to keep a dog, that dog must wear a badge with its name and the owner’s name. Since keeping of dogs is generally a luxury, you are not supposed to keep a dog which you cannot afford to look after. Otherwise, you can even be charged for being cruel to that dog and in some countries, there are even homes for ill-treated dogs. When I was in South Africa, I discovered that there is a home for dogs where people can go and adopt those, which were removed from the owners who mistreated them.

So, it is really up to the owner of the dog to make sure that it is vaccinated. But the problem is that we have the laws in place but they are not enforced. I would like to request the Leader of Government Business - because he is responsible for all these ministers – that through the Minister of Local Government, a circular be sent to all districts and urban authorities to inform all dog owners to take responsibility as provided for in the law and that stray dogs and cats will be destroyed. 

DR NDUHURA: Madam Speaker, I am ending with an appeal, especially to my colleague from Bundibugyo because the report I have is that despite the district having the vaccine, people are not bringing the dogs for vaccination. So, the appeal I am making to her is to work together with the local leaders – both civil and political – to make sure they mobilise the people – (Ms Taaka rose_)

DR NDUHURA: Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it seems you are allowing some while others – (Laughter) - since you allowed hon. Nambooze, please allow hon. Taaka also to inform you.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the minister that there are no drugs in the National Medical Stores because even a few minutes ago, I consulted my DDHS and he says there are no anti-rabies vaccines in the whole of Busia. This requisition he was talking about was given six months earlier and up to today they have not received even a single dose.

Moreover, Busia has been serving several districts including people coming from Pallisa, Tororo and Mbale. And you know that Busia is a border district. So, we have even patients from Kenya. Rabies is not just a national but regional issue since dogs cross over.

As much as health centre IIs and IIIs can get drugs, the rest make requisitions but have never received them. The problem also arises from the underfunding of the health sector. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we shall address that one during the budget debate. Hon. Minister, please close so that we can proceed to other business.

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, I am giving information to the minister and the House to the effect that I had a case of rabid dogs in Karamoja. When I called the Ministry of Health, the vaccines were sent to Karamoja. So, I know that the drugs are in the country. If they are at the National Medical Stores, it is wrong because they should be at the referral hospitals.

DR NDUHURA: Madam Speaker, I thank the colleagues who have given information. As you have heard from the Minister for Karamoja, she can confirm that there are vaccines at the National Medical Stores. (Laughter) [Hon. Members: “She is the First Lady.”] No, it is not a question of her being the First Lady; you are also Members of Parliament. I really want to assure you that we respect DHOs; we respect directors of hospitals. So, let us work together especially when it comes to mobilising our people for programmes like dog vaccination. I have already informed you that we have had this programme in Bundibugyo, but the turn up has been very poor which calls for my colleague, the Member of Parliament, to mobilise her fellow political leaders and the civic leaders to mobilise the people to take the dogs for vaccination.
  
I value the information I have got from you, and it is going to help me talk to the hospitals so as to ensure that those hospitals that are located in areas where we normally have rabies, stock the vaccines so that our people do not die unnecessarily. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, I think we need to move   to other matters. 

3.30
MR KAPS HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope you remember that you had given me the green light to come here though you requested me to give way to the hon. Member to contribute to an issue that is ongoing, that is, of rabies.  Now that we have finished, I would like to contribute to an issue of national importance. It is about security, just like this one which has been dealing with injury and death from diseases.  

There are alarming pieces of information coming from individual persons, organisations and the mass media about terrorism and to be specific, today we have got in The New Vision newspaper’s front page reports that 40 Ugandans were arrested in Kenya over terrorism. And that on investigation, these Ugandans were found to be going to Afghanistan who had been recruited as private security guards going to work there. I for one have also come across people in Uganda requesting for recommendation to be recruited as security guards in Afghanistan and Iraq by private security guard firms.  
Now, the threat of terrorism is real all over the world and Uganda has of recent experienced these terror attacks here in Kampala. Also the movement of human labour is real. Now the question here is, which security firms are permitted to recruit and export Ugandans to work as security guards in Afghanistan and Iraq?  And if the company which recruited these Ugandans is permitted to do this work, why is it that this time the Ugandans prepared to go and work outside the country are assembled in another country. The practice used to be that these people are screened here and our security officers, intelligence, Police and even the Army get to know about the operations of these security guards. We need an explanation from Government on this.

Whereas the problem of terrorism is real, it is also being mixed with internal problems of political rights of the citizens of Uganda when they have got to advocate or to raise an issue through a demonstration, for example, the case of Walk-to-Work. It has been also-

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I think you are abusing the opportunity by bringing in that matter about the Ugandans. Do not mix them up.  Concentrate on the issue of the Ugandans arrested in Kenya and do not bring a debate on other issues. Which minister will respond to that? Will the Minister of Defence respond to that later? 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First, I would like to thank hon. Fungaroo for stating clearly and on the Floor of this House that, “Terrorism is a reality” and, therefore, all of us have to stand together to effectively respond to that.

In regards to the report by The New Vision, I think it has been explained very well that these were Ugandans found under unclear circumstances in a house in Kenya, and the authorities in Kenya were suspicious about their motives and they decided to hand them over to their home country, Uganda. We are still in the very early stages of following up this matter; we are investigating it. We are not just taking it on face value. So, it would be too early to give any more details beyond the fact that these people have been handed to us in order to continue the investigations. 

THE SPEAKER: In fact, you can come back to us when we are doing the budget; we could get an answer from you. 

DR KIYONGA:  Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had requested the Attorney-General to give us a legal opinion on some issue, which was not concluded. Can I ask him to give his opinion so that we finish that matter as well? 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, 16 August 2011, you detailed the Office of the Attorney-General to give a legal opinion in respect of the membership of hon. Peter Lokii in the Pan African Parliament.

Hon. Lokii was elected Member of the Eighth Parliament and subsequently elected to the Pan African Parliament during that term. The Eighth Parliament was dissolved on the 12 May 2011, however, hon. Peter Lokii was re-elected to the Ninth Parliament and he avers that since he is a Member of the Ninth Parliament, he is still a Member of the Pan African Parliament. So, the issue is whether a Member of Parliament elected in the previous Parliament can continue being a Member in the Pan African Parliament despite the dissolution of the Parliament in which he was elected without further re-election. 

In our opinion, the election of Members of the Pan African Parliament is regulated by the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. Rule 12 (2) provides: “The election of Members to the Pan African Parliament shall take place in the first session of each Parliament.” In line with this rule, hon. Peter Lokii was elected among other Members to the Pan African Parliament during the Eighth Parliament.  

The implication of this provision is that election of Members of the Pan African Parliament should only be done from among the Members of each Parliament. The key words here are “each Parliament.” Therefore, each Parliament has to elect its representatives to the pan African Parliament since the purpose is to represent the current Parliament as stated in Rule 12(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In Appendix D, Regulation 4(1) of the rules, which provide for the tenure of the Members of the Pan African Parliament provides: “The term of a Member of the Pan African Parliament shall run concurrently with his or her term in Parliament.” The key words in this provision are “run concurrently”. The implication of  this rule is that as long as the term in Parliament still runs, the membership at the Pan African Parliament shall run concurrently unless the member ceases to be a Member of Parliament as provided under Appendix D Regulation 4, sub regulation (2) (e).

Hon. Peter Lokii completed his term in the Eighth Parliament. Although he is a Member in the Ninth Parliament, he was elected to the Pan African Parliament in the Eighth Parliament and his membership run concurrently with his term in the Eighth Parliament and upon expiry or dissolution, his membership to the Pan African Parliament automatically lapsed.

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Article 77 (3) provides that the term of Parliament shall be five years from the date of its first sitting after a general election. This Article, read together with Appendix D 4(1) of the Rules of Procedure, imply that the term expired after five years when Parliament was dissolved.

In conclusion, therefore, the Eighth Parliament, within which hon. Peter Lokii was elected expired on 12 May 2011 and the Ninth Parliament was sworn-in. Although he is a Member in the Ninth Parliament, the fact that he was not re-elected to the Pan African Parliament in this first session of the Ninth Parliament means he automatically lost his seat. Thank you.

3.41
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. As of now, the term of the Pan African Parliament, in which hon. Lokii, among others, were Members, is still running - I hope. To the best of my knowledge, the current term of the Pan African Parliament will expire in December this year. First of all, the Members who we elect to the Pan African Parliament actually represent the Parliament of Uganda and not a specific Parliament be it Eighth or Ninth. So, if a Member was elected in the Eighth Parliament, he was not representing the Eighth Parliament but the Parliament of Uganda in the Pan African Parliament.

If the current term of the Pan African Parliament is still running and then the Member who was elected to that Parliament in the previous Parliament of Uganda is re-elected, is it not legally tenable for such a Member to complete the term of the Pan African Parliament and then we go ahead to elect a new membership? That is what I am trying to state.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I really want to thank the legal counsel- (Laughter) – for assisting the House. However, after the debate last week, I also went back and reflected on the provisions of the protocol and the Rules of Procedure and I  do believe that it could not have been the intention of the Pan African Parliament to fitter the rights of a Parliament to elect its representative. Otherwise, it would mean that a Member would remain there in perpetuity. If you are here for three terms, you are there in perpetuity because you are - I do not think that was the intention of the Pan African Parliament but I think we may need to make some amendments to the rules of the Pan African Parliament to include the provision that says that a Member may be re-elected; “may” not “shall”. This is so that if the opportunity is there, the Member is considered.

The other problem I found again arising from this debate is the reporting procedure. We deploy these Members there but we did not provide for a reporting procedure. So, that is another area where I hope the rules committee would be able to take up this issue and formulate the process for reporting.

The other area we did not provide for is who leads the delegation. I think we sent them and left it at that. Those are areas where I would like the rules committee to look at and help this House to improve on the Rules of Procedure. But for now, I want to ask this House to confirm the five Members as proposed to the Pan African Parliament. I put the question that this House do approve the names as proposed from the Opposition, the Independents and from the NRM party.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS BOARD OF TRUSTEES

3.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 18 of the Parliamentary Pensions Act, the NRM has designated hon. Rose Akol, district Woman MP, Bukedea as representative to the Board of Trustees for the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. (Applause)

3.46
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, the Opposition has nominated hon. Peter Omolo to represent us on the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the other two members are hon. Alisemera Babiha, representing the former Members of Parliament and one member of staff Mr Justus Karyaija. The Parliamentary Commission had already nominated hon. Emmanuel Dombo to represent the Commission, so now that the body is complete, they should start work immediately to handle outstanding issues.

Hon. Members, the Leader of the Opposition had some problems yesterday and we said the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain why he has disturbed his body. So, can I ask the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to respond? I do not know whether you got his statement but he made a statement here earlier.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I apologise for coming late after the hon. Leader of the Opposition had made his statement but I have received a copy and I have this to say. 

Having acknowledged it, we will give a full response to all the issues he has raised in that statement as soon as possible and maybe as early as next week. But I have to add that the Inspector General of Police received a letter from the hon. Member of Parliament from Kyadondo North, hon. Semujju Nganda. The letter was received on Tuesday at around 7.00 p.m - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I really did not intend to interrupt the speech of the minister, but he has just told this House that he will come next week with a substantive statement in response to the statement made by the Leader of the Opposition. What this means is that when that statement comes to the Floor of the House next week, it shall be debated. I seek your guidance on whether it is procedurally right for the minister to come with an incomplete statement that has not been written and circulated to us, and also whether that statement that he is about to make will attract debate. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think it is better that you bring a statement at once because if we start listening to what you have received today, we shall start debating whether the letter arrived or did not arrive and then next week you will come with a full statement. Let us do it on Tuesday; come with a statement and distribute it to the Members and then we will handle it.

MR BABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2011 

(Debate continued…)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are continuing to receive the responses from Government and now I invite the Minister for the Presidency. You have 10 minutes. She will be followed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Karamoja Affairs, the Minister of Defence and then we shall have the others. 

3.51
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable members for their contributions. Hon. Angelline Osegge raised an issue that the State House is like a different government of its own. I wish to respond that the President, as the head of state, is in charge of every sector in this country. He is the chief executive. It is, therefore, important for him to structure Government in a way that he thinks will best deliver on a mandate that was given to him by the people of Uganda and the members of the public are aware of where to go when they need what, and the different institutions that are designated in order to deliver the different services to the people of Uganda. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised an issue of funding to the State House and the Office of the President. These two offices are set up by law. So, it is, therefore, unfair to expect that they will run without adequate resources. The matters handled by these two offices are crosscutting as pointed out above and some are confidential, others are of security nature and others are for public relations. So, this justifies the amount of resources that these two offices use. But I would like to add that because of the budget ceiling, the two offices never get enough resources as they would have loved to. So, I want to request Parliament to understand the nature of these two offices, and always give the two offices the required resources so that they can deliver on what is expected of them.   

There are some issues that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition. There was an issue to do with the manifesto that the President failed to deliver on the pledges. Madam Speaker, the President and indeed the NRM Government did not fail to deliver on manifesto commitments and pledges for the last term. You may wish to note that many of the pledges mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, are ongoing and they overlap because of the long-term nature of this project. We are mindful that we must deliver on our promises. 

An issue was raised that the NRM Government is less tolerant to the media. Freedom of the press is one of the core values of the NRM, and this is embedded in the Constitution of Uganda and also in the other subsidiary laws. However, this does not mean that the media should be free to mislead the public and to misuse this freedom. The media should communicate positive issues but we do welcome criticism as it helps Government to even do better. But the media should not concentrate on manipulating the population for their selfish interests. 

Another allegation by the Leader of the Opposition was that the NRM leaders are illegally accumulating wealth, and perpetuating all kinds of human rights abuse including torture of journalists and intimidation of the media houses. There are institutions like the IGG that handle issues of corruption. Such leaders should be reported for investigations and prosecution because if we move or act on allegations like the Leader of the Opposition did mention, and we do not go the full length to investigate and prosecute and know whether these are true or false allegations, then we will not be helped. 

This House did enact a Whistleblowers Act and this was intended to help in this direction because I have received several allegations that even Leaders in the Opposition are illegally amassing wealth, but I cannot go spreading this unless I have concrete evidence. So, matters of human rights are also handled by the Human Rights Commission and the courts of law. I want to call upon the Leader of the Opposition to avail us this information so that it can be dealt with accordingly. 

The Leader of the Opposition said that the NRM Government is criminalising political parties. I wish to respond that the NRM Government allowed the reintroduction of multiparty politics through a referendum and there is, therefore, no way it can criminalise political parties. However, it is important to note that the mobilisation of people by all parties must be done in such a way that is provided within the laws of Uganda, and anybody who mobilises outside the laws of Uganda, anybody who is engaged in unlawful and criminal activities will definitely be handled according to the law. 

So, it is not the parties but maybe individuals but even if parties were involved in criminal or unlawful activities, they definitely would be dealt with according to the law. It is not the intention, it has never happened and it is not about to happen for the NRM Government to criminalise any political party. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you Minister for the Presidency. Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of Faith Homes Primary School, represented by hon. Stephen Chebrot and hon. Phyllis Chemutai from Tingey and Kapchorwa districts. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Let me invite the Minister for Karamoja.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I need clarification from the minister who has been holding the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: On what? But she has sat down.

MR LUKYAMUZI: She had to finish before I could intervene.

THE SPEAKER: When you want to clarify, you should stand up before – she has already sat down. She is already down and no longer on the Floor and so you cannot seek clarification from her. May I now invite the Minister for Karamoja.

4.00
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA (Mrs Janet Museveni): Madam Speaker, let me begin by thanking you for giving me this opportunity to address this House very briefly on matters concerning Karamoja, because many things were raised about Karamoja and I want to answer all of them in this very short statement.

On security and disarmament, I am happy to inform this House that UPDF records show that 90 percent of illegal guns in Karamoja have been removed from the communities and this exercise is still ongoing. (Applause)  In addition to this, the Uganda Police have strengthened its own arm by recruiting many Karimojong youth and LDUs from all the sub-counties in Karamoja in order that people and their properties can be sufficiently protected in their villages. Consequently, Karamoja is calm by and large and people are busy and actively involved in food production.

Under this same programme, Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and in collaboration with the ministries of Defence and Foreign Affairs, we have been engaged in cross border disarmament efforts by organising joint meetings with especially the Kenyan Government to try and create peace and harmony between the Karimojong Pokot and the Pokot of Kenya and the Turkana living along this common border. This process has led to the reduction of cross border raids and relative peace now prevails among these communities. 

In this exercise, we brought the Karimojong elders on board to help us re-establish relations between the Karimojong tribes internally and also their lost brother and sister communities across the borders. This too has helped a great deal.
 
In addition to PRDP, the Government also designed another programme called Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Plan (KIDDP). Under this programme, we started a new method of electronic branding of animals, which places a boras chip in the stomach of the animal with all the information of the owner, their home, location and so on. This exercise and the mode of branding has brought in an excitement because people in Karamoja now know that animals can no longer disappear without trace.  Even at the market place anybody who takes an animal without an ear tag is questioned where the cow is coming from and the name of the owner is registered for future reference. 

At least 38,000 heads of cattle have been branded in Moroto, Napak and now the exercise has started in Kaabong and Abim districts and will go on until it covers all the seven districts of Karamoja. 

Under this same programme, we also agreed with the Ministry of Water that the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs in the Office of the Prime Minister will now strive to provide small parish dams while the Ministry of Water goes on with the big water reservoirs or dams. So far, we have already finished three parish dams or valley tanks in Moroto District and now completing construction of two in Napak. Two in Kaabong are also under construction and 16 others for Kotido, Nakapiripirit, Abim and the new district of Amudat are still waiting. 

In this effort of water provision for production and also for human consumption, we are working with an NGO to repair the old non-functioning boreholes and construct new ones so that we ensure clean water for human consumption. We hope that this will go a long way in solving the water problem in the sub-region.

Under KIDDP, we also initiated food security and agricultural production. We employed a tractor hire service support for farmers who had lost everything, including the will to try growing their own food. 

When I first went to Karamoja in 2009, there had been drought for three years. The farmers had resigned to wait for World Food Programme food aid as their source of food permanently. Therefore, the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs in the Office of the Prime Minister had to find a way to remind people that it is their duty for every family to provide food for itself, and motivating them to begin this endeavour. 

In the past two planting seasons, some 6,000 acres of land were ploughed but in this current season, a total of 8,496 acres have been opened up and we supplied seeds. This support to communities has already reduced household dependency on relief from 70 percent of household food requirement in 2009 to the current 40 percent food aid requirement.    

Under KIDDP, we have also started a community empowerment and peace building project to kick-start income generating projects for the youth and women groups especially because many of the young men, who are called the Karachuna in Karamoja, were the ones used to raid cows and even kill people in the process. Therefore, in order to deter these youth from cattle rustling and this destructive way of life, we are providing livestock and agricultural implements. We are teaching some of them methods of construction of houses using hydra form technology and they are the ones putting up those modern Manyattas in permanent materials that I am sure some of you have already seen. 

For women, other programmes of their choice are being put into place so that dependency on relief can truly be discouraged and in time, completely phased out.

Let me also say something about re-settlement and rehabilitation of Karimojong street children. I know that hon. Alaso raised the question in this House about the street children. First of all, as you are all aware, the mandate for the management and welfare of all children in Uganda falls under the sister Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, as a Ministry for Karamoja Affairs with a mandate of ensuring affirmative action for this part of our country, we have taken keen interest in the problem of street children from Karamoja. 

Therefore, in collaboration with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, UWESO an NGO, UNICEF and GIZ, we are planning a comprehensive approach to address the challenges of these children and the mothers who are living with them on the streets. We have established a strategy that will focus on the rehabilitation of these children using short, medium and long term interventions that address different facets of this problem. In summary, this will entail withdrawing these children from the streets and taking them to UWESO Masulita Children Village. At this centre, we have agreed to keep them for a short period in order to offer them the following:

1.	A period of rehabilitation providing psycho-social support services.
2.	Screening them and establishing their health status.
3.	Tracing the relatives of those who have no mothers with them.
4.	 Skills training or education for the young ones.
5.	Begin the training using multi-disciplinary approach that provide a mechanism for preventing these children from ever going back to the streets and
6.	 Eventually repatriating these children to Karamoja – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you five more minutes.

MRS MUSEVENI: Where the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is working on the Koblin Rehabilitation Centre in Napak District. 

For the mothers who are on the streets, Madam Speaker, I implore you and this House to try and understand that the problems that bring any mother and her children to the streets are problems indeed. Therefore, in order to begin a process of healing for this mother or these mothers, we do not need to be harsh and insensitive. We need to try if possible, to walk in their shoes as the saying goes. Therefore, we at the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs are looking to UWESO because it was founded to deal with people in difficult circumstances and it now has a very rich experience in this work. 

Therefore, I trust that programmes will be designed for these mothers that will at least attempt to begin a process of healing and provision of life skills that include income generation. This exercise of withdrawing from the streets is planned to begin before the end of this month. (Applause)

However, the problem of street children is an evil that all of us must cooperate to eradicate from our streets. There are selfish individuals who do child trafficking for commercial purposes. Therefore, I believe that this is not a problem for Government alone. All of us leaders of this country, together with our communities, must unite and build safety nets that will protect the children of this country.

The last programme I have to mention here is NUSAF II. This also is a programme that runs through the whole of Northern Uganda region including Karamoja. However, in Karamoja, this programme has delayed to start because there had been problems with its predecessor NUSAF I whose funds could not be traced and there was nothing to show on the ground. But that part has finally been concluded and NUSAF II will begin this financial year.

Finally, let me end by reporting briefly on the report that appeared in the print media that, “Floods devastate Karamoja” and I felt called upon to travel to Karamoja urgently in order to get an on-spot assessment of the situation on the ground. Fortunately, when I got there, I found that while this story may have been true on the 13 August, Karamoja being the semi-arid area it is, as of the 16th August after some three days of sunshine, the water had significantly reduced even though the Lopei Bridge was still submerged but vehicles could now pass.

Fortunately, I can safely say that Karamoja is not devastated by floods as reported in the media but the road network is still a big challenge in Karamoja, and when there is massive rain like we have had this season, then roads inevitably get worse. In fact, I should say that the road network in Karamoja truly needs affirmative action. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.


4.15
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Minister for Karamoja because some of the questions that had been directed at us, she has conclusively responded to so I will only add a few points to what she has just elaborated.

First, it is true as expressed by a number of colleagues on the Floor that in the recent past, there was some spike in terms of the frequency of cattle thefts within Karamoja and in the neighbouring districts mainly of Agago, Kitgum and Katakwi. However, the security agencies in the area, the Police and the Army, have been responding to these recent changes effectively and the situation is on the mend. 

I made inquiries from the commanders in the field and also the RDCs and there was some disparity between what was said on the Floor and also what is actually in the field. So, as a result of this, we have made a decision that as soon as this debate is over, we and our colleagues, who come from the districts that were born out of Kitgum, shall jointly move to Kitgum and have meetings with Army and political leaders so that we assess the situation on the ground and make proposals to make further improvements in this situation.

But let me take this opportunity to commend our colleagues from Karamoja, Members in the Eighth Parliament. In the Eighth Parliament, we saw a turning point in political terms. While before it was very difficult for a Member of Parliament from Karamoja to be heard publicly speaking against cattle rustling and speaking in support of disarmament, the Eighth Parliament broke the line. Our colleagues not only spoke here on this Floor, they went to the field sometimes with us and told our brothers and sisters in Karamoja that the gun must go and the cattle rustling must stop. So, I want to appeal to our brothers and sisters who have come to the Ninth Parliament that we should push with this tradition that our predecessors in the Eighth Parliament started. 

So, Madam Speaker, on the side of cattle rustling/cattle theft, I will leave it at that because the First Lady was very elaborate on the comprehensive programme of Government to turn around that situation. 

The second leg of my response regards our troops, who are outside this country. In their contribution on the Floor, some Members appeared to imply that we are outside the country illegally. Others also wanted an update on how things are moving. I am going to briefly give an update where we stand, where we are going and also underscore the legal framework under, which our troops are outside this country. 

Let me start with Somalia. 
Upto date, despite continuous requests and reminders to all members of the African Union, it is only the contingent from Uganda and the contingent from Burundi who are helping our brothers in Somalia. For some unknown reason, our other brothers have not found the courage to come over so that we work together. 

A lot of progress has been made, but in order to consolidate that progress, the AU decided that the size of the troops in Somalia should be increased to 20,000. And as procedure requires, this decision of the AU was sent to the UN Security Council. And the UN Security Council agreed with the AU, but decided that we should first step up from 8,000 to 12,000 instead of moving straight to 20,000. 

That notwithstanding, we have not heard additional voices from the rest of Africa to contribute to this task. Having started the journey, we want to continue with our brother of Burundi and we are in the process of contributing the additional 4,000 forces, between us and Burundi so that we can build on the successes that we have achieved out there. 

As you saw in the press, Mogadishu is now more or less under the authorities there; the Transitional Federal Forces supported by AMISOM. The current strength of UPDF is 4,887. So, we are going to add an additional 2,000 and Burundi will also add 2,000 so that our total force will come to 6,887. 

Now, turning to our mission in the DRC and Central African Republic, in pursuing Joseph Kony and his terrorist organisation, LRA, I would like to remind this House that we took several years in Juba negotiating with leaders of LRA and the whole of Uganda was very expectant that we would finally end this problem through negotiations. They hoped that a day would come when President Museveni would append his signature to the agreed position and also that Joseph Kony would do the same. 

We were, however, disappointed as the leaders of this country and I am sure all the people of this country that finally Kony showed his true colours. Not only did he fail to turn up, but actually while we were negotiating in Juba, Kony was rebuilding his forces. Because of these two realities, a decision was made to pursue him into DRC. 

This decision was taken in consultation with other partner states; certainly our colleagues in Southern Sudan knew, our colleagues in DRC knew about it and we all decided to pursue Kony to eliminate his terrorist activities. 

The UN Security Council was formerly informed by President Chissano who during the discussions acted as a special envoy of the UN Secretary General. 

As we pursued Kony and destroyed the machinery of his war making, he did not just stay in DRC; he proceeded to the Central African Republic. Therefore, the operations were now not only Uganda but also involved Southern Sudan, DRC and also the Forces in Central African Republic. 

Most of his forces have either been killed or have surrendered or are scared in the bush. The force he is left with is relatively small and is split into small groups. But the command structure of Kony and his immediate assistants remains; they are still alive and are hiding in the vast jungle of Kony and Central African Republic; and we continue to go after them. 

The principle question Members were asking is, are we legally in Somalia, DRC and Central African Republic? Article 210 of our Constitution says in part: “Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and in particular for the deployment of troops outside Uganda.” Indeed, Parliament enacted the UPDF Act, 2005. In that law, Section 39, it is stated:
“1. The President may deploy troops outside Uganda for purposes of:-
i)	peace keeping;
ii)	peace enforcement.
 
2.	The deployment of troops for the purposes of peace keeping shall be done with the approval of Parliament.”
 
The troops in Somalia are there under the mandate of peace-keeping and the Eighth Parliament authorised the Commander-in-Chief, the President, to deploy forces to Somalia. So our forces are in Somalia in line with our Constitution. 

In line with the Central African Republic and Sudan, it was not for peace keeping; this was pursuit of an enemy and the Constitution does not require the Commander-in-chief to get approval of Parliament for pursuit. Therefore, the President acted within his powers given by the Constitution to ensure that we do not leave an enemy to grow bigger. However, in conformity with our open methods of work, within the week that the forces were deployed into the DRC, the Minister of State for Defence came on the Floor of the House during the Eighth Parliament, gave details and a thorough discussion ensued. So, the deployment was in accordance with the law and Parliament was duly informed. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I can hear the clarification before I conclude.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from Hon. Dr Kiyonga, the Minister of Defence. One is what he has attempted to respond to. As far as I know, and I have been in this House for some time now, no permission was sought from Parliament neither was that permission granted by Parliament for our troops to go to Sudan and subsequently to the Central African Republic. 

But that said, I would like some clarification from Dr Kiyonga. How long are the boys going to be in Somalia? Is this thing open-ended? How long are the boys going to be in the Central African Republic and Sudan? Is it open-ended? When will the boys come back home? What is the measure for them to return to our country? We have got security concerns in this country, and I think our tenure in those foreign lands cannot be open-ended. I seek that clarification, honourable minister.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Minister, for allowing me to seek this clarification. I would like to know if the minister can explain to us why other African countries have not vigorously taken up this exercise or this mission of AMISOM? I think this is important because we are investing heavily in terms of manpower, resources and we have lost many of our children there. I just want to know: why is Uganda so vigorously at the forefront despite the heavy sacrifice? Why is it that we have not been told why other countries are not demonstrating the same concern? Honourable minister, I am talking to you through the Speaker. (Laughter)

Secondly, I would like to know whether you have bothered to seek to amend the protocol that has allowed you to be in Somalia because you are there for peace-keeping. But I also know, whether officially or unofficially, that you are also engaged in combative exercise; which would also require some amendment to the protocol. I am not so sure whether you have that permission to get engaged in combative exercise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this is becoming a debate. You will raise other issues when we are doing the budget. Otherwise, I will have to allow everybody to start contributing now -

DR KIYONGA: During the budget we shall. Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, Engineer Amuriat just restated what I said. It is true Parliament did not authorise our deployment to pursue LRA. But we are guided in what we do by the laws we make for ourselves. I have just read parts of the Constitution that are relevant. The President did not require, in a situation of enemy pursuit, in a situation of peace-making, to get the authority of Parliament. What he has stated is not new. If anybody has a different opinion, the Constitution is there for all of us to see.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, as the Bible says, many were called but few turned up. (Applause) The call has been out there but the other people have not come. Let us not forget, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, through the Speaker, that Uganda has also been a beneficiary of actions taken by our neighbours. Without the help of Tanzania, our own liberation from Amin would have taken longer.

In conclusion, the work of the Ugandan contingent in Somalia, together with our Burundian brothers, has not only assisted the work that is ongoing to rebuild the state of Somalia but has also brought honour to Uganda, to Burundi and Africa. People realise that we can solve our own problems. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you. The fight against LRA which is now of regional concern is to ensure sustainable peace and security and protect our people in the region. I am sure that this august House, the Ninth Parliament, being proud of its defence forces can only but commend the UPDF and in the spirit of Pan-Africanism also acknowledge the sacrifices being made by our joint forces of Uganda, DRC, SPLA and Central African Republic to stabilise Africa and protect our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you Minister of Defence. Is the Minister for Water ready? 

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to extend my apology for not being ready yesterday. In the same vein, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity today to respond to issues that have been raised by honourable members. A number of issues have been raised. This is in response to His Excellency, the President’s, State of the Nation Address. 

The issues that have been raised by the hon. Members that we picked from the Hansard include one; increased allocation of funds for boreholes. Two, tapping rain water or harvesting water from the lake. Three, provision of water for Bugiri District. Four, water supply to Adjumani. Five, recruitment of an executive director for the National Forestry Authority. Six, Banda wetland. Seven, water for production.

Although the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business addressed all these issues before, I would still like to give you some brief response as follows:

Increased allocation of funds for boreholes. It is true the District Water and Sanitation Grant has been the same at Shs 4.0 billion over the last three years. The Ministry of Water and Environment, however, designed an allocation formula which is used to distribute funds to the districts based on the current population coverage and average unit cost. The ministry has gone ahead to authorise local governments to allocate the limited resources to the most vulnerable communities as we wait for additional resources. 

Tapping rainwater or harvest water from the lake. It is true in some areas along the lakeshores that there is a problem of inadequate underground water sources. The ministry is promoting the use of rainwater harvesting in all parts of Uganda, as one of the appropriate technologies in water-stressed areas. 

The amount of grant allocated to rainwater harvesting has increased, although very slowly. However, over the period, due to many competing demands, the allocation still falls far below of what is needed. 

On the issue of salty water in boreholes in Bunya East Constituency, a team from my ministry was dispatched to collect samples to find out the elements causing this. We expect this report next week.

Provision of water to Bugiri District

Bugiri District indeed is water-stressed and borehole drilling is quite difficult. For that matter, the ministry has prepared designs and bid documents for a large piped water system from Lake Victoria. The water will be treated and distributed to affected sub-counties in the district. This is estimated to cost about Shs25 billion, which at the moment the ministry does not have. But I hope that in the near future, we will be able to find the funds. 

Water supply – [Mr Waira: “Clarification”] - Madam Speaker, I will lose the ten minutes you have given me if I start responding to clarifications. 

THE SPEAKER: You can link up with the minister later. She is very friendly.    

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Water supply to Adjumani. Water coverage in Adjumani District stands at 61.5 percent, which is slightly below the national average coverage of 65 percent. 

The district has been allocated over Shs 700 million for water and sanitation this financial year, that is, 2011/2012 and it is upon the district to ensure that there is equitable distribution within the district’s sub-counties. 

On that score, I would like to appeal to leaders in this august House to please follow up releases made by the ministry because oftentimes, there is misuse of resources at the district level.

The Ministry of Water and Environment is also undertaking rehabilitation works on Adjumani Town Council water supply, which will include expansion of the network to new areas. 

Recruitment of the executive director of National Forestry Authority. I would like to go in a chronological order on the events that took place. According to the provision of the Act that established the National Forestry Authority, the executive director is appointed by the minister on recommendation of board of directors. The Act then goes on to describe the kind of qualifications required. 

Following the non-renewal of the contract of Mr Damian Akankwasa, who had been the Executive Director from 1 June 2007 to 31 May 2010, NFA management did run in The New Vision of Monday 3rd June and The Daily Monitor of Wednesday 5 January 2011, advertisement to recruit the executive director.  

Eleven applications were received. The short listing was done by a head hunter firm. Seven candidates were shortlisted. The shortlist was accordingly considered and approved by the board at one of the board meetings. The shortlisted seven candidates were subjected to both oral and written interviews by Java Consulting, the head hunter that was contracted by the ministry. 

The firm handled the assignment professionally and submitted a comprehensive report to the board containing four best candidates for the position of the executive director. These were in order of merit: 
1.	Mr Robert Nabanyumya 
2.	Mr Hudson Jackson Andrua 
3.	Arthur Mugisha and
4.	Moses Mapesa

The board then went ahead to recommend to the minister for appointment, Mr Andrua, who was No.2. This obviously brought a lot of reaction, arguments and counter arguments. 

The minister, therefore, recommended that since the recommendation ended up in controversy – the first step was to get the Directorate of Internal Security to conduct due diligence on the candidate that had been selected. Following that, Mr Andrua, who had been Acting Executive Director of NFA, was cleared. That is when – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Ok, I will give you five minutes more.

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This generated a lot of controversy. Consequently, therefore, when the board recommended Mr Andrua, who was also cleared by ISO, the ministry decided that the process of recruitment starts again. In the meantime, it appointed Mr Gershom Onyango, Director for Environmental Affairs to act in the position of Executive Director. He was appointed on June 1st 2011 for three months. 

The matter has been taken up by the IGG for investigation. Up to now, we are still waiting for the results of the investigation by the IGG. That is as far as the appointment of the executive director is concerned. 

Banda wetland

The ministry has used all available enforcement tools to control and curb encroachment of Kawooya-Kinawataka wetlands at Banda but unfortunately, we are still experiencing pressure from encroachers. We do hope that very soon we will embark on recruitment of an environment protection force, so that they will help us evict encroachers from all wetlands. 

Water for production

On construction of small valley tanks as opposed to huge water reservoirs, the water for production technology options commonly used in Uganda are dams and valley tanks. The decision to select one of the two options is usually dictated by the following: 
1.	Topography of the area determines type or facility dams. 

2.	Hydrology of the area determines the amount of rainfall and run-off and hence justification of capacity to construct.

3.	The total water needs for the area when large requirements call for large reservoirs.
 
4.	Resource availability, which dictates investment levels.

5.	Evaporation factors, which make small valley tanks unsustainable. Small valley tanks would in the short term appease more people but because of being prone to drying up in the prolonged drought periods, they are not sustainable in some instances and this leaves the large reservoirs as the fall back position such as Kakinga Dam in Ssembabule.

6.	Climatic variability adaptation where large dams are vital for flood and drought mitigation, and a catalyst for improved rain in the area.

Since I am running out of time, I will be giving out my paper so that Members can read advantages of dams over valley tanks. 

On irrigation, the schemes of Mubuku, Olweny, Doho and Agoro were part of the formal irrigation systems which were established in the 1960s and they include: Mubuku Irrigation Scheme in Kasese District, Kiige Irrigation Scheme in Kamuli District, Labori and Odina in Serere/Soroti districts, Ongom in Lira District, Atera in Apac District, Agoro in Lamwo District, Kibimba Rice Scheme in Bugiri District, Doho in Butaleja, Olweny Swamp in Lira/Dokolo districts, Kakira Sugar Works in Jinja District, Lugazi Sugar Works in Buikwe District among others. It is not true that the NRM Government has killed any of the above schemes. It is a well-known fact that these irrigation schemes fell prey to past wars and insurgencies of the 70s, 80s and the 90s. 

The Government of Uganda, with financial assistance from the African Development Bank, has embarked on programmes for rehabilitation of four of the above-mentioned schemes while the others wait: Mubuku in Kasese, Olweny in Lira/Dokolo, Doho in Butaleja District and Agoro in Kitgum. Upon completion of the rehabilitation of Mubuku, irrigable land is expected to be increased - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, kindly distribute the same to the Members. I also want to appeal to the other ministers who have not distributed theirs to do so, so that Members can use them when we are going to deal with the budget. 

Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have members from Kanjuki Parish, Church of Uganda. They are represented by hon. Amos Lugoloobi of Ntenjeru North and the Woman Member for Kayunga District. You are welcome. (Applause) They are well dressed in Kanzu and Gomesi. 

Can I now invite the Prime Minister?

4.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, on 8 June, as you may all remember, the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, addressed the Ninth Parliament on the state of the nation. 

You will recall that at some point, all Members of Parliament on the Opposition side, led by their leader, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, walked out and stayed out throughout the rest of the day’s proceedings. 

On 6 July 2011, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament presented to Parliament a response to the President’s State of the Nation Address. The following is the rejoinder of Government in reply to the Leader of the Opposition’s response to the President’s address.

Whereas we wholeheartedly welcome the response by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, we regret the language he chose to employ in his presentation. We think it is inappropriate and absolutely unparliamentary to the extent of his suggestions of dishonesty on the part of the NRM leadership, including those in this Parliament. We have however, chosen to ignore that in recognition of the fact that this was the maiden major speech by the new Leader of the Opposition. We hope that since time is the greatest healer of all wounds, my brother will gain the necessary skills and confidence to discharge the duties of a loyal Opposition in Parliament. Wishing him well, I pledge maximum co-operation with him in the management of the business of Parliament. (Applause)

Listening to him- (Interruption)  

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know the Leader of the Opposition is not in Parliament at the moment. But I think it is really unfair for the Leader of Government Business to criticise the Leader of the Opposition to the extent that all of us feel shattered as if we do not have a leader. That is not right. The language is not parliamentary. Is he in order to say that the Leader of the Opposition needs to learn as if he is a nursery school boy? (Laughter) This is unparliamentary. Is he in order to demean the Leader of the Opposition to that extent?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think all of us are in the learning process. Multiparty democracy in this country is about six years old; so there are errors made in the way business is conducted but I think that the Leader of Government Business was responding to the language used by the Leader of the Opposition. (Applause) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to him present the Opposition’s response to the State of the Nation Address, one would be forgiven for concluding that this Opposition believes that the role of the Opposition is to oppose for the sake of appearing to oppose all the time.

As His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Uganda, pointed out to Members of the Opposition at a meeting held at State House, Nakasero, in July 2006 and I quote, “The Opposition is a useful and necessary component of democracy especially in ensuring transparent and accountable government that serves the people’s interests.” 

Some of the guidelines, which were adopted by the African parliaments in their meeting in Libreville in 1999, and are almost universally practised in democracies the world over, include the following:

(a)	Once there is opposition in parliament, it becomes an indispensable component of democracy. In a multiparty democracy, political life is enriched by free competition of political programmes; it is impoverished by rivalry based on personal ambitions, which merely disqualifies it in the eyes of public opinion. 

(b)	The primary function of the opposition is to offer a credible alternative to the majority in power. By overseeing and criticising the action of the government, it works to ensure transparency, integrity and efficiency in the conduct of public affairs and to prevent abuses by the authorities and individuals, thereby ensuring the defence of the public interest.

(c)	The opposition in Parliament must engage in constructive and responsible opposition by making counterproposals. In its action, the opposition must not seek to hinder pointlessly the action of the government, but rather endeavour to encourage it to improve such action in the general interest.

In other words, the major role of the opposition in Parliament is to propose alternatives to what the government does, so that the public gets the benefit of political debate between different directions. If the opposition criticises Government in a positive way, it can cause Government to adopt positive proposals. The role of the opposition is not always to oppose.

Madam Speaker, in his response, the Leader of the Opposition is at pains to create a negative impression that President Museveni is either not aware of or is insensitive to the main issues obtaining in a country, which he has led for the last 25 years. He, therefore, imposes upon himself the onus of informing the President what the pertinent national issues are and how the State of the Nation Address should have been presented. Nonetheless, the issues which he claims have been omitted in the President’s address are actually dealt with in that same address, except that the President uses a style and tone different from what the Leader of the Opposition and his side would have preferred. 

The purpose of a State of the Nation Address, however, is not to please any particular group or individual. It is meant to update Ugandans with facts on where the nation has come from in the preceding year in relation to where it was before, and where it should go in the coming year. In this regard, facts remain facts and the President’s duty is only to lay them bare.  Regarding style and tone, the choice is with the President. 

For instance, on Page 4, the Leader of the Opposition calls the President’s Address, “Just a government report card on achievements, without an assessment of progress, challenges, and opportunities and how Government intends to move forward”.  This is not true and it is contradictory. It was clear in the address that the achievements, which the Leader of Opposition refers to were enumerated as the President examined the progress made during the year under review.  

In so doing, the President also highlighted a number of challenges that need to be addressed, ranging from -
•	election management problems raised in various reports on the country’s electoral process;
•	 constrained balance of payments; 
•	a decline in foreign exchange reserves; 
•	a rise in the annual headline inflation rate on all items;
•	unfavourable climatic conditions;
•	depreciation of the Uganda Shilling, etcetera.  

But also where achievements have been registered, it is only fair that they are acknowledged.

Furthermore, the issues which the Leader of the Opposition raises in Paragraph 5 of his statement, as unattended to in the President’s address, were ably dealt with as highlighted below:

(i)	The issue of how to reduce corruption was addressed on page 46 of the President’s address.

(ii)	The issue of reversing the trend of electoral contests being turned into wars with expensive and violent campaigns, was dealt with on pages 5 and 6 of the President’s address.
(iii)	The issue of increasing public vigilance to detect and deter commission of graft is dealt with from pages 46 to 48.

(iv)	The issue of increasing the speed of and efficiency in prosecuting and punishing the corrupt and stiff sanctions against the corrupt is also addressed on page 46.

Of course, there should be little wonder that the Leader of the Opposition did not adequately grasp the President’s address.  As I earlier said, he led his entire team in a walk-out when the President was expounding on the issue of corruption and measures to address it. They missed all that - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Throughout his speech, the Prime Minister has been insulting, not only the Leader of the Opposition, but also the entire team that hon. Nandala-Mafabi heads in this House. In fact, it has to be said that the statement read by the Leader of the Opposition in response to the President’s address was contributory in nature in a sense that all of us on this side made an input to it. 

By hon. Mbabazi insulting the Leader of the Opposition, we all feel insulted. By referring to our walk-out, he ignores the fact that the State of the Nation Address is put on record and distributed to every Member of Parliament. Is hon. Mbabazi, therefore, in order to insinuate that the entire Opposition is not informed? Is he in order to express his ignorance here to the fact that we actually read the entire speech of the President and responded accordingly, in the way we understood it?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, unfortunately, I cannot lift the veil to find out the process through which the Leader of the Opposition’s speech was crafted. And in his presentation, hon. Mafabi did not say that, “We sat together on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday with so-and-so to make the statement.” So, I cannot lift the veil but what the Prime Minister was saying is that you did walk out.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very delighted that hon. Amuriat realises the folly of the walk-out. 

The issue of how to arrest the current depreciation of the Uganda Shilling was addressed by the President on page 6 and to echo the President’s own words. He said, “On 8 June 2011, Uganda will be reading her budget for the financial year 2011/12. The budget speech will give a detailed background to the economic outlook of our country.” Indeed, the budget, as hon. Members know, gives that detail. 

More to that, the President went ahead and summarised the state of the economy.  On page 9, he went ahead and outlined reasons for the depreciation of the Uganda currency. On page 10, he outlined the measures Government is undertaking to curb the inflation problem. 

On the issue of the major driver of the economy, there is no better way to explicitly put it than the first statement by the President in paragraph 3 of his address. He states: “Madam Speaker and hon. Members, agriculture remains the backbone of our economy”.  I will again get to the details of this under paragraph 2.17 below.

At this juncture, I would like to implore the Leader of the Opposition - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: An additional 20 minutes. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: After 20 minutes, I will take what my brother took off. I will again revert to this under paragraph 2.17 below.

At this juncture, I would like to implore the Leader of the Opposition to let credit be given where it is due and criticise constructively where it is necessary. (Applause)  For example, not  only was he in haste to assert that important things had been omitted in the President’s address while they were actually included, but he also conspicuously ignored other important drivers of development, which the President presented in his address.  These include health, land, the mineral sector and ICT issues.

The President also highlighted the various opportunities in our midst, which are to be tapped and harnessed in order to overcome our development challenges as a nation. These opportunities involve abundant hydro electric power potential, the national oil and gas resources, mineral resources, the peace and stability now prevailing throughout the country; potential for natural water irrigation, etcetera.

On how Government wants to move forward, the President’s address focuses on wide ranging interventions both proposed and ongoing, like rehabilitation of four large scale irrigation schemes at Mubuku, Olweny, Doho and Agoro, the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF), the Karamoja Integrated Disarmament Programme, the Northern Uganda Peace Recovery and Development Programme, the Luweero-Rwenzori Development Programme, NAADS; Bujagali and Karuma Hydropower projects. Various renewable energy projects, 30 rural electrification programmes to be commissioned in September 2011, to mentioned but a few.

Regarding corruption, the President pledged Government’s continued commitment to zero-tolerance to corruption, adding two very important steps to be operationalised in the current year namely; the passing of the proceeds of crime legislation to empower Government to confiscate assets of corrupt officials and enacting the anti-money laundering legislation.  These two once put in place will be very instrumental in curbing corruption and retrieving stolen public resources from the corrupt.

Other salient interventions made against the scourge of corruption over several past years include establishing and strengthening a robust constitutional and legal framework comprised of the IGG, the Leadership Code Act, 2002, the Anti-corruption Court, the Whistleblowers Protection Act, the PPDA Act and Regulations etcetera.

The Leader of the Opposition asked why the President does not provide an account on his last term’s manifesto. The State of the Nation Address is given annually and it reviews the situation obtaining since the previous year. On the other hand, a manifesto states what an office bearer will do over a whole term of office, five years in our case, and accountability thereof is given at the end of the term. The President gave his accountability to the people of Uganda from November 2010 up to February 2011. The people responded in the affirmative by returning him as their President with 68.4 percent of the total votes cast. (Applause)   

The Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and indeed all of us here in this House are as a result of that same election. It would, therefore, be discourteous and contemptuous of us not to appreciate the electorate for a job well done.

The Leader of the Opposition is cynical about the President’s re-election, but we can understand where he is coming from. He and those whose political interests he represents were neither neutral observers nor foreigners in the same election. They were active competitors on the side that lost. (Applause) Their affected sentiments in this regard are, therefore, appreciated, but it is also good practice to lose honourably. 

It should be further noted that an annual State of the Nation Address cannot include the full detail of every government programme. For example, Government is still committed to its goal of transforming rural household incomes from subsistence to commercial levels, targeting an average of Shs 20 million per household per year.  To achieve this goal, the following strategies to enhance agricultural production and productivity in the country have been adopted:

a)	Multiplication of seeds and planting material through -
i)	the Public/Private Partnership (PPP) with medium to large scale seed companies and farms;
ii)	direct support to public sector agencies like the National Agriculture Research Organisation (NARO) with expertise in seed multiplication;

iii)	Support to companies with out-grower schemes, including tea, coffee and rice producing corporations;
iv)	Support to individual farmers with proven capacity to produce seeds.

b)	Continued improvement of extension services through the revised NAADS programme.

c)	Promotion and support of fertiliser usage.

d)	Support to water for agricultural production at household level.

e)	Promotion of labour saving technologies and mechanisation of agriculture.

f)	Modernisation of post-harvest handling and storage infrastructure.

The political scene

Alleged “criminalisation of political party activities.” The Leader of the Opposition makes a number of sweeping statements alleging criminalisation of political party activities by Government.  He does not advance even one example to substantiate his claim, most likely for lack of any authentic case to cite.  This false view is born out of an erroneous mindset among sections of the Opposition and some sections of the media, that in a multi-party democracy, the conduct and activities of the Opposition have no legal confines, and wrong doing by Opposition politicians should go unpunished in the name of tolerance.  

With this mindset, some Opposition politicians have put themselves in conflict with the law, expecting to get away with it, only to be disappointed because where there is the rule of law, rights and freedoms do not include the right or freedom to break laws. (Applause)      

Government does not and will not criminalise any lawful activity of any political party or individual. Equally, Government does not and will not condone any unlawful individual or political party activity. Recently, I was surprised to read in some print media that some press had chosen to rank Uganda under those countries that are considered failed states because of the querying of the Walk-to-Work protests. What a narrow view of the propagators of this school of thought. Of course, Uganda cannot be a failed state. For a state to be considered a failed state, all organs of state must be in chaos; the Legislative, Executive or Judiciary which is not the case with the current Uganda Government. It is indeed laughable even to imagine that.

It is equally unfortunate that some of the media houses would like to associate themselves with this school of thought, which in my view is choosing the wrong side of those who make wild and unsubstantiated assumptions.

Crime is crime whether committed by an opposition politician or not, and the politicisation of a crime as a gimmick to attract undeserved sympathy just because an offender is an opposition politician will not make the law enforcement agencies relent in their work.

The maintenance of law and order, the security of people’s lives and property and ensuring a peaceful atmosphere for stability and development is a cardinal role of every elected government.

Alleged coerce of voters to elect NRM

I earlier said that the Opposition, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi leads in Parliament, was an active participant who lost all previous elections. So, naturally, we do not expect kind words from them when it comes to explaining away their political failure. But the truth is incontrovertible. The ruling party does not coerce people to vote for it. 

It will be recalled, for example, that at a time when the Kony insurgency was at its height and when the coercive machinery of Government was deployed in every inch of Northern Uganda, NRM consistently lost elections there in 1996, 2001 and 2006. That is the time when a government, which uses coercion to win elections would have swept all the votes in the entire region. But NRM relies on its performance and open campaign to win votes and as it were, because during the period of insurgency, the people of Northern Uganda were unhappy and they understandably voted against us but you will appreciate that with time, we turned the tide against the Opposition in the same region through our performance, by banishing Kony and his killers and by instituting recovery programmes, which saw people’s lives gradually returning to normal.

It is no surprise, therefore, that by February 2011, NRM for the first time since 1986 had sufficiently won the minds and hearts of the people of the North to fetch 54 percent of the votes in the Acholi, Lango and West Nile sub regions. The rest is now history. We deliver and convinced people to support us; we do not force them.

Alleged media intolerance

In paragraph 11 of his statement, the Leader of the Opposition refers to Government as becoming less tolerant of the media whom he calls, “Guardians of public interest”. This assertion is misleading. First of all, Government is not intolerant of the media but even before that, who is a guardian of public interest? Who confers this mandate and how? Some of these foreign concepts like referring to the media and civil society as guardians of public interest are misleading. In real terms, nobody can claim to be more of a guardian of public interest than the one whom the public itself has chosen to be in charge of their interests.

The President, Members of Parliament and the elected local government leaders are the foremost guardians of public interest in Uganda by virtue of the people’s mandate. This mandate is put to the test by the population at regular intervals in elections. Academic and foreign so-called democratic rhetoric aside, from where does the media derive its mandate and how is it checked?

There are media laws, principles and best practices, which prescribe the dos, donts, whys, hows, whens, wheres for media practitioners. Unfortunately, whereas many media houses conform to these laws and best practices, there are some media houses, some journalists, some civil society organisations and some activists who seem to think that press freedoms and freedom to demonstrate transcend all other laws or regulations of a country.

For them, press freedom and the right to free assembly are exemptions from the application of every other law, regulation, standard or custom. That is why in Uganda we have some irresponsible journalism in our country today deliberately calculated to excite sections of the public against others or even to instigate the public against government.

The government has, on very few occasions, come out to take specific action only against a media house or individual journalist which or who has broken the law. We cannot promise that this is about to stop because it will only depend on the conduct of media houses and practitioners. No breach of the law will escape appropriate legal action. Equally, no law abiding media industry house or person will be victimised.

This Government is responsible for the diametrical progression of the media in Uganda; from less than three media houses in 1986, Uganda now has nearly 300 active houses including more than 250 FM radio stations scattered in every corner of Uganda courtesy of NRM’s liberal media policy. While we do not want these gains to be reversed, we equally must resist an anarchic media which may scuttle our country hard-earned stability.

The same applies to Civil Society Organisations (CSOs).  Indeed, some of them do complement Government efforts in the delivery of social services. Some are actively involved in mobilising and supporting our communities, and institutions in doing significant development work. Without mentioning names, Government salutes such CSOs for their positive contribution to the stability, peace and development of Uganda.

But even among CSOs, we have the bad apples. Just like some sections of the media do, there are CSOs, which take to the moral high ground and purport to be guardians of public interest while they in actual sense represent some selfish, parochial, partisan and at times negative foreign interests. Some of them have in the past given both overt approval and covert support to controversial political standoffs and acts of lawlessness in the name of upholding people’s rights and freedoms.

Let me repeat that nobody can claim to be a more rightful guardian of public interest than those whom the people have elected to take charge of their destiny. A CSO cannot be more of a public interest guardian than an elected President, an elected Parliament or an elected local government. Therefore, just like Government will firmly resist anarchic media houses and practitioners in order to safeguard our hard-earned peace and stability, Government will also resist intransigent CSOs, which hide under the guise of public interest while they in actual sense propagate anti-government sentiments and foment disorder in this country. 

Alleged illegal accumulation of wealth and human rights abuses by NRM Leaders -I welcome back my brother from Terego, Kassiano Wadri, to the House. (Laughter) I acknowledge that I did not try hard enough in Terego. 

In paragraph 13, the Leader of the Opposition says that NRM leaders have illegally accumulated wealth and perpetuated all kinds of human rights abuses. Illegal accumulation of wealth and abuse of human rights are both criminal in nature, and should only be imputed on a person who has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction. This blanket accusation of criminal behavior on the part of the entire leadership of a political party is both unacceptable and deserving of condemnation by all right thinking people. Even if there were one or two individuals, who may have been found guilty of committing crime, how could the entire leadership of the NRM be condemned as being criminal? Which NRM leaders have been proven by court as having illegally accumulated wealth or abused human rights? Unless the Leader of the Opposition has turned himself into a court of law, we demand that this unsubstantiated allegation be withdrawn.

Looking at democracy only in terms of elections

In paragraph 16, the Leader of the Opposition wants to contemptuously portray the leaders in Government as people who think democracy means only elections. The leadership in Government has all the necessary intellectual and practical credentials to adequately appreciate all the ingredients, which constitute a democracy. It is on record that the same leadership fought for and restored democratic governance in Uganda and the Leader of the Opposition is a product and a beneficiary of this effort. It is instead the Opposition, and in particular the Forum for Democratic Change party, whose conduct is still wanting in terms of democratic credentials. As we have seen before, to them, an election is free and fair only if they have won, and a government is democratic only if they are the ones in charge. They espouse the “We either win or they lose” mentality which is in itself grossly undemocratic.                         

In paragraph 18, the Leader of the Opposition claims that public trust in the UPDF is eroding because of continued involvement of – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have in no way stood to disrupt the statement being issued by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The procedural guidance I would like to seek from you is that, as the debate on the State of the Nation Address is being wound up, the Prime Minister has given scathing attacks on the Opposition and in certain instances, he demands that we either substantiate or withdraw and this is going on the Hansard. 

The procedural guidance I seek from you, Madam Speaker, is that as we go into the debate on budget or policy statements, will we be given an opportunity because these are serious issues that we need to substantiate since the Prime Minister has demanded for it? Otherwise, how will the future Members of Parliament look at the official record where on one side we demand for withdrawal, if we do not substantiate? At what time will we put right the record of this Parliament? Will we be given the opportunity? I wish to seek your indulgence in that regard. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when the Leader of the Opposition was making his response to the State of the Nation Address, he spoke for over two-and-half hours and I protected him fully. I refrained the Government side from even standing up to say anything, and I allowed him to say everything that he wanted. So, let the government respond. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In paragraph 18, the Leader of the Opposition claims that public trust in the UPDF is eroding because of continued involvement of senior officers in electoral politics, police protecting NRM leaders and RDCs and DISOs campaigning for the NRM. Again this is a blanket generalisation and obviously it is very inaccurate. The very few isolated cases of members of the armed forces who have strayed into partisan politics have been punished. On the whole, our UPDF and the Uganda Police force go about their work in a non-partisan and professional manner. 

The respect and loyalty, which the armed forces accord to the President in accordance with Article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, should not be misinterpreted to mean siding with the ruling party. They are simply performing their duties. The President is entitled to it by virtue of his position as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

Constitutionalism and rule of law
In paragraphs 20 and 21, the Leader of the Opposition insinuates that there is limited constitutionalism and rule of law in Uganda. This argument is far-fetched. We, the NRM, are the ones who instituted a process for restoration of constitutional rule in 1986, which culminated in the 1995 Constitution after two decades of unconstitutional rule.  We have since stayed on the constitutional path. Where the Constitution has been amended, this has been done through constitutional means.

In paragraphs 22 to 25, the Leader of the Opposition harps on the understanding that as Members of Parliament, we are answerable to 33 million Ugandans to justify some of the excesses committed by the Opposition in Parliament, including the futile walk outs, all ostensibly in the name of pushing Government to follow the right path. In this, the Leader of the Opposition seems to forget that actually the President is equally, if not more, accountable to the 33 million Ugandans as we the MPs are, given that he is elected through adult suffrage by the whole nation while each of us is only elected by a constituency. 

In doing his work, therefore, the President and the Executive which he leads have no less a duty to the people of Uganda than Parliament has. Therefore, neither Parliament nor the Executive should seek to assume preponderance over the other in the running of Government business. The two organs have independent but unavoidably complementary roles and the success of each in discharging its mandate very much depends on cooperation and support from the other.  (Applause)

The importance of mutual respect and constructive collaboration in order to deliver the “Change which Ugandans want in their lives” therefore cannot be over-emphasised.  
In paragraph 24, the Leader of the Opposition calls upon the President not to cajole MPs from their enormous undertaking to improve the lives of Ugandans.  This statement is meant to denigrate the President as a person who could persuade Parliament against pursuing national interests. At its best, this innuendo is grossly unfair to the person of the President, a man who has to-date given all his time, energy, thought and life to the struggle for the stability and development of this nation. 

The Leader of the Opposition is emphatic on providing a credible opposition. This is very welcome because as I said earlier, if the Opposition is indeed credible, it adds value to the policies and programmes of Government. But, with all due respect, our Opposition still has an uphill task of disabusing itself of using incredible methods in trying to provide a credible opposition. For example, why should you walk out in the middle of an address to which you have all the time, space and facilities to respond and voice your disagreement? The practice of walking out is not only unparliamentary, but it is also not provided for in the Rules of Procedure. (Applause)

The Opposition in Parliament should adopt more civil, mature and collegial ways of dealing with views, which they do not agree with.  It is natural - [Mr Wadri: “Order.”]-  if you lend one your ear, he will also lend you his when your time to speak comes.

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR WADRI: I am one person who has very great respect for the Prime Minister as he superintends over the Executive, and more importantly at a personal level when on a number of occasions I refer to him as “Patrick” just to show the close working relationship we have. But as I sat down to listen to the Prime Minister, the words he is using against the Members of the Opposition - (Interjections) – certainly, nobody can hold onto his or her seat without rising up.

Is the Prime Minister in order not even to exercise decorum and respect for the Opposition as he articulates his issues? I mean, he even goes further to say there is no provision in our Rules of Procedure that allows Members, who are not agreeable, to walk out when we know that as members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the only civil method that Members of Parliament can exercise is to register displeasure by walking out. Is the Prime Minister in order not to recognise that and continuously use provocative language against us? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope that this exercise will guide all sides of the House to use civil language when they are dealing with colleagues. As I said before, I restrained the Government from interfering with the Leader of the Opposition when he was making his response and so he said everything that he wanted to say in the manner he wanted to say. I think during the next State of the Nation Address, we should be more civil to one another. (Applause) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank you for that ruling and I thank my dear brother for raising that point. I would like to explain why I made reference to the Rules of Procedure. Rule 9 of the Rules of Procedure is titled, “Presence of President in the Chair” and reads as:

“(1) There shall be a Chair of State for the President in the Chamber.

(2) The House shall be called to order and stand in silence whenever the President enters or leaves the Chamber.

(3) The President may be accompanied in the Chamber by an aide-de-camp.

(4) The President, while occupying the Chair of State-
(a) may make a presidential statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question; but
(b) shall not otherwise participate in the proceedings of the House in any way.”

It is obvious that our rules command us that when the President is making his statement, he shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question. (Applause) 

The Opposition in Parliament should adopt more civil, mature and collegial ways of dealing with views which they do not agree with. It is natural that if you lend one your ear he will also lend you his when your time to speak comes. But the converse is also true if you do not.

Let me deal with the old and tired argument about presidential term limits.  The Leader of the Opposition says that term limits are good for nurturing democracy and must be reinstated. This statement is in itself undemocratic. Why should a democrat advance his or her view point as a must do? The proponents of term limits argue that it allows frequent turnover of leaders and therefore, widens the opportunity base for different people to assume elective offices. But many others argue that fixed term limits deny people an opportunity of returning an otherwise good leader just because he or she served a prescribed period. 

The critical question is, Do the people have a free choice on who is to lead them or they do not? These are two varying positions on term limits; neither of the two is godsent and the choice of which option a nation should adopt is a matter to be decided through democratic means. 

Let me reiterate that the State of the Nation Address, which was delivered to this august House on 8 June 2011 by the President, is a true, correct and adequate exposition of the state of our nation. (Applause) The future strategies and programmes articulated therein represent only a snapshot of a broad range of Government interventions aimed at improving service delivery and furthering national growth and development.

This Parliament has since 8 June 2011 spent a number of sittings debating and deliberating on the State of the Nation Address. Let me take this opportunity to assure you, Madam Speaker, that Government is very grateful to this Parliament for the great interest the Members have taken in the President’s State of the Nation Address. Government is happy about the serious and constructive debate and deliberations that have taken place in this Parliament, and Members from both sides of the House have raised sector specific issues. I assure you that this debate and deliberations have not been in vain.

Government ministers used the opportunity given to them to respond to many of the issues in some detail. It is also a fact that many of these issues are addressed in the budget speech for the financial year 2011/2012, and in the various ministerial policy statements for this financial year. These too will be the subject of parliamentary debate, deliberation and action in the next few weeks.

Government legislative programme
The following, and what the Cabinet may add later on, shall constitute the legislative programme for the financial year 2011/2012:
i)	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011.

ii)	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill

iii)	The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control)Bill.

iv)	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill.

v)	The Geographical Indicators Bills.

vi)	The Implementation of the Government Assurances Bill.

vii)	The Industrial Property Bill.

viii)	The Chattels Securities Bill.

ix)	The Companies Bill.

x)	The Marriage and Divorce Bill.

xi)	The Plant Variety Bill.

xii)	The Plant Protection and Health Bill

xiii)	The National Council for Older Persons Bill

xiv)	The National Council for Disability Act (Amendment) Bill.

xv)	The Uganda Meteorological Authority Bill.

xvi)	The Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act (Amendment) Bill and

xvii)	The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill.

The finer details of the interventions articulated in the President’s address are contained in other government policy documents. These include the national development plan; the proposed national budget for the year 2011/2012; ministerial statements of the various Government ministries. These constitute our roadmap towards stability, growth and development in the current year and beyond.

As Government, we call upon all Members of Parliament and indeed all Ugandans to embrace, support and implement this roadmap. We welcome constructive ideas given in good faith to add value to the planned interventions. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, that marks the conclusion of the debate on the State of the Nation Address. Next week, we shall commence on the budget. Can I alert the acting Leader of Opposition that the shadow finance minister will have to take the stand early on Tuesday.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement made before this House. There are some sweeping parts of this statement where there seems to be a need for either clarification or responses, to substantiate certain issues that were raised by the Leader of Opposition. I do not know whether you will avail our side the opportunity to give such clarification to substantiate some of the statements attributed to us and when will this happen? Madam speaker, this is the clarification I would seek from you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my learned colleague that the response is a rejoinder and in practice, a rejoinder does not afford the other side the opportunity to reply. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is not the practice in this House to continue debate in perpetuity. Both sides were given an opportunity to contribute; therefore, this is the end of it. Then next we are going to do the budget.

Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do give thanks to the President for the clear and precise exposition of state policy as contained in the State of the Nation Address.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

Now, hon. Members, yesterday I appealed to the committee chairs to expedite the work. We would like to handle two committee reports a day so that we finish the debate on policy statements by the end of next week. So, kindly if there is still unfinished work, use tomorrow, Saturday, Sunday and Monday so that we complete the budget process. House adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.56 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 August 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

