Tuesday, 12 August 2008

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting and I just wanted to re-assure the Members of the House that there has been a substantial amount of rain and there will be subsequent showers and thunderstorms. So, please check the weather stations. (Applause) 

Honourable members, we are still dealing with the general debate on the Budget, which we hope to close today. We have some more Bills for a first reading. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY, UGANDA BILL, 2008

2.49
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ham Mulira): Thank you. Rt hon. Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the First Reading of the following Bill: “The National Information Technology Authority, Uganda Bill, 2008.” I also hereby table the certificate for financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the Bill will be committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Dr Atwooki Kasirivu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Physical Planning Bill, 2008” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The certificate- has it been seconded?  You know it has to be seconded and you have to say that you have the certificate there. You did not just show it to me. (Laughter)

DR KASIRIVU:  Madam Speaker, the certificate of clearance is attached and I lay it on the Table.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, the Bill has been seconded; the certificate is available; it will be sent to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/08

II) 	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/09 

(General debate continues)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Before we go there, hon. Members in the public gallery we have P.7 pupils and teachers from Hornby Junior High School, Kabale Municipality in Kabale District, please stand up. (Applause)  You are welcome. We wish you luck in your P.7 examinations; they are all P.7 candidates. We also have teachers of Buyoga Primary School in Luuka County, Iganga District- they have not arrived? They are still on their way from Luuka - okay.   I have seen all of you; let us start with hon. Obua then hon. Otengo. 

2.51
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the general debate on the budget. Firstly, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the budget that he presented. Usually, in such a Budget Speech there would be a lot of things that could be praised but also there is a lot to criticise.

I would like to thank the minister more especially for this year prioritising the budget and ensuring that there was a focus in certain areas like the roads. But also I would like to say that there are areas that needed further scrutiny, that needed more serious consideration and I would like to pick on one and that is education. 

Madam Speaker, let me share a small story so that I can illustrate the point that I would like to make. Recently I was in my constituency and I found this young girl of 13 years who happened to be my cousin and she was in a UPE school. When I checked her report, I was very impressed because she was top of her class. I decided that I would pick this young girl, bring her to Kampala and help her with her education. 

To my dismay, when I brought this young girl, the first thing I discovered was that she could neither speak English nor could she write. She could not even spell her name correctly. And yet this is a girl who was supposed to be in P.5. When I asked her, "how did you manage to perform so well?" Her response was that the teachers would administer exams in Luo orally and they would respond orally. That is how she managed to be at the top of her class. This is the story in our UPE system. I would like to submit that this is going to take us to a place where we shall have half-baked people in this country. 

Madam Speaker, admittedly, UPE has improved on our access and enrolment, we admit that. But when it comes to quality, equity and retention, it is very wanting. The minister himself admits that we are doing very badly in terms of quality. Actually in my part of the country, I would say that there is no education that we can really boast of.  I do not want to be misunderstood; the UPE itself is a very good policy. Unfortunately, whenever you come up with a constructive criticism, you are called names. We want to improve the quality of UPE. 

Elsewhere, like in Ghana, they took time to prepare. They made sure that infrastructure was in place and they have even gone ahead to make it compulsory. There it is Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education (FCUBE) and they took time to prepare. What has happened here is that we have tried to politicise something which is actually a basic human right, which was agreed by comity of nations throughout the world in 1990.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that we should not only be looking at the Education Standards Agency as the way to improve quality.  We need to tackle the problem right from the roots. We need to pay very close attention to the teachers. The teachers cannot possibly teach in the circumstances under which they teach. I can speak for my area where up to now teachers have to ride bicycles for 25 kilometres to go and teach and ride back to wherever they stay, just because they do not have accommodation in schools. Their salary is nothing as a take home; we need to increase their salaries and motivate them.

I am very disappointed that whenever you google UPE Uganda, the document that you see there is the one of 1999 and the latest is 2000.  Yet this is one programme which as a country we are very proud of.  I would envisage a situation where we would be updating our data. We should not abandon this programme. We want to help Government to improve it and so when we criticise it the way I am doing, it should be taken in good faith.  

Madam Speaker, may I also touch briefly on higher education. I was one of the privileged people who attended the UN World Conference on Higher Education that took place in Paris in 1998 organised by UNESCO. That conference came up with many good resolutions and one of them was that higher education should be made more accessible to many especially the poor.  What do we see in Uganda?  The poor are being left out.  When you leave higher education to the market place, to the forces of demand and supply, the way it is, then we are not helping the poor parent with a bright student. 

Therefore, Government should support poor students by way of providing them with student loans.  This is something we need to prioritise as a nation; other countries are doing it. In Ghana- I like giving reference to Ghana because I lived there for quite a long time - this student loan scheme has been going on for many years and therefore even the poor can access higher education. Why can’t we do it here?  And we cannot say money is not available because we have a lot of money at the National Social Security Fund, the same source of funding that is used in Ghana. They call theirs, Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT).  We need to re-examine this and make sure that there is equity in this country in terms of higher education.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MS AMUGE REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, District Woman Representative, Lira):  I thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for having read the Budget Speech. I guess the minister was trying to respect the demand by the Constitution. One the Budget Act; second, the national objectives and directive principles of the state policy which, amongst others, demand that the State respects the following: Provision of adequate resources for organs of Government, right to development, balanced and equitable distribution of resources, protection of natural resources, provision of education, provision of health services and so forth.  

Madam speaker, last week I was disappointed when the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries tried to give us some information about the project which we were supposed to undertake from 2003 to date.  We all know that fish is now about third in the foreign exchange earning for this country.  You may recall that in the year 2003, Government came up with a project under ADB and 35 landing sites were supposed to be developed and these were around L. Victoria, L. Kyoga, L. Albert, L. Edward, L. George and so forth.  

However, Madam Speaker, to date it is very disappointing to discover that the Ministry in charge of Fisheries has not done much in this area.  We were told last week that the project ends at the end of the year.  I would like to demand this august House to urge Government to give us the plan or strategy they have to implement the programme within the remaining month or otherwise.  

Madam Speaker, we also received some money from DFID and this money was supposed to form the BMUs, that is the Beach Management Units and also to remove the side dwellers. I believe that this was done, but the ministry was supposed to sustain the programme, which they have not done. Up to now when you go to these landing sites, the fishing communities have been left without any social services. They have no roads; they have no health centres which were promised and the landing sites are so pathetic. I would like to ask, if the ministry cannot give us the answer now, where should we look? As I speak now, the lakes have been taken up by the security agencies. They are torturing the fishing communities and yet themselves are using the illegal fishing gears and depleting the lakes with impunity.  

Most of the money has gone to workshops and foreign trips and that is how we plan to sustain our lakes which are now depleted. I would like to demand that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries informs this House what steps they are going to take to make sure that we do not lose out on the money which was given to us by ADB. It would be unfortunate for the fishing communities who were promised alternative livelihood so that they do not over use the lakes just to be left like that. Part of this money was supposed to sustain the environment which is getting bad.  

Having said that, I would like to look at the health sector. On page 28, the minister concedes that there are some problems in the health sector.  I do agree with the minister, but what he has not added which I would like to add as a challenge in the ministry is the conflict amongst the political supervisors; secondly, the political leaders partially being disregarded by the technical staff and thirdly, the work environment of the health workers which is very bad. The repercussion is now on the citizens who expect to be given services at different locations in this country. While the political leaders are busy fighting themselves, they are not aware that probably there could be some deliberate move by some cliques also to fight them. I plead with our technocratic Prime Minister to look into this. I am just a whistle blower, but there are some problems.  

I believe that if the appointed political leaders are disregarded in the ministry, then the appointing authority is also disregarded. I think this is insubordination which should be looked at.  

However, I also do not believe in the ministers themselves practicing insubordination sometimes on the frontbench.  When the Prime Minister has to run around to look for the ministers to do their work - I think this is unacceptable -(Interruptions)

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health is one of the most hardworking ministries in this country. We have handled very serious epidemics namely, Ebola, Marburg, Cholera, HIV/AIDS; we are now dealing with meningitis and hepatitis. Is the Member of Parliament in order to insinuate that the Ministry of Health is disorganised and is non-performing? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought I understood her to mean that she had left talking about the Ministry of Health and she was talking about the ministries in general and the Prime Minister’s difficulties sometimes in making them stay here. That is what she was talking about.

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance. I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for giving us ambulances. (Laughter) They gave 24 ambulances to referral hospitals and the most rural hospitals. I want to thank you for that.

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the ministry to add more facilities to the highway hospitals like Tororo, Bugiri, Kawolo, Kiryandongo and the rest because of the accidents we always have on those roads.

3.10
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to once again thank the Minister for Finance for fulfilling his constitutional obligations by reading the Budget Speech and I want to thank him so much for saying that this year’s budget is focusing on Prosperity for All. That is the point where I want to make my submissions. 

Prosperity for All is a very good programme which has all along been emphasised by the ruling party. We all do support the programme so much and we want to be part of the entire programme.  

I recall on Friday, 27 June 2008, on the debate of the State of the Nation Address, the issue of Prosperity for All was raised in this House with emphasis on the selection criteria for the first six homesteads per parish. Indeed in that debate, the Minister for the Presidency, Dr Wabudeya, did acknowledge the fact that there is need to come out with the policy guidelines on the criteria for the selections of the six beneficiaries per parish. To date, we have not received anything to that effect. 

I want to say that yesterday I got a disturbing letter in my pigeonhole. The letter was written to the Executive Director of NAADS Secretariat directing him to submit lists of the selected beneficiaries of the six homesteads per parish for the technical committee that is sitting today to approve and finally give a go-ahead for the implementation of Prosperity for All. The letter is very disturbing and I want to read it. I will not go through the whole letter but part of it. Point number one-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, start from the source, the address, author, date and so forth.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The letter was written on the 4 August 2008 to the Executive Director, NAADS Secretariat by Prof. Dr J.J Otim, Head PFA Coordination Unit, Office of the Vice President. The letter reads: 

“Reference is made to H.E the President dated 11 July 2008 to Hon. Hilary Onek, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: 

Subsequent resolutions of the last meeting of the sub Cabinet Committee on Prosperity for All chaired by H.E the Vice President on the 24 July 2008, which discussed the above subject. 

The urgency of completing the selection of the six homesteads per parish does not need any further emphasis. The programme is already behind schedule. The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to remind NAADS, through you, to ensure the following:
1.	A list of selected six homesteads per parish throughout the country should be completed and presented to the technical committee meeting scheduled for the 12 August 2008 (which is today).
2.	Provide a list and composition of the parish and sub county committees that carry out the selections of the six homesteads per parish as per the selection guidelines.
3.	Attach comments on the degree of merit and transparency in the selections with reference to the policy and selection guidelines approved by Cabinet”.

Madam Speaker, when you look at our Constitution, Article 79 says that it is only Parliament that has the constitutional obligation to make laws for good governance, development and peace. I ask myself a lot of questions. Where did Cabinet get the mandate to come out with a policy and after -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I came back from the North last night where I had spent five days. I took trouble to find out from my constituents whether they had already selected their six people per parish. Nobody was aware that they were even supposed to select anybody and the deadline has passed. The committee in Kampala is supposed to be vetting them today yet in the rural areas they are not aware of this selection. 

Furthermore, some SACCOs are selectively being informed that they will get money from this programme of Prosperity for All meaning that only those SACCOs headed by known supporters of NRM/O are being informed. I have SACCOS, which are headed by the people who support me and they have never been informed. If we are not careful, this programme of Prosperity for All will end up as a political programme for 2011. I thank you.

MR OYET: I thank you very much, hon. Okello-Okello for that information. Madam Speaker, on the 27th June this year, I provided the House with information regarding the unfair selection of the beneficiaries of these six homesteads in Acholi sub region. I want to say that the selections are now being done politically, which to me is a very unfair exercise, as it will undermine the entire intention of Prosperity for All. 

During the pilot scheme of the PFA, for example in Gulu District we ended up with the RDCs, army officers and some of the key cadres of the NRM as the first beneficiaries leaving the most vulnerable who should have been considered as first priority in this programme. One wonders whether this programme is really meant to eradicate poverty and bring prosperity for all Ugandans.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether the Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister can tell us. This matter was repeatedly raised in the State of the Nation Address; the question of the selection of the six homesteads and the government undertook not to start before they had come here for discussion of that matter. So, where do we stand on the issue of the selection? Have you started or not?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Hilary Onek): Madam Speaker, as regards the selection of the six per parish, the policy has only been passed by Cabinet and we have not formally launched the selection. I don’t know what selections these people are talking about because I am the Minster of Agriculture and I know what is happening. I was in Amuru three to four weeks ago and among other places in hon. Oyet’s constituency and I had a meeting with the leaders of the district. I clarified to them that the selection will be done at parish level by everybody. 

The members of the parish will be called and they will nominate who they consider are people who can provide demonstration services in their land. That is the position of Government. The selection will be done in the presence of the sub county LC III chairmen and the officials from the farmers’ Committee and farmers’ forum. Nothing formal has been done and I don’t know why people lie in this House and make sensational statements. I do not understand. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Agriculture, there is a letter he is reading, purportedly following up some Cabinet issues. Did you forge that letter?  

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I am ready to lay this letter on Table. I wonder whether the honourable Minister for Agriculture is trying to disown the letter from the Office of the Vice-President. My worry is about insubordination, because this is a letter from a whole Vice-President and here you are disowning it yet it is copied to you. 

Madam Speaker, allow me read who the letter was copied to: His Excellency the Vice-President; the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, and I believe they have a copy; all ministers and ministers of state; the Principal Private Secretary to H.E the President; the Principal Private Secretary to H.E the Vice-President; all Members of Parliament; all LC.V chairpersons; all RDCs; all LC.III chairpersons. Now, what are you talking about? Allow me lay this letter on the Table -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let him lay it. 

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, allow me lay on Table the letter written to the Executive Director NAADS Secretariat on 4th August by Prof. Dr. J.J Otim of PFA Coordination Unit, which I believe the honourable minister of Agriculture is not aware of.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, it seems the Office of the Vice-President has some information. Hon. Baba, you wanted to give us information. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, it is true that on the 24th of July the Vice-President chaired a Cabinet sub-committee on the implementation of Prosperity for All. The idea was to review progress on the implementation of that programme. With Cabinet having approved the policy as well as the rollout plan, it is true as the honourable Minister of Agriculture has said that the selection criterion has been approved. The committee to approve the six selected members from every parish was also approved. 

The concern was that the beginning of this process was delayed and the coordinator for this new programme, Prof. J.J Otim, was tasked to ensure that this programme starts as soon as possible, hence this letter to the NAADS Executive Director. To my knowledge, this process of selection has not yet started throughout the country but we are urging the NAADS coordinator to start this process as soon as possible on the basis of the criteria that was made and on the basis of the group that are to be selected at every parish. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is on your side, but an undertaking was made in this House by none other than the Prime Minister that the debate will be brought here before you start. So, where does Parliament come in here? I think that is the issue we want to know. You made an undertaking here before we went for recess that the government produces that policy here for debate. So, where does Parliament fit in? That is what we want to know. 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Presidency) (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I have just arrived but I thought I could come in here and inform Parliament that the policy on Prosperity for All is ready for dissemination. It is in print and as soon as it is out, we shall distribute it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me; was it just for information or for debate? You know, dissemination is different from debate. 

DR WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, Parliament does not debate policies. Polices are debated by Cabinet and we disseminate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They say they are bringing it; will Parliament have input at all in the selection process? Is that what you are saying? 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to inform this House that last month, we had regional workshops and the one for the central region was in Masaka. There were also sub-regional workshops and they really emphasised that Parliament is a key stakeholder and that Members of Parliament in their constituencies should be members on the committees for these programmes. If now the selection has started without our knowledge, I do not understand what is going on. Maybe the minister should tell us what the role of Parliament is. What is our role as Members of Parliament in our constituencies where this programme is being implemented? 

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the submissions and the source of this letter, can the Minister of Agriculture now retract his statement that there was a lie being portrayed in this House?

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, the minister has just informed us that the policy for Prosperity for All is still in print. If that be the case, how come other SACCOs have already started receiving money?

DR WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, I would like first of all to clarify on the role of Members of Parliament. If my colleagues, Members of Parliament, had been attending the regional workshops, by now they would be aware of their role. It was felt that it would not be very wise for Members of Parliament to be members on the selection committees. Honourable colleagues, you know very well the implications and intricacies in selecting six people out of a whole parish. So, we have agreed that Members of Parliament will be part of the monitoring team. Your role will be to monitor the activities of the Prosperity for All Programme and not to carry out the selection. (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members! Let the minister explain. 

DR WABUDEYA: If we reflect very well, you will all agree with me that it is dangerous for you to belong to a selection committee. You will be doing a better job as a monitoring agent than a selection agent. There is a selection criterion -(Interruption).

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have just received information from the Minister of Agriculture that the policy is not yet out. If I got him right, the selection has not yet started and the implementation of the policy has not yet started. This means that the statement has actually not even been presented to us. So, is the minister, hon. Wabudeya, in order to give us the particulars of a policy which is not before us? Is she in order to even go to the extent of telling us that the MPs will play such and such a role, that theirs will be just monitoring and they will not be involved in the six homesteads? Would she be in order if the Minister of Agriculture has told us he is going to bring the policy here and we debate it, look at it and internalise it? 

We have a duty as Parliament. Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether the minister is in order to give us that position which is contrary to what the hon. minister is saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, the minister has been listening attentively to the various complaints raised since the State of the Nation Address and that is what she is addressing now. So, she is in order.

DR WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, the Cabinet of this Government has passed that policy and therefore it is ready for implementation. I was just saying that we are printing the document which we shall circulate to everybody to use or to get to know. Otherwise, the passing has been done. We are now actually at the implementation stage.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find a lot of contradictions from the Minister for the Presidency. On 27 June this year, she did acknowledge the fact that the policy will be brought to Parliament for Parliament to pronounce itself on that policy. She was actually seated in that very position and I was there on the frontbench. Now, this is the same person who is saying that Parliament has nothing to do with that policy and that it is only the work of the Cabinet. I find a lot of contradiction in that. 

Two, Madam Speaker, -(Interruptions) - I do not need information. I am a learned person- (Laughter)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable Members of Parliament, Article 111(2) of the Constitution says: “The functions of the Cabinet shall be to determine, formulate and implement the policy of the government and to perform such other functions as may be conferred by this Constitution or any other law.” So, it is Cabinet which determines and implements policy. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but Prime Minister, perhaps you should also be clear when responding to issues here because the government made an undertaking to bring the matter here for debate. In the State of the Nation Address, that is what you said. You made an undertaking to bring it here. You are now tactfully withdrawing from -(Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker of Parliament, to err is human. I am now stating the position of the Constitution and I suggest that we should abide by the Constitution. I thank you.

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for that submission and for accepting that Government erred. Before I conclude, Minister of Agriculture, hon. Hillary Onek, made a statement saying that I lied to the House. I want him to retract the statement here and now. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, in the policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, somewhere they said they are soon coming with the Bills on microfinance - which actually to the best of my knowledge is about PFA - before September for Parliament to pronounce itself so that they effectively begin the implementation of microfinance, which is part of PFA. I find a lot of contradictions here. All I want to say is that we want this PFA to be implemented in a transparent manner. It should really target to improve the life of the most vulnerable Ugandans so that tomorrow we live in harmony in as far as our economic set-up is concerned. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.36
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I salute all of you. I would like to address myself to the section that talks about security and governance, particularly local governance and financing. We have a scenario in Obongi Constituency where the technical people required to help in the delivery of services at the sub-county level - people like veterinary officers, fisheries officers and other technical staff at that level - are missing. Itula Sub-County, for example, shares a vet officer with Gimara Sub-County. Even other sub-counties in Moyo that do not fall within Obongi County have the same problem. We realised this when we were fighting against a disease of cattle, CBBP. 

I ask myself, and I would like to ask the minister; we have jobs in Government positions that are not filled but Ugandans are complaining about unemployment, what is our problem as a country? Don’t we have the right people? Are the right people to employ not there or we have the people to employ but the jobs are not there? What is the problem? What are we lacking? Are we lacking the jobs to employ Ugandans or are we lacking the Ugandans to be employed in the jobs? I think we should address this. 

We can talk here about Prosperity for All, and Government can look for money from here and there and send to the sub-counties, but my personal problem is doing things in a shoddy way just because you do not have the technical people to give the right advice to the people at that level. I would like to urge the honourable ministers of Public Service and of Finance to look into this matter so that we come out clearly with our deficiencies - with what we lack - and with what we have, especially jobs versus the people to be employed.

Secondly, in my understanding of the term prosperity for all, I do not limit myself to Government giving money to people but creating a conducive atmosphere for generating wealth for all the people of Uganda. I would like to refer to the Ugandans who are working outside Uganda and specifically their time of retirement. In Uganda we have NSSF to deal with that period when a Ugandan retires from office. The NSSF provides a fallback position for him or her. 

However, I have realised that Ugandans, especially those in countries like the UK, work there for all their useful age but when they leave that country before retirement, the money collected by the equivalent of NSSF in that country cannot be transferred to Uganda because the British system does not link up with ours. Their system only links up with Australia. A citizen of Australia working in Britain can transfer his or her money accumulated by the equivalent of NSSF to that country. 

I would suggest that the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Public Service including the technical people at NSSF and the Parliamentary Committee of Foreign Affairs study this problem so that they can come up with a policy to enable Ugandans who spend their time working abroad transfer their collection from those social security funds to Uganda when they leave work before retirement. I believe that governments such as that of Britain are getting free money that would belong to Ugandans and Uganda as a country. I am saying this because it is so bad for Ugandans to accumulate such money there but fail to transfer it to Uganda.

3.41
MR ABURA PIRIR (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the budget speech which he presented. I am indeed delighted with this budget because this is so far the first budget to cater for some areas that had never been thought of. It is the first time a budget has come up with affirmative action to address issues of development in areas that had never been thought of, such as Karamoja. I will talk specifically about roads. A road is a very vital means of communication and development in the country. There should therefore be balanced construction and repair of roads countrywide. 

Although we are talking about Karamoja being one of the areas that will benefit from this road construction, my problem is the estimates in the budget. I wish this budget could be divided. We have four administrative regions: north, east, west and central. So if the whole of this budget estimate could go to one region annually, let us imagine the east, it would addresss all matters of development in that region. (Laughter) Then the next one could go to the north to cater for things like health, roads and so on.  

Finally, you can get to central and west. In five years, I believe, there would be an impact in terms of development in the country. I am saying this because the budget estimate is so small that you are forced to give some little to central, east and so on. That is why I am suggesting that we should copy the idea of the five-year lifespan of a Parliament.

Madam Speaker, let me talk about the issue of currency. I do not see why we carry around a lot of money. We should slash the money. We have a legal tender note of Shs 1000 but if we slash off two zeroes and remain with say Shs 10, that would be better than carrying a lot of money, which is also so bulky. Let the honourable Minister of Finance reduce this money. 

I attended the anniversary of 50 years of Ghana’s independence and I can tell you that they have exactly the same volume of currency like Uganda. They also have the decentralisation aspect; I had not known that we borrowed it from there. On currency, I can inform you that they also slashed two zeroes but retained the value. If an item cost Shs 100, for example, when you slash two zeroes to Shs 1.00, it will remain the same.

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the issue of security. Any time we talk about security, everybody’s mind goes to fighting, rebellion and so on. I am talking abut security in respect of the fires. Since the fire accidents broke out in Uganda, we have not been able to control them. What does it mean? It means we have inadequate fire fighting equipment. I expected this budget to come out with a plan on how to curb fire outbreaks in Uganda. A fire engine, for example, costs about Shs 1 billion. As I said earlier on, we could have every region get a regional fire-fighting engine at its headquarters. I am saying this because fires so far have become more dangerous and alarming; they jeopardize the lives of people both in schools and elsewhere. So, I expected this budget to have covered the issue of the fires.

3.47
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to add my voice to others to thank the Minister of Finance for giving us this year’s budget under the theme, “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Prosperity for All.” I would like to first of all say that this is a very good theme because the catchword therein is “prosperity for all”. I look at prosperity for all as being multi-sectoral; when some major sectors relevant to prosperity for all are provided for, then I think we move a long way in strategising for prosperity for all.

Let me say something about NAADS. Yes, I appreciate the fact that the minister increased NAADS’ allocation by 62 percent, but I want to say that this NAADS programme has greatly been sabotaged by the same Ministry of Finance. I am saying this because when I talked to officials from the NAADS Secretariat, they complained that after passing the vote on account here, money was only sent on paper but in actual fact there was no physical money sent to run activities of NAADS. I want to request the minister to send this money in good time because when you send it when the planting seasons are over it is as good as wasted. I would like to urge the Minister of Finance to speed up the remittance of NAADS funds so that we can time the seasons. 

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure honourable members that we are extremely anxious to ensure that NAADS is able to supply inputs to farmers in time because we know that the rains have begun. So, they should supply quickly.  

I am in touch with NAADS almost every day including today. Although I am not the Minister of Agriculture, I have asked the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury to put maximum pressure - and those are my words - on NAADS to ensure that they supply inputs in time.  I spoke to the Director of NAADS yesterday and he did not indicate that there is any problem of money; money is not the problem. If there is any problem, then that is something else but not money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
MR KALIBA: I thank the minister for that information, Madam Speaker. However, I would like to inform him that even His Excellency the President has actually complained about delayed remittance of funds to NAADS. He actually wrote a letter to all Members of Parliament complaining about why NAADS activities do not match with the planting seasons. He said, for example, that we had lost the last season. Actually, he was worried as to whether we were not going to miss this planting season as well. That is why I am raising this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Kaliba, I think the minister has just said that now the issue of money is not a problem. He said he has provided the money. Hasn’t he?

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, if the money has been sent to the NAADS Secretariat, it is well enough. However, I was in touch with a one Dr Salim from NAADS Secretariat about one week ago and he expressed the same problem. We had gone there to request for some support for Toro diary. That is when we got that information and I thought I would raise this on the Floor of Parliament.

Secondly, I want to talk about roads. I want to thank the Minister of Finance for earmarking Shs 1 trillion for roads. This is a very important aspect because improved roads have a very big correlation to farmers’ accessibility to markets, to tourist attractions, value addition, industrialisation, etc. So, it is really very crucial and fundamental. 

I also want to thank the minister for deleting VAT on salt and other equipment like plant machinery trucks of loading capacity 3.5 tones. This is clear evidence that the budget is about the local people.

3.54
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to first of all seek your indulgence. I have a matter, which I thought the Leader of Government Business should take note of as we discuss the budget to enable the people I represent be assisted. I have over 1200 families living between Butiaba in Biiso Sub-county and another six villages in Buliisa Sub-county who for the last three years cannot access their gardens. Unfortunately, even the areas where they have been grazing from are now overgrazed. In Buliisa, we have foot and mouth disease. So, those who cannot get food cannot also sell animals because we have had quarantine for the last four months. That means livelihood is almost becoming next to impossible.  

The other area where they have been surviving on is fishing, but because of much pressure and some mismanagement of our fisheries resources, right now they have nowhere to turn to. They are so dehumanised and their lives are at risk. I would like to first of all make an appeal to the Prime Minister and the Minister in charge of Disaster to come the rescue of these citizens who cannot dig and who have no pasture for their animals and nothing to find in the lake. The earlier some resettlement camps are put in place and some relief is brought, the better. 

At the same time, the situation is so bad that the animals which brought this foot and mouth disease are roaming from Butiaba Barracks up to the boundaries of the national park, through the forest reserve, up to almost Bulisa District. I am not in any way contesting the court injunction; I am just saying that the enforcement is not defined. I request the Prime Minister’s Office, the Police and the Judiciary to help us to define the area. Right now, the police are protecting those who are moving around with the animals against the communities which were evicted three years ago. 

I would like to call upon NGO’s, human rights organisations and the international community to come in and help my people where the Prime Minster’s Office and the disaster department cannot handle because we are at the brink of coming here to ask that Bulisa be declared a disaster area. This matter has been discussed here for the last three years but we do not seem to get anywhere. Unfortunately, the victims are people who have not caused any trouble and yet I am told by the police that they have a responsibility to enforce an injunction to protect 54 citizens against the 1,200 families. I thought I should be given an opportunity to raise this as a matter of national importance so that Government and any other person who cares about humanity can come to our rescue. 

Now to discuss the budget, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for increasingly showing us that we can now concentrate and focus on our resources. Last year, we voted for CHOGM and whatever was done was for CHOGM. This year, some good money is being put on roads. I would like to thank the ministry for this Shs 1 trillion plus. However, I would like to add that it is not enough to just increase the financing of the roads sector and not look into the designs and the decisions as to whether we should continually be repairing or constructing roads. 

4.00
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Finance for the very good budget speech, one of the best in recent times. I also thank the shadow minister for the response and also for the positivism that he had in his response. I hope the Minister of Finance will not hesitate to take this on for the good performance of this budget. 

I was very happy to note that our country has registered 8.9 percent of economic growth, a percentage that is enjoyed by the fastest growing countries, especially the Asian tigers like China which registered 11 percent. This is a ray of hope for our country; if others have done it, we can also do it. As hon. Kaliba said, the theme of the budget speech was very good and also the details of the budget - issues like infrastructure development, human capital development, energy, industrial development, NAADS which is under agriculture, and of course governance and security which will all help us realise prosperity for all.

Under economic performance and forecast, specifically under business environment, the minister talks about improving efficiency in the land registry which will go a long way to improve access to this department, which has been disturbing quite a number of Ugandans and as such keeping them away from acquiring mortgages. The minister in his speech indicates that it has been 12 days but now it would take only 30 minutes. Honourable minister, I think this is far fetched. You need to work hand in hand with the minister responsible because a number of people are being kept away because of the bureaucracy that is in this land registry department. 

The second issue under the business environment is Government targeting infrastructure investment, specifically injecting Shs 1.1 trillion for the road sector development and maintenance. As the honourable minister was reading the budget, I was very keen and I had a very big smile on my face because it was a very good budget and when it came to the Shs 1.1 trillion, I was very happy. However, I was saddened that among the 10 roads that are going to be constructed, Kanungu was not included; the Ntungamo-Kagamba-Ishasha road was missing. 

As you may all know, this road was pledged in the morning days of NRM, and it has appeared in the national budget for a number of years. As you all may know, this road is very important. First of all, it is important as a tourist attraction facility as you indicated in the budget and also because we are exploring many prospects of oil in Kanungu. Even before we go to that, we all know that Kanungu is a hub for tourists. We have the rare endangered species of mountain gorillas in Bwindi, we have the climbing lions – I think they are only in Tanzania and Uganda - in Kanungu, Queen Elizabeth National Park. 

This road also works as a connection to the Congo. It could work as a security road because you know that we have had about 14 attacks from Congo from people suspected to be Interahamwe. They have killed our people and taken a lot of our property as a result of that road not being in place. If there was some reinforcement needed, this road would be very helpful. Of course, we should not forget that Kanungu is more or less a land locked district. If you are going there, you have to go through Nengo – the deep gorge which many of you have seen - or you go through Hamuba, the floating bridge which we cannot use because it is now condemned. What should we the people of Kanungu do? 

Three weeks ago, a truck got stuck in Nengo and all the traffic; talk about the buses; talk about the trucks that are going for exploration, which is at Ishasha in Bukongwe. Talk about the tourists going to Bwindi, going to Queen Elizabeth National Park. Talk about the Kanungu people doing business. Really, Madam Speaker, I have a specific question to the Minister of Finance but the minister in charge of roads would be the best person to answer this. My people are not happy likewise, I am also not happy because this road is not a new road; it was started in Ntungamo, it reached Rukungiri and it stopped there yet it is supposed to proceed to Kanungu. Why is this road not appearing in the national Budget? 

4.07
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to say bravo to the Minister of Finance because of the way our revenue collection is progressing. It shows that domestic revenue is increasing and we are running away from donor funding, which is at about 30 percent. The situational analysis shows that we can at least sponsor the activities which we plan for within the budget rather than depending on donor funding, which sometimes does not come on time and sometimes it even distorts budget activities. 

But, Madam Speaker, my problem is on the tax measures. I think the minister gave tax measures but I would like to appeal to him that since he has been responding to all recommendations of Parliament, he should look at the threshold across the board; in the business sector and individuals. If you look at the Income Tax Act, where the threshold has been 130,000 per month, you find that a levy of 10 percent has been consistently the same since 1997. And when we encourage savings for people who earn an income – these people whom we are looking at are teachers, nurses. We are looking at people who just get a minimum amount of money, and you will find that the threshold which was recommended by Parliament in its last recommendation of Shs 235,000 has a meaning because it has a multiplier effect. Shs 200,000 now; you can imagine its value now because since 1997 this threshold has not changed. 

Even the business enterprises -  because when you look at the threshold of VAT, which is across the board, of Shs 50 million, with the events, the cost of living, I think this is where I am appealing to the minister that since the Finance Bill is not yet passed, we can look into this so that the people who are going to implement UPE, USE –instead of taxing them more, we encourage them not to be taxed with a small minimum fee, then they go and accelerate the purchasing power within the economy and that is when you will collect even more. Other than getting 130, 10 percent of it and you remain with 120. When you compare it with the cost of living, I think it is really unreasonable now to remain at the same rate that we were in 1997.

Secondly, the tax measures that were taken on the levy of new vehicles. I think it is high time that Government thought about the new vehicles because when you look at global warming, the 20 percentage of levy on old vehicles compared to all the East African member states - they do not allow old vehicles! They merely re-adjust their import duty and excise duty on new vehicles so that people can import new vehicles and discourage importation of old vehicles. The problem is that, we spend a lot of money on used vehicles. Instead of spending foreign exchange on old vehicles to buy spares, you could spend it on new vehicles which are durable and which are less costly to maintain. Because when you are buying a new vehicle, it is not repaired within five years. 

When you follow the major principles of taxation, it must be equitable, it must be affordable and it must be flexible so that somebody can afford. But what we want to achieve here is that, the moment you reduce the tax on new vehicles, you will get more turnover; the old vehicles will not come in. Even time spent on the road, you will find that the time the old vehicle spends to run from here to Mbarara is not the same as the time the new vehicle will spend. And even the risk of carrying people in an old vehicle is very high; and that is why you find that the importation of these old vehicles is discouraged in other countries. So, I would think that we should look into this and we improve on the import duty of new vehicles. These are my observations. Thank you.

4.12
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleague, hon. Mukitale, Madam Speaker, permit me to raise this matter as a matter of national importance in the course of the debate. Yes, it is a matter touching the business of this House.

This House was considering the issue of re-development of the Old Taxi Park and wrangles erupted; they ended up in this House; a petition was presented and this House established a select committee to probe into this matter. A report was made and presented to the House but up to now it has not been debated. Surprisingly, our colleague who is chairing this committee, hon. Saleh Kamba, made a communication in writing to the parties concerned particularly to the tenants that they vacate the parks. And this communication went to the municipal authorities for enforcement as a decision of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, this matter has got lots of implications. What these people are doing – the municipal authorities – they okayed the demolition of the structures and in the process several people have suffered untold consequences. The demolition was carried out recently and it is ongoing. They have not finished all the structures but part of the structures are already demolished. They went ahead even to mislead the Attorney-General who made a similar communication okaying the demolition. 

So, Madam Speaker, as we go ahead with this budget debate and what not, I think it would be appropriate and pertinent if this House came up to pronounce itself on this matter. Whether actually we took a decision to authorise that kind of demolition to go ahead and the re-development or not. Because as far as I know, the record is very clear; we have never sanctioned that demolition. The report has never been debated in this House; we have not taken any decision on this matter. 

So, I do not know what can be done? This is a serious matter, it is even touching, you know I am sorry to say but, Madam Speaker, it is a serious  matter for a Member of Parliament to communicate to the tenants  directly that, “You vacate this is a decision of Parliament.” I do not know whether communications come from Members of the committees. I do not know whether it is not violation of our rules; I do not know whether disciplinary action should not be taken against the hon. Member who made that communication -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is true this matter came to the floor of Parliament and whatever took place took place and this debate, which is going on right now is specifically a general debate on the budget. I do not know whether it is procedurally right to bring in the matters which were in this House before without a substantive motion in the middle of the budget general debate. I do not know whether it is procedurally right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate on the budget concerns measures of the minister to raise finance in this country. Part of the people in that economy are the ones hon. Lukwago is talking about. So, it is pertinent.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would request that to protect the image of this House we come up with a position as Parliament. That is number one. Two, the status quo be preserved as we debate this matter. And thirdly, I propose to dispose of this matter one way or the other so that we get to know the clear position as what should be done. Otherwise, when you look at the petition that went to Kakooza Mutale and the Attorney-General acted on that petition from Kakooza Mutale to also say, “Go ahead with the demolition”, Parliament is going to be held liable. It is going to be denigrated in the public there for the actions of individuals but not the entire House. So, I pray that we get time off to debate this matter. 

Just an inquiry on the general debate on the budget. I would like the Minister of Health to tell us how far they have gone with complying with the requirements under the Abuja Declaration of 2000. We undertook as Government, as partner states who ratified this declaration, that we shall commit 15 percent of our budget towards health and eradication of Malaria. So, how far has the minister gone because I have seen time and again in all these financial years this issue is being shelved? Are we handling it or not?

And about millennium development goals, generally speaking hon. Minister of Finance, are we moving towards that direction of hitting the target by 2015? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, just to tie up loose ends on the matters raised by hon. Lukwago, one, I want to caution the Members of the House that the powers of the committees are delegated powers of the plenary. So, no committee can take it upon itself to take decisions on our behalf. And no Member of this House is allowed to communicate to the public decisions of this House other than the Clerk and the Speaker. So, please, hon. Members if you have been doing it, stop it. I will not deal with the discipline issues as for now but I will put this matter on the Order Paper so that we conclude it as the House because the report was for this House. Thank you.

4.19
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity for adding my voice to the budget speech. And just like my colleagues have alluded to, I should also not hesitate to send my appreciation to the hon. Minister of Finance for this time ever attempting to realign the budget with our national priorities and in a way that would not romance with poverty but would have a biting effect on poverty. 

But I am very concerned that we cannot talk about a good budget without looking at the budgeting discipline in this country, because the success of every budget is dependent on the budget discipline and the paradox we have in our civil service and all local governments whom we are relying on to deliver a half of our budget through services to the poor. It is unfortunate to note that they are dysfunctional and we cannot put our expectations that this budget is so well focused, would result into having tangible interventions in terms of quality services to the people of this country.  

I would be very concerned that at this point in time Government should have been rigorously pursuing how we are going to operationalise and implement the access to Information Act. We should have at this point in time institutionalised the system how we are going to ensure that local governments would not leave this budget in the hands of the corrupt officials who are behaving in this country like survivors of the Stone Age period. And these are things really we cannot leave untouched and I think Government must come very clear to take very proactive actions in terms of litigation for those caught in budget indiscipline. Because doing so would set zero tolerance of the corruption culture in this country. 

The other thing which I would want to add my voice to over this budget is that I appreciate the initiative of Government of Uganda to move to attract direct foreign investments into the country. But my concern is how do we create a win-win situation between the investors and the local people? I appreciate totally the government policy of promoting investment. Every investment that comes to this country the primary goal should be a partnership of developing this country. Many investors that have put their resources in Uganda are also at the same time victims of high forex  repatriation because we do not have a policy like the Tanzanian Government has where every investor would by law be permitted to reinvest 32 percent of the profits they are getting in that country. In Uganda, they repatriate profits 100 percent and I think that this is something that should not go unchecked. 

Again, these investors are employing people and cheating our people in the absence of a minimum wage policy. I understand the contradictions many have always brought in bringing the minimum wage policy. But I think it is high time we protected our citizens and ensure that they are well paid for the employment services they are executing to promote investments in this country. And I think this is something which our Government should take in a very serious way –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am seeking some clarification and also I am giving him information that the system he talked about referring to Tanzania was being used when Tanzania was still under a semi-socialist economy. But as I talk of now, we all have businesses; we go to Tanzania. After liberalisation of their economy, they repatriate their profits the way they want even 100 percent. Therefore, I would like to know when you did your research on Tanzanian economy to know about that 32 percent being reinvested as a must in the country. So, I would like to know when you did your research or how you got your information. Or whether it is recent or it was during that time when they were still under the socialist economy.

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, I was in Arusha six months ago to understand some of these issues. But if the example of Tanzania is not good enough then I can again refer you to Botswana where a similar practice is being undertaken. (Laughter)

Allow me add my voice on a strong affirmative action which can be taken in annexing Prosperity for All campaign and I have always said that our poverty is indeed energy poverty. Making a deliberate attempt to promote energy farming in this country would be the entry point for enhancing social change and transformation. What do I mean?

Our renewable energy policy, Government of Uganda requires all petroleum companies to blend their fossil oil with 20 percent of plant oil. This creates a deliberate market for our farmers. What our farmers lack is actually the strong motivating market. AGGRECO, which is the thermo plant in Lugogo, if it is required to blend by 20 percent of plant oil, they use 200 thousand litres of diesel a day. This should mean Shs 100 million would remain in the country, saving us Forex which otherwise we would have spent in importing oil. (Member timed out)

4.27
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister of Finance for fulfilling his constitutional obligations and also for the good budget speech, especially the theme, “The Strategic Priorities Accelerate Prosperity for All.” I wish also to thank our shadow minister for finance for having given alternatives because normally they say that the role of the Opposition is to oppose. We are not opposing; now we are giving alternative to your policies. 

Madam speaker, the Minister of Finance talked about 8.9 percent economic growth which we realised in the financial year 2007/08. I have persistently asked the minister to tell us exactly - because most of us represent rural constituencies. When you talk about 8.9 percent economic growth, in my constituency, let it be in infrastructure, let it be in health sector, let it be in agriculture, I do not see it!

Madam Speaker, even the President himself in the State of the Nation Address - open page 9 - he said, “This growth is however mainly in towns. It is good that the towns are growing and they will grow faster when the problem of energy is resolved.” I see this growth in urban areas but when you talk about 80 percent where our rural peasants live and you talk about economic growth, I think there is a lot to be desired. 

I have always told the Minister of Finance, for example, in my constituency, I would like to go there and explain in my local language, “Nti waliwo enkulakulana” but they will ask me, “Where is that nkulakulana? We can’t see it”. People who used to eat two or three meals a day, they cannot afford. Somebody who used to travel- (Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Nsubuga to take a figure which is used world wide, in all economies, to measure the change in the growth domestic product of the country – is it in order for him to distort this figure to be a measurement of the changes in his constituency? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, the peasants in Bukoto do not know the growth domestic product. For them they know food, water, electricity. So, he is in order.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR OCENG: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Nsubuga for giving way. In my constituency, for instance, you hardly get very good houses in the villages but at least all those villagers who have some money have a house or two in  the trading centres and I think this happens in a number of other areas in this country. So, when somebody says that there is only growth in towns and yet the owners of this town growth basically come from the villages, I feel that some information needs to be given to that effect. That I also understand might be happening in your areas. Thank you very much.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, that 8.9 percent figure does not represent distribution. It is not meant to describe distribution. Growth, you could have it even in one area and the statement talks about this growth being reflected more in town than in rural areas. However, the distribution, the equalitarian distribution of growth is a different matter and hon. Nsubuga knows.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, for your information. Honourable Minister of Finance, I thought Bukoto South was part of Uganda so when you tell me that my constituency is not included in this, then I am left out.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I had the privilege of studying Economics and I would like to describe the growth of our economy in Uganda; it is a monolithic growth. The growth is only being enjoyed by five percent of Ugandans but the majority are walloping in poverty and it is called democratic poverty in Uganda. That is why there is pride that - (Interjections) - did you do Economics? So what I am saying, and the minister should know, is that we need broad-based growth whereby all sectors of economy should enjoy that growth but in Uganda now, it is only the five percent, or 100 people enjoying everything on our behalf which is very unfair.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much. Another issue is this choosing of six households in a parish as a way of promoting Prosperity for All. In 2006, the whole Cabinet visited a place in Busense in Bukoto Central, Mrs Kizza’s farm, but the ministers who are here can tell me – you could hardly believe that what we have seen in Mrs Kizza’s farm is really in Busense as a village. This question of putting six families in a parish that they will act as demonstrations cannot work. The very example where you went, you can go back and see if it has helped to bring up the place. When we talked about Prosperity for All, this very honourable minister in 2006 –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, the farm of Mrs Kizza that we visited had a fruit-drying equipment and the fruit which was being dried was being collected from out-growers all around that area. So, she was marketing that fruit on behalf of the various people who were bringing it there and selling it to her. They were definitely benefiting from that farm’s activities. Thank you. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: My constituency, Bukoto South, shares boundaries with Bukoto Central and I know vividly that the farm has not helped my people or even the people in Bukoto Central as a demonstration farm. I think we need to devise some ways –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matthias Nsubuga, my people in Kamuli have been to that farm and have been trained there. There is a training facility there for people who want to learn. My Basoga have been there and over 600 people have gone to Mrs Kizza’s farm to study. You cannot say it is not helping people.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: It is true but it is just like we used to have demonstration schools; we had Kabanyolo DFI, Kamenyamiggo DFI School and Mukono DFI School. These used to act as demonstration schools. This is exactly what Mrs Kizza’s farm is doing but you cannot tell me that by choosing six homesteads in a parish this will do something.

The last one is about the roads. Those of you who have taken Bukoba-Mutukula road, it was made in 1971 by Idi Amin. To date, that road has no potholes at all. Minister Mutagamba can bear me witness. But last year, when you look at the amount of money we put in Kampala here for roads - these roads are not even there. When His Excellency the President says he was told by the Minister of Transport that there are roads that last 15 years and those are meant for Africa and there are those that last 50 years and are meant for developed countries - this very road I am talking about is now about 30 years or more and it was made by Idi Amin. Why can’t these roads here that you people are making –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think as honourable members, when we are debating we need to first do research so that we tell the public the facts not to come here to politicise each and every issue for the sake of politics or making votes in our constituencies. You said that you are in the Opposition and that you are not there to oppose but to give alternatives and I expect you not to tell lies. I have got all the roads which were done before 1985; they are listed here and I can lay the list on Table. I do not have a road called Masaka-Mutukula which was done by Idi Amin. I ask that I lay this on Table. And I request that I go and consult and then I return to tell you when that road was constructed. I know very well that the old roads of before 1985 are listed here in full.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying that there was no road there constructed before 1985.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Idi Amin constructed only one road in this country and that is Kampala-Nsambya-Buziga road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I do not think the Member is asking about who constructed the road, his problem is its quality and life.

MR BYABAGAMBI: If you ask about the condition of the road, there I can give you an authentic answer but if you come to lie that it was done by Idi Amin of all people, then I shudder.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: I was born in Masaka. I have grown up in Masaka and I have studied in Masaka. The road from Masaka to Kyotera was done by Idi Amin in 1971. Like it or not! If you do not know your history, you can go back to the books. That is the fact. I am only concerned about these roads, for example, the minister himself uses Kampala-Masaka road. Recently, I asked you when you put this company – (Member timed out)

4.42
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you Mr Minister for having done your constitutional mandate to give us your financial statement. On page 26, you have assured Ugandans that you are going to focus on addressing unemployment and underemployment in the rural areas by stimulating agriculture. You very well know that your budget for agriculture that you intend to utilise as a promotion for employment and getting rid of underemployment is less than six percent. How are you going to realise employment let alone the fact that your Government since 2001 has only had a draft employment policy? How is it possible that you are going to realise employment for your people given the bad statistics for Ministry of Agriculture and the fact that as a nation, you do not actually have an employment policy?

You have captured my attention as far as NAADS is concerned. NAADS is supposed to be a demand-driven private sector led provision of extension services. For your information, I was part of the consultants doing the mid-term review of NAADS and our recommendation then to the NAADS secretariat and PMA was that the farmers need markets and you have indeed said in your statement that you are going to expand access to markets. You are going to concentrate on enterprise selection, value addition, increased production and export promotion. What has the Uganda Export Promotion Board done since then to promote product exportation in the agricultural sector? If that has not been done as far back as when this board was created, what miracle are you going to do now to get market access for our farmers in order to improve access to jobs in the rural sector and particularly in agriculture? 

You have indicated that you are increasing NAADS resources by Shs 40 billion and Shs 22 billion is going to be micro credit. Remember that you signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the World Bank to finance NAADS for 25 years and this was not a component. Now you are bringing the SACCOs component into the NAADS programme in order to realise your Prosperity for All yet Government itself has not had a policy for implementing Prosperity for All. It is yet to come and you have started releasing monies outside the framework of NAADS. How are you going to harmonise these disparities? Mr Minister, I am not confused. It is you who is totally confused and misdirecting this country. These are his figures.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Is it in order for the hon. Christine Bako to use un-parliamentary language and say that the Minister of Finance is confused? Is she really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance is a very sober individual and senior economist so I think he is not confused. Please withdraw it.

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has given us good statistics as far as growth is concerned. I remember very well that my good minister told me that he is now aware that inflation in West Nile and Gulu is beyond 25 percent. I discussed that over a cup of something with him the very day – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bako, I asked you to withdraw that small word. He is a sober person and not confused.

MS BAKO: I concede and withdraw. My good minister said that it is true that inflation in West Nile and Arua in particular should be beyond 25 percent by now. He is aware that food prices have escalated and his Government has failed to fix production entitlement. Market entitlement to food is now a problem and his Minister for Disaster Preparedness is only sourcing this country in terms of catastrophes based on donor entitlement. How can we therefore finance this budget and still remain beggars even when catastrophes hit us knowing very well that the regional economy, particularly Northern Uganda, can actually be remodelled by the technocrats in his ministry? Mr Minister, what are you doing to fix and balance the regional economy so that we also have food in our homes?

As regards the roads, some of you must have come to pay your last respects to the late hon. Francis Ayume. I don’t know whether some of you passed through that road but it is in a terrible state and we are losing patients from Koboko when they are being referred to Arua Regional Referral Hospital. There is a lot of oil exploration going on. When you take the road from Arua town to Rhino Camp, it is almost impassable and here we are with Shs 1.0 trillion plus. What are we doing to fix this road? When you get to Arua town and as you turn right to go to Koboko, what you see is a deep depression implying that -(Interruption)

MR OCULA: Thank you, hon. Bako, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, I think this issue of roads is a concern in the whole country. I am talking like this because I have a road in my constituency heading from Gulu to Juba and it is in a terrible state. Actually it is not a road. What you see is like a water dam or fish pond that you have to pass through. The information I want to get from the minister is that, at least we have passed some Vote-on-Account; about 30 percent of the budget. Can the minister really move and try to redeem some of these roads, which are in a terrible shape before turning to other roads because as I speak, if something is not done on that road, part of West Nile that is Adjumani, Moyo and Southern Sudan, will be cut off. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have moved very far; from very little to Shs 1.0 trillion. Maybe if the road is not there, you should say it is not there but if you are saying that we should start now, let us quickly pass the budget and give the money to the Minister of Works to work on the road. However, if it is not there then the issue should be taken up. Is it there and part of those roads?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I drove on that road on Thursday. It is indeed in a bad state but I can give information that it is now being surveyed for construction. That is Gulu-Atiak-Nimule with a branch to Adjumani.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it seems to become a burning issue when it comes to roads. As regards that road, I have two contractors who have mobilised to start from Gulu to Pabbo and from Pabbo to Atiak. Therefore, go there within two weeks and you will find that contractors will be on the road working.

MS BAKO: Thank you for giving that information. I hope that you will actualise it so that Ugandans benefit from the Shs 1.0 trillion plus. 

Madam Speaker, I was just explaining the scenario as one leaves Arua and heads for Koboko. There is a deep depression there as a result of the heavy traffic that leaves Arua town for Juba.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Name the road. I also want to know the actual road you are talking about. 

MS BAKO: This is the Arua-Koboko road. As you are coming from Kampala and turning right to go to Koboko, the depression there is to the extent that there are lots of mosquitoes being bred in the centre of the town as a result of that depression becoming a crater lake. This is a disaster in the middle of Arua. How can this budget help me reduce the impact of Malaria in Arua as a result of bad roads? 

Finally, the issue of health. I must sincerely thank the Minister of Health for having given my district one realistic ambulance this time and not a double cabin. However, my plea to the ministry is this; the functionality of this ambulance is what is going to save lives particularly the lives of mothers. However, if it is going to be pitched there without it being maintained, serviced and fuelled, we would only have a monument in terms of an ambulance instead of equipment to save lives. I thank you.

4.54
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the Minister of Finance and the shadow minister of finance for their budget speeches and write up. The theme, “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Prosperity for All” leaves no doubt in anyone’s mind that it is a good one.

Madam Speaker, the emphasis on increasing employment, critical infrastructure and institutions of this country is another good gesture from the minister. Real GDP at 8.9 is excellent, despite all the problems we went through in Kenya and Eastern Uganda. But when you look at the agricultural sector, some people may be impressed that the growth of 0.7 percent is good but it leaves a lot to be desired because this is a sector that employs most of our people and when we see it moving down the drain, its contribution to the GDP also declines. 

I do not agree with the argument that a fast growing economy reduces its contribution of the agriculture sector towards the GDP. I do not agree with that argument because even if it were so, how is it that agriculture in itself is declining? So, I think the minister will clarify on that. When you look at sectors like fish and cotton, they are gone. So really, it cannot be prudent to say that it is proper for the agriculture sector to contribute less to the GDP. So even if it were to be proper, how then is it that agriculture within itself is declining? As Parliament, we have to put more effort into reviving agriculture.

NAADS is the main vehicle for Prosperity-for-All, Madam Speaker, but when you look at NAADS from its inception to date, it is not clearly guided. This is why at one point the President had to intervene and say, “Enough is enough.” That is a very bad indicator and I think the Minister of Agriculture will take it up and see that calling for the intervention of the President is not a good indicator. And when I move down, today we are giving almost Shs 100 billion because we were given Shs 98.24 billion to NAADS but the guidelines, which I have shared with most of the Members of Parliament here, cannot be ably explained. It is vague. So the minister has to really come out and make the guidelines very clear such that every leader can understand them. 

When you move down and look at the walking tractors - this one may be another disaster if not well-guided because there are many facilities at the district level but you will find that a vehicle is sold at very minimal amounts of money of about Shs 100,000, because it lacks the spare parts. So if we put the walking tractors in the hands of the district, then this will be a disaster. So I think the honourable minister in his wisdom will see how to go about it. 

The other issue is about the increase in food prices. It is good for us as an agricultural country but then it must be followed by some other things. For instance, when you look at the salaries – we can take the example of a primary school teacher who earns around Shs 200,000 – the salary of this primary teacher is fixed and the yearly increment is very minimal, but then the same teacher is going to the same market she or he has been going to despite the increase in prices. So I think that much as we are celebrating, that too has two sides. 

When you look at the manufactured goods, most of which we import, the increment in their prices is far higher than that of the agricultural products. In that light, our people may not benefit despite the increment in prices. When we look at the investment, especially private investment, it is good that we have moved to 21 percent in 2007/2008 from 13.7 in 2001/2002. This is a very good gesture but as colleagues said, when you look at the roads in this country, private investment is discouraged. For instance, I come from a tea growing constituency but the roads there are in a terrible state. So, I do not know how these people will be encouraged to invest further.

When you look at the issue of corruption, we have really talked as Parliament and the ministers and the government generally know that corruption is one of those things that encourage investment in any given country and much as we appreciate our Government - the NRM Government - which has tried, there is a lot to do in the field of corruption. When we look at the investors who come here from outside this country, again there is a lot to do. You remember the other time here in this Parliament there was a lot said about Tri-Star and Rift Valley Railways; I may not go back to what happened but we really need to get investors who have money, not those who come here to use our money and masquerade as if they have money. So, really this is an issue we need to critically look at. 

The growth in the service sector is commendable and I commend the Minister of Finance. Thirteen percent is not bad and when you look at the industrial sector, 6 percent is also not bad. However, when we look at inflation, 13.2 percent in the period ending May 2008 is not good for this economy. Much as one can argue, in economics we know that mild inflation can facilitate development but 11.2 percent is not mild by any standards. 

When we move to the external sector performance and when you look at our balance of payments, the trade deficit is projected to worsen to US $1639.6 million in 2007/2008 up from US $993 million in 2006/2007. This is due to the fact that we are increasing imports at 34 percent while the proceeds from exports are increasing at 15.2 percent. When you look at the two, this does not augur well for this economy; the payments will not balance. I think those who studied economics know it. 

When you look at URA, we commend the work of the Uganda Revenue Authority but again when I did a bit of research, there is a decline in tax revenue collection of 11 percent. This is a shortfall of Shs 27 billion. This is due to the fact that there are a lot of inefficiencies in tax collection. I think the minister will look into that. 

When you look at the trend of COMESA and when you look at the East African Customs Union, this shows that our taxes from imports may decrease and this calls for an increment in revenue locally, and when you look at our collections minus the imports - because when we move to the East African Customs Union it means we shall not be getting a lot of revenue from the imports coming into this country. So, we need to increase our tax base locally. 

Madam Speaker, a reduction in the donor support of 34 percent in 2007/2008 to 30 percent in 2008/2009 is very commendable and I commend the minister for that. However, there are a number of challenges I may want to highlight such that the minister looks at them critically: 

1. 	Maintaining the macro-economic stability in the face of the increasing oil prices. We really need to be very stable as a Government to plan because we know right now we are not an oil producing country, much as we know we shall have it. So, honourable minister, you have to look into stabilising the macro-economic level. 

2. 	Then the commodity prices: we have to do a lot because the increment in the commodity prices is really affecting our poor people. 

3. 	The other issue is the unmatched capacity in production. We have the market locally, regionally and internationally, but are we increasing the production at the same pace? Those are the challenges we have, Madam Speaker.

When you look at the budget discipline, a colleague has just talked about the budget discipline. Very soon you will see the minister bringing the supplementary whatever on the Floor of Parliament, and we think the minister should really budget and take some time before bringing supplementaries up on the Floor of Parliament. I think he knows how to do it.  

Then there is another serious issue: when we look at the decimal investment in the agricultural sector, it is only 3.8 percent of the budget. Going to the backbone of this economy, which is agriculture, it also leaves a lot to be desired.  

Madam Speaker, I have talked about the issue of corruption and I do not want to repeat what I have already said.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR KASAIJA: I am winding up, Madam Speaker. When you look at the SACCOs, they are a very good thing. We have 78 percent coverage of the SACCOs but when we go back to our constituencies, are all these SACCOs still there and if they are, are they functioning properly? Those are the issues we need to look at.

Coming to the response of the Shadow Minister, I am happy this time round that the Shadow Minister was a bit balanced in the response. He thanked where the government has done well. He was so critical in the other budget when presenting here but this time, he has been balanced. When you look at where he says, “We commend Government…” this is a very good thing really; everything cannot be negative.  

There is where he said that, “What would a Member of Parliament tell the constituents about the budget?” I wish he were here, I would tell him that, “You go and tell them that this was good in the budget, this was bad because of this and that” simple. So, I do not see why a Member of Parliament should be bothered not to tell the people the truth.  

The economy is growing, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think there is a problem with the system but the five minutes are already up, please.

MR KASAIJA: I am winding up, Madam Speaker. It is true that the gap between the rich and the poor in this country is widening. However, I do not agree with the Shadow Minister of Finance when he says that the growth of the economy has not helped the poor. I do not agree with this because when employment opportunities increase, the poor are not discriminated; they are there -(Member time out)

5.08
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister of Finance for presenting the Budget and for the positive remarks he made with regard to the performance of the economy. 

First, he did say that there is an improvement in the economic growth and he also said that the contribution of the domestic resources compared to the donor resources has also substantially increased and we welcome that, and commend him for that good report in the Budget.  

However, I just have a few comments I would like to make. One is to question and interrogate whether Parliament engages the budgeting process adequately for us to make a contribution. I know we have the Budget Act, which clearly spells out how different institutions come in, including Parliament. But I do feel that probably we need to revisit the Act and give more time to Parliament when the proposals from the ministers come so that we can make a meaningful contribution to the proposals from the Executive. Because when the proposals are laid on the Table on 1st April, and then by 15th May they must go to the President, I feel that the time is inadequate for us and, therefore, the work which is done in committees usually is rushed and we do not give meaningful scrutiny to the proposals which are brought from the Executive. I, therefore, make an appeal that we should look at the Budget Act and the relevant laws to give Parliament more time to make a meaningful input.

Secondly, we also need to be involved in monitoring the performance of the budget. In my two years in Parliament, I think we sit here and pass figures, then come back as a ritual and pass figures. I think there is little involvement in monitoring of the performance of the Budget in this country by Members of Parliament and, therefore, we would like the funding of Parliament to be improved to enable Members of Parliament be able to monitor the performance. I have been sitting on the Social Services Committee for two years. We could not get money to move out to monitor the performance of the sectors which we oversee and, therefore, it is not enough for us to pass the budgets and not engage in the monitoring exercise.

The minister did say that he was re-instating the Graduated Tax compensation for the local governments - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Baryomunsi, you know that is on the Parliamentary Commission. Are you suggesting that we do not give you enough money to do your work? I want to really know whether this Parliament does not give you enough money to do your work.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I think at times our oversight function is compromised when we lack transport and we are facilitated by the very people we are supposed to be actually checking. I would be more comfortable if the Commission had enough finances to transport us and facilitate us so that we are not seen to be compromised by the very people who actually - because if they give you the comfort and the vehicles, then it is risky. So I would rather that we had enough funds so that we are independent and we move when there is need without waiting for the leverage from the other side.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank the honourable member for the information. I want to agree with him that the funding to Parliament is inadequate. What is done in most other countries is that the three arms of Government get an agreed proportion of the budget. But here, the mechanism is not that way and what we have been getting is just slightly over 1 percent of the total budget, and definitely the money is inadequate. Like I said, in the Social Services Committee we could not secure funding from Parliament to do the monitoring exercise for two years; I think some Members are here and they can testify to that. So I think it is important that we pass the Budget but also monitor the performance of the Budget.

The other issue I want to raise is the financing of local governments. We did take a decision as a country to decentralise service delivery in this country, but when you look at the resources which are remitted to local governments - in the Budget Speech, the minister says that around 34 percent of the domestic resources are going to local governments minus the donor resources and I think this is inadequate. While he acknowledges that Government is working on a formula to use for allocating resources, I think this should be given urgent consideration because the money, which the minister allocated, is the same money which he had given last year, and most of us know that a number of local governments were failing to function in my district. The sub-counties were almost not functioning because no money was being remitted from the districts and yet we know Uganda is experiencing one of the highest population growth rates; we grow by about one million people every year. So the allocation of resources should be commensurate with some of these observations, which we know. 

Therefore, I want the minister to consider the funding of local governments as a serious matter with a view to increasing how much is sent to local governments because we also know, we have seen studies where most of the money that is left at the centre does not really trickle down adequately to the local governments. I could give you figures if I had time, because we have seen some of the studies where it has been demonstrated that there is a lot of constipation of resources which come from the centre to go down to the rural areas.

The other issue I want to raise is that since the economy is improving and our performance is better, as hon. Lukwago had raised the issue of financing the health sector - indeed the minister said the health centres continue to have drug stock outs and attendance by many health workers to their duty stations is irregular. As a health worker, I can tell you why the health workers are irregular at their stations. One of the cardinal reasons is poor pay. 

A medical officer right now earns about Shs 500,000 and it is very difficult to attract a medical officer to a district like Kanungu because if he remains in Kampala he can work in three clinics and earn perhaps Shs 1.5 million. Right now as we speak, we are only three doctors in Kanungu: one is the District Health Officer, one is the Medical Superintendent of the hospital, the third is a Member of Parliament - myself! (Laughter) It has become very difficult to attract health workers to Kanungu District. Unless we address the pay and the motivation of the health workers, it is going to remain a challenge to get health workers to Bundibugyo, Kanungu, Yumbe, Karamoja and especially those hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas in this country.

When I looked through the budget proposal, no mention is made that the motivation, the increment in the pay of health workers, is being considered. Although we later saw in the papers that the President met health workers and asked the Ministry of Health to look for Shs 18 billion to enhance the payments, we want the Ministry of Finance to assure us because some of us who are health workers are always asked by our colleagues whether there is anything being considered for them in terms of better remuneration. 

Lastly, my sister hon. Kyatuheire commented on the road to Kanungu. These days I fear to go to Kanungu because I will have to pass through the hospital for some medication by the time I reach there, since the road from here to Ntungamo is not in the best shape. However, I was happy the minister put money in the budget to work on the road but again from Rukungiri to Kanungu it is actually almost impassable and I am about to ask Government to buy me a helicopter perhaps to access Kanungu - (Laughter) In the budget, we waited anxiously. The road was not -(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I want to thank the honourable member for yielding the Floor. I would like to seek clarification from Dr Baryomunsi. Sometime back you informed this House that one of your own was constructing an airport to ease the problems of transport in Kanungu and we also got an assurance from another colleague of yours that the issues of the airport are over. Since that project had taken off, why are you complaining about the roads since you have an airport and it could ease your problems of transport in Kanungu? (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes. I want to give you information that the first time I went to Kanungu, I drove my car, I was with hon. Michael Ocula, and your roads are really bad! In fact when I looked down and it was so deep compared to the flat roads in Pader, my head started turning until our vehicles rolled. But by God’s love we came to the side where we had the mountains and not the other side, which was so deep. So your road is actually very bad and I am a living witness to that information you have given - (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I want to thank my colleagues for the information they have given to confirm what I am telling this House that we, the Members of Parliament who hail from Kanungu, are finding it very difficult to go back to our areas in Kanungu because of the poor state of the roads. Although I have discussed with the Minister of Works and he has promised he is finding some money, he conveniently did not put this promise in the Budget Speech. So, I hope the money is being found and we want to invite him to come to Kanungu and interface with the people of Kanungu themselves and hear their voices.

On what hon. Katuntu is raising, it is true there was a debate here with regard to the airstrip or the airfield, which is being constructed by Mr Musinguzi Garuga in Kihihi. Then the debate was that Government was delaying approving the airfield and the minister responsible for security did commit himself on the Floor of this House that he had cleared the airfield. However, the information I get is that the clearance is not yet done. Unfortunately he is not around but I have continued to receive complaints from the people in Kanungu, including Mr Garuga himself, that I think Government has been a little bit slow in helping him get clearance to have the airfield fully constructed. Otherwise, if we get the airfield then it will ease transport for those who can afford to fly in order to access Kanungu. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I know that in this country the airfields and airports are a responsibility of Ministry of Works and Transport. We have categories of airports and airfields; it can be a private airfield but licensed by the Ministry of Works and Transport. I have never heard that the application was made to the Ministry of Works and Transport. If there is any information on that, I urge the honourable member to bring it to the right ministry. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you honourable minister. Perhaps if you could allow me, Madam Speaker, to repeat what was on the Floor when we debated this issue. Mr Garuga is an investor. He hails from Kanungu and he is trying to construct an airfield in Kanungu. CAA requested him to get clearance from the District Security Committee, which is chaired by the RDC because the airfield is going to be near the DRC border. They wanted to be sure that there were no security implications although it is about 20 kilometres from the border. Somehow the issue came to the National Security Committee, which is chaired by, I think, the Minister for Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi and that is why he came to make a clarification. The complaint from the investor, Mr Garuga, was that there was a delay. Of course as you know, Mr Garuga stood with hon. Mbabazi for Parliament so he thought perhaps he is not clearing it because of that political rivalry. But the minister clarified -(Member timed out) 

5.23
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course I support the Budget Speech in all ways. But I have come here to comment on a few issues from the response by the hon. Shadow Minister of Finance. 

To start with, there are some statements, which I do not associate with. He says in No. 6, “Hon Speaker, we reiterate that performance figures which conceal the bleak state of the economy will not assist Parliament to advise Government on how to improve its failed policies.” This is a very strong statement. First of all, with figures, when you are calculating them there is no way you can hide because it can be proved by other people. And if the minister wanted to prove this, he would continue to find out -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am well-mannered and it is not usually my behaviour to put my colleagues to order. However, the honourable minister holding the Floor is a Member of the Cabinet. This budget was discussed extensively, exhausted [Hon. Lokeris: “This is a budget for the Opposition.”] Oh! It is for the Opposition. Okay, I am sorry and I withdraw; I thought he was reading ours.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, honourable colleague for withdrawing the point of order. I am commenting about the budget as presented by the Opposition Finance Minister.

It is not possible that any figures can be concealed. This astronomic economic growth, which says we seem to be the tigers - first of all I would like to state that the growth is evident in many aspects, but because we are one of the least developing countries, we have to follow priorities in order to advance economically. If we had the money, we would use the approach of balanced economic growth in which we would address the various aspects of our economy at a go. We would try to improve the infrastructure; we would try to look at the financial institutions and many other aspects. Otherwise, in a least developed country, you look at priorities and usually what we do is to improve what is called capital overheads. 

That is to say, you look at the infrastructure, for example the roads, which we are doing very well. You also have to look at power. That is why all of us are saying, “Improve Nyagak, Bujagali and so on”. That is how the path of unbalanced economic growth is followed and I am sure we are doing it very well. At least there are indices, which show improvements even in towns, but some honourable members have been saying thus: “There is no economic growth because there in nothing in my constituency.” If it is a road passing for instance via Adjumani, it is possible for that kind of assessment to be done in such a way that you talk of evidence of economic growth only in terms of a tarmac road in everybody’s constituency, in Karamoja and other places. Is it possible? That is why you cannot see it there.

Let me talk about exports, Madam Speaker. I have been listening with worry – Sudan has opened markets and taken everything but at the same time people are saying that balance of payments is in advance on our side. A market has opened in Sudan, but some people are saying we should block it; why? To me that is an opportunity because when such a market opens then we should use the marketing language, which says that if a market opens there, then you must fill it with products, which you have. We should now be getting worried about products like rice, tomatoes, and so on to sell in that market. Why don’t we produce enough to export to them to improve our terms of trade? We must be doing that all of us; we should not say, “Close”. No, that is bad. 

There must be what we call product development immediately to fill that market. All of us as Members of Parliament should be able to mobilise the people. We should tell them that, “A market has opened there, please, take advantage of it”. The surprising thing is to see some people saying, “Ah”! Let us stop it. And I did not want those words to come from my neighbour who I respect - hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I am a qualified marketeer myself - I want to tell you that we must now embark on product development to fill that market. If that market were not there and we had all the products then we would create the market by going to do market intelligence –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I think the minister has ably represented Karamoja in this House apart from his constituency. If he is celebrating about the market in Sudan, can he tell us what he has been doing to feed Karamoja?

MR LOKERIS: There is no contradiction here. I am just explaining to you market forces and not relief. (Laughter) I am talking about the interplay by different marketing glues – you can read books by Phillip Cotler; you will look at the Grid of Ansoff or you do the one of Michael Porter. You will be able to know that I am giving exclusive, professional advice.

MR OCULA: Thank you, honourable minister. I have been very attentively listening to all the advice you are advancing. However, the clarification I am seeking relates to a question whether while in Cabinet meetings you also do give this kind of advice to Government so that production is increased to enable us have excess to sell to Sudan? Do really give such advice to Cabinet or it is just for the purpose of debate in this House?

MR LOKERIS: Precisely, as colleagues we talk and that is why you see these robust innovations coming out – (Laughter) – that is why you see them.

So I am appealing to my colleagues to sit down and look at that market; to identify what it needs. You have seen SACCOs going to lend money to the people. Please, go and mobilise the people to use this money to produce more so that we can feed Sudan. There is a wide market there and we do not even need to export anything to Europe. The market is just here and for some of you, it is a walking distance; you just cross on foot, not even by donkeys. (Laughter) So, surely I did not want to attack a lot of the expressions by the shadow minister. He agrees with many of the issues raised by the Minister of Finance. Unfortunately, at every conclusion he nullifies everything about the minister’s Budget Speech.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the budget proposals. In the interest of time, I will just comment on three points. One was that issue of the welfare of the Army that both the honourable minister and his counterpart on the Opposition did comment on. The Army definitely needs to have their welfare increased, although at the same time we should thank them for their patriotism and their sacrifice that they continue to bear on behalf of the whole country. 

As far as salary is concerned, colleagues remember that the salary of the primary school teachers was increased to a minimum of Shs 200,000 and because money was inadequate at that time, the soldiers again had to sacrifice and wait. But in the last year we raised their salary from Shs 140,000 to Shs 180,000 and this year we have brought the privates to parity with the primary teacher. We are happy that Parliament has supported this move. 

But of course, the welfare of the Army is over and above the issue of salary; we look forward to the day when the issue of “Mama ingia pole” will be history. We look to working with you in Parliament – the barracks, the accommodation of the Army, their education, feeding, and transport. And every year we are increasingly attending to these issues. So once again I thank the two ministers for their support for the Army.

The second issue is on the economy. However, hon. Nandala-Mafabi appeared to me to be vacillating: on the one hand he says that the economy is growing and on the other he is wondering where it is growing; in other words, he is questioning whether there is growth. But I think at the bottom of his heart he is saying that it is a good thing for our economy to grow. 

When the Minister of Finance says that we hit 8.9 percent, our chorus should be, “Hon. Minister, we want to sustain that.” Because economic analysis indicates that if we are going to deal with poverty in a quick way, we should sustain growth between eight and 10 percent annually. Then we can hope to reduce poverty among our population very quickly. 

But hon. Nandala-Mafabi makes a point rather obliquely and then leaves it there. He says that if there is political uncertainty, then it is going to be difficult to sustain the growth of the economy. And I agree with him but I want to expound on that issue of political uncertainty. 

I was very happy to hear hon. Reagan Okumu announcing publicly, for the first time, that land is available in Acholi for investors. That is good news and that is the voice we should resound. Before, in the last financial year, we heard some colleague saying that, “If somebody comes to Acholi with the voice of investment, we shall deal with him”. Precisely that is where the political uncertainty can come from, and we cannot sustainably increase our economy unless the whole country is open to investment. If we give wrong signals not only to outsiders but also to Ugandan investors, then it is going to be very difficult to expand the economy. I do hope that from now on, both the government side and the Opposition shall speak with one voice on the issue of economic growth.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi also commented on the issue of security. If we do not have security we would discourage investment. And when we talk of security, we do not only mean Kony fighting or the ADF, but even the actions that we do in our towns: chaotic demonstrations, being disruptive to investments, would also discourage investment. So we need to be together on the issue of demonstrations; they need to be handled in a way that does not give wrong signals so that both national and external investors do not run way. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I thought Ndugu Nandala was dishonest in the way he measured the come-down of the level of poverty. We should not only talk about percentages, but also talk about nominal numbers – how many people are we getting out of poverty? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and colleagues, when poverty was first measured, 56 percent of our people were below the poverty line. At that time the population was 16 million people. That means that that the people who were below the poverty line were 9 million. 

If on the other hand the 56 percent had remained constant today, with a population of 30 million, the people below the poverty line would be more than 15 million. So by merely reducing that percentage, we have saved so many people from living below the poverty line. Of course the objective is to go to zero poverty, but let us be open to our people and thus articulate these issues, and let us all know that ending poverty is our common struggle. 

And that is the difference in this budget, to hear colleagues say, “We want to be involved in choosing the people who are going to benefit from NAADS”. I am taking the spirit behind that rather than the procedure. Sometime back we went to Teso and some of the colleagues were just laughing at me saying, “You people, you think that Bonna bagagawale will work? We shall see.” But to hear Members of the Opposition in Parliament saying that they want to get involved is moving in the right direction. Let us work together and end poverty. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.43
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank the Minister of Finance and his counterpart for delivering the Budget Speech and the response. I would like to associate myself fully with the response delivered by the Shadow Minister of Finance in response to the Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance. 

As a Member of the Shadow Cabinet, I will not waste a lot of time because I have already said that I fully associate myself with the response that the shadow minister gave. So, I would like to use this opportunity to comment briefly on security – I can see the minister of Defence nodding. 

The minister says in his speech that in the medium term they are for building modern and professional defence forces, which is quite good, but I would like the Minister of Defence to tell the House the procedures, rules, basis and maybe criteria used in promotions in the UPDF. Because when you are developing a professional Army you need promotions so that you get professional soldiers. Therefore, Madam Speaker, could the minister tell us at an appropriate time, the process of promotions? For instance, are there promotional exams? Is there promotional training? This issue has brought a lot of controversy in this country. 

I would like to use this opportunity to defend the institution of Parliament. You know that Government has three arms, that is, the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary. When His Excellency the President was on his tour of the Eastern part of this country to asses the progress of NAADS and the Bonna Bagagawale programme, he made very serious statements bordering on irresponsibility and inciting the population. The statements were directly attacking the institution of Parliament with intentions calculated to undermine the institution of Parliament.

His Excellency the President while he was in Mbale S.S grounds, in the constituency I ably represent in this Parliament, made the following statements. One; that the decisions of Parliament are made in the NRM caucus and not in the House. Secondly, he said that Parliament just acts as a rubber stamp, stamping the decisions that have already been made in the NRM caucus. Thirdly, that Members of Parliament who are not able to attend the NRM caucus are doing nothing in this House and they have no reason to be in this House; and therefore the caucus is the Parliament and they are just earning salary for nothing; that is the only thing they are doing in the House. So, Madam Speaker, I think the Executive should not attack another arm of Government. In my opinion this is a direct attack on one arm of Government by another. [Mr. Kivejinja rose_]

MR ODONGA OTTO: Before the Minister of National Guidance, and former MP of Bugweri comes on board, -(Laughter)- allow me to give the following information. It is well known that the Speaker of Parliament and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament do not attend caucus meetings. It was all intended to ensure their impartiality even if they have political parties. So, the information I am seeking and giving as well is: how do we qualify the President’s statement, Mr Minister of National Guidance, as it relates to the position of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker?

Secondly, we all earn salary from this institution of Parliament. For the President to say, “If you are not in the caucus, you are just rubber stamping”, is it possible for all of us to go in the caucus so that we do not earn a salary for nothing? (Laughter) Or is it possible to stop our salary so that those in the ruling party can rehearse their presentations in the caucus and just come and play it in Parliament as we watch. (Laughter)

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Kajeke. I just want to clarify that we are in a multi-party system. We better wake up to that reality. Therefore, even what is talked about and brought here by the government side is in consonance with the party manifesto. The decision as to how to bring it here and get legislation is the sole responsibility of the ruling party. So, you should know where you belong in that scenario.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kajeke, proceed.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Otto for that information. I do not think the information or the clarification from the Minister in charge of National Guidance is of any use to what I am debating because if you are saying that in a multi-party dispensation Parliament becomes a rubber stamp, then I will appreciate your information. 

I was saying that this is a direct attack on the institution of Parliament; undermining the rule of law; and our Constitution is very clear that anybody who undermines the rule of law and therefore undermining the supreme law of the land, under Article 3 of the Constitution –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to imagine that the President would have gone to his constituency to praise him? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not understand. What is the point of order you raised, honourable minister? What is it you raised?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I raised the point of order that is it in order for the honourable member to imagine that the President went to Mbale to praise hon. Kajeke when the President is competing with Kajeke for votes? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what is in Mr Kajeke’s mind but you proceed. (Laughter)

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, definitely I did not expect the President to thank me or do anything. But I have not said anywhere in my statement that the President abused me in my constituency. I was saying that I am protecting the independence of the institution of Parliament. 

On a lighter note, is –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I want to thank my younger brother, Kajeke.

The President of Uganda is on tour as the President of Uganda and not as Chairman of the NRM. (Interjections) Please, listen for your information if you do not understand English. As the President of Uganda, he will come and tell the population what he is supposed to deliver and not to talk about how the caucus operates. So, the information I want to give is that the President also came to my area and I was present. Instead of even thanking me for whatever I am trying to do, the man said I am nothing. You can imagine the President saying I am nothing when I have gone to school. (Laughter) I have gone to school, and I am circumcised! (Laughter) - And intelligent; very intelligent; and by the way, for your information, very intelligent.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for hon. Nandala-Mafabi but is he in order to tell a lie here about the personality of the President when even in his constituency he again told his people lies about the President? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now honourable members, the President’s speech in Mbale has not been placed in this House so I will not rule on that. Please, complete your statement. 

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was saying that on a lighter note, the President while he was in Mbale declared hon. Nandala and myself dead. He told our constituents that they are orphaned. Therefore, the President in my opinion staged a coup, overthrowing two Members of Parliament. (Laughter) Declaring himself the chairman of the Electoral Commission, he organised elections and even before the results which he would anyway lose -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, given the fact that we are discussing the budget and given hon. Kajeke’s deliberations, it is as if we are discussing the President’s speech in Mbale. So, is hon. Kajeke really procedurally right in as far as the budget speech is concerned? Because I can see we have diverted and we are getting – (Interjection) – No, but is there anything in the budget that regards the President’s visit to Mbale? So, are we proceeding really rightly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Kajeke, the fact that you are actually standing in this House and representing your municipality means nobody has taken over your constituency. So, speak about the budget and conclude.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the President is moving around the country talking about Prosperity-for-All, which means moving us from poverty to riches. The clarification I want to seek is: is it when he is on Prosperity-for-All tours that he is there to abuse Members of Parliament in those areas?

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, you are a lawyer and you know that when a defence lawyer pleads good character in defence of his client, he brings the character of that client in issue and therefore affords the opposite party the opportunity to rebuttal. Therefore, it is only good that I was grown up; I did not just grow like a mango tree and therefore I will not try in any way a rebuttal to what the defence lawyer pleaded on behalf of his client in question.

I would like to finally ask honourable members that we must stand in unison and defend the independence of Parliament. We must defend the independence of the institution of Parliament and therefore defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as we swore by oath when we were being sworn in as Members of Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we are still debating the motion that the Parliament resolves itself into a committee of supply and we are doing it in two stages. What we have been having is a general debate on the budget. The second phase will come when we debate the committee reports. 

Now, last year a number of committee chairpersons, committees and the population were not happy that some ministries were not discussed. So, I would like to create time so that each sector is discussed for the good of the House and also for the good of the country. To that extent, I would like now like to ask the Prime Minister to respond. I have noted those members who have not spoken and I will give them the first opportunity when we are debating the committee reports. The debate will continue but after the committee reports. So, let me invite the Prime Minister.

5.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, honourable Members of Parliament, I have a few remarks and they are being circulated so that I may enhance internalization of the points I am making. 

As we come to the end of our general debate, I wish to extend to you and to honourable Members of Parliament our appreciation for the fruitful contributions aimed at improving the budget management and service delivery. I wish also to thank honourable members of the Opposition for their written response on the budget statement and for having made concrete recommendations.

Our budget formulation is participatory. It is in this respect that I equally wish to thank the development partners, NGOs, the private sector, local governments, ministers and all other stakeholders for their constructive input into the formulation of the 2008/2009 financial year budget statement whose theme is “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Prosperity for All.”

Rt hon. Speaker, it was my intention to make a few remarks and allow my colleagues to respond to issues relevant to their ministries. I hope it will be possible. 

Hon. Oyet made the following observations: 

•	That there is uncoordinated information released concerning the starting date of implementation of the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) for Northern Uganda. Some members state that it started in 2007 while Government points out that it started on 1 July 2008. 
•	That the PRDP funds should be ring fenced and not released through sector ministries to avoid priority shifts. 
•	That the information contained in the National Budget Framework Paper for financial years 2008/09 - 2012/2013 issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in March 2008 indicates that Shs 254.29 billion was released for PRDP; it appears on page 175. He would like to know what was achieved with this money.
•	That in 2006/07 financial year, Shs 18.6 billion was released for resettlement kits of IDPs. Investigations were carried out by Parliament through the Committee on Agriculture to ascertain the validity of the complaints. The committee issued recommendations. Hon. Oyet would like to know what has been done.
 
Madam Speaker, hon. Reagan Okumu expressed concern that over 80 percent of the population, IDPs, has returned and yet they are not receiving the necessary social services. I wish to respond as follows:

Starting date for PRPD for Northern Uganda

The PRDP was launched by H.E the President on 15 October 2007. However, its implementation has started this financial year. This is the authoritative position to go by. Perhaps I should add, it is not in my speech, that 30 percent of that money is in the Budget.

Ring Fencing PRDP funds

Let it be noted that PRDP is not to be implemented as a stand alone project. It has come on board in recognition of a desired multi-sectoral intervention aimed at addressing inter-twined challenges that necessitate the participation of all the relevant sector ministries and other development partners. In fact, there are sectoral plans for scaling up sector interventions in Northern Uganda by allocating additional resources for the PRPD districts. For example, the Ministry of Water and Environment has allocated additional Shs 5.0 billion over and above their normal sector distribution to Northern Uganda districts for PRDP targets. 

Similar initiatives for affirmative action for the PRDP districts have been employed by Justice, Law and Order and Health sectors. The Ministry of Education and Sports is developing a mechanism for additional support for education in the PRDP region based on a comprehensive education needs assessment carried out in the first half of this calendar year.

The Shs 254.29 billion as reflected in the budget framework paper for the financial years 2008/09 up to 2012/13. 

The above figure is reflected in the national budget framework paper for the financial years 2008/09 - 2012/13 issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in March 2008 and they appear on page 175.
Indeed, the figure is a sum of both recurrent and development budget for the financial year 2007/08.

The table on the page referred to above gives an outline of the services to which the funds were directed. These include: police, judiciary, public prosecutions, prisons, districts and urban administration, disaster management and refugees, primary education, urban water and sanitation. Rural water and sanitation, primary healthcare, community development, extension services, district and urban and community access roads, natural resource management, multi and sector local government programmes.

These funds will be channelled to the districts in the Northern Uganda which fall under PRDP. The PRDP districts include:

a)	West Nile sub region – Arua, Yumbe, Koboko, Moyo, Nebbi, Adjumani and Maracha-Terego, despite the problems they are having.
b)	Acholi sub region - Amuru, Pader, Gulu and Kitgum.
c)	Lango sub region - Lira, Oyam, Amolatar, Dokolo, Apac.
d)	Teso sub region - Soroti, Kaberamaido, Amuria, Katakwi, Kumi, Bukedea, Pallisa and Budaka.
e)	Karamoja sub region - Kaabong, Kotido, Abim, Moroto, Nakapiripirit.
f)	Elgon sub region - Mbale, Sironko, Manafwa, Bududa, Kapchorwa and Bukwo.
g)	Bukedi sub region - Tororo, Busia and Butaleja.
h)	Bunyoro sub region - Masindi and Buliisa.

The details of the achievements will be with the respective districts and urban local governments while minister will give achievements with respect to their sectoral interventions. 

So, I call upon honourable members of Parliament to ensure that when the money is released to those areas, especially the districts, you help us to monitor what is happening. It is extremely important and the minister informed me that whenever this money is sent to the districts, it is published in the mass media. So, you will know and the minister is here, hon. Prof. Dr. Suruma. So you can always know what is happening and you should ensure that you go and find out whether the quantum has been delivered and what has been done. And hon. Adolf Mwesige is also required to monitor, along with the sector ministers and ministers of state for local government. They are required to monitor what is happening.

Implementation of recommendations by the Committee on Agriculture

I wish to inform the honourable members that the recommendations as adopted will be implemented by the relevant ministries and agencies, for example, Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and I have gathered from UNBS that now importation of sub standard goods is being handled very firmly. [Mr Okupa: “No”] - Well, that is what they have informed me. If they are wrong, again I welcome those corrections.

As far as hon. Reagan Okumu’s observation is concerned, I wish to make the following remarks. Government priority has been to ensure security, peace, law and order. This explains the effort Government put in establishing police posts in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub regions. It also explains our efforts to recruit, train and post the anti-stock theft units to curb all forms of cattle rustling. It also further explains our determination to rid Karamoja of illegal guns through the disarmament exercise and encourage them to go into agricultural activities through the provision of tractors and alternative livelihood programmes. And I would like to thank H.E the Vice President who has spent at least, I understand, two weeks, trying to market rice production and I am very happy. 

With the prevailing peace and stability, provision of social services namely; education, health, water is following on sustainable basis and I trust that the sector ministers will substantiate. 

I wish to request you, Madam Speaker, to allow first of all, the Government Chief Whip because she has a major correction to make then Education and Sports, Works and Transport, Energy and Mineral Development, Water and Environment, Health, Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Internal Affairs, Tourism, Trade and Industry, Presidency, Public Service, Finance, Planning and Economic Development and any other ministry which may wish to clarify any issues which were made in this House because we were actually capturing what you were saying. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. I want to draw your attention to something which has not been captured by Government, that is, the existence of – I do not want to call them internally displaced people but there are people who have moved from Teso and Acholi during the insurgency across the Kyoga into Kamuli District. In fact, they describe themselves as “Abalumusi”. I had never heard that word but when I went there they said, “We are not the others but we are “Abalumusi”. I would like to ask the government to capture those people because they are there along the Kyoga basin and to support Kamuli District for the future. Thank you. The clarifications will come during the committee reports. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Order”.] You are putting me to order?

MR ODONGA OTTO: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The responses will begin tomorrow with the Government Chief Whip followed by the Minister of Education and the rest will follow. The House is adjourned until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 13 August 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

