Wednesday 15th August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A 
COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

1. The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 2000/2001.
2. The Budgetary proposals for the Fiscal Year 2001/2002 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.

(Debate continued.)

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry we moved very rapidly to item No. 3, but I had a question for you on item No. 2, “Communication from the Chair”.  

Sometime back, I had planned to move a motion on a matter of the privatisation of UCB. We came to an arrangement with the Minister of Finance in consultation with you that this matter will come up today, 15th August. I am wondering if the office of the Minister of Finance has come back to you to confirm whether the Cabinet is now ready to debate the motion.  

Secondly, I am also seeking guidance from you on the matter of Question Time, as to when we shall resume that programme because we have a number of questions to put to Ministers, especially on burning issues such as guerrillas meeting in Kampala without our knowledge.

THE SPEAKER: I think let me start with the issue of questions. As you know, when we started we did not have Cabinet Ministers to answer questions, but later we got the Cabinet. I think there is a Member who asked this question. I do not remember whom but I think he was from Soroti. He asked when they should start asking questions.  My answer was, if you have questions, submit them and we shall make arrangements to have the Ministers answer them.  Therefore, hon. Aggrey Awori, if you have a question, do the needful; the Ministers will be required to answer your question. My answer to you applies to any other Member who may have a question to put to a Minister.

With regard to your issue, I remember that you discussed this issue of UCB in my presence, and as far as I know, it is a pending motion that should be handled soonest. Since this agreement was between you and the Minister, instead of me consulting the Minister, I would rather you consult the Minister and let me know, then I will put it on the Order Paper.

MR.ERESU: Point of procedure, Mr. Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Oh you are asking about Katakwi? 

MR.ERESU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I am conscious about that matter because the Minister promised she was going to bring a detailed statement, but I have not seen her. As soon as I see the Minister, using my powers under the rules, I will adjust the Order Paper so that we hear that detailed statement. 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently, I tried to move a motion using rule 42(1) of our Rules of Procedure, but the move flopped. I applied a new tactic, using rule 89 to move a similar motion. I would like to know, on behalf of the people I represent, what is happening to my move?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are talking about UCB again.  You remember, on Friday you sent me a letter; I was away. I saw it on Monday and I replied to you and it seems the letter was published. So that is the answer which I can give to your matter. But should you have another motion, the door is not closed. Use our rules and the matter will be entertained. But as you know, your motion about UCB was similar, in a way, to the one moved by hon. Awori. I suggest that instead of having an independent motion, you can use the opportunity when hon. Aggrey Awori is tabling his motion, to improve on it so as to include what you wanted in a motion under rule 42, and the same results will be achieved.

So it is now open for you to continue with the debate, subject to the amendment that I may bring to the order of business when the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is ready to give us her detailed statement.

MR.OLEGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Mr. Speaker, since this is my maiden speech in this august House, I wish to congratulate you upon your election as a Speaker for this august House. I also congratulate your Deputy for the same. I would have done injustice not to thank the Minister of Finance for coming up with this constructive Budget Speech. I have actually tried to peruse through it and I think our economy is not hopeless. I think if you follow and try to implement the strategies laid down by the Minister, this country will move forward.  

I have tried to see what programmes the Government has come up with, particularly as regards PMA. This programme is a very crucial one if it is implemented, because our people generally are traditional farmers. Therefore they need education. If agriculture is modernised, it will also create employment for our people. My main worry is, when will these programmes and ideas percolate down to our people? I think some of these things are put down and it takes time for these things to go down to our farmers. My farmers grow cotton as a cash crop but at a small scale. If there was a possibility of giving them some funds so that they could expand on the cotton, I think the issue of poverty would be called history.

Allow me to comment on the issue of water. Water in my area has remained a problematic issue, which needs to be rectified. I think Ugandans need clean water. Therefore, I would like to thank the Government for doubling the funding which was meant –(Interruption)

MR.BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am made to understand that my colleague holding the Floor, and who is talking for the first time in this House, has a lot of saga surrounding him. Do you not think this would be the opportunity for him to clear his name, since it has become too much in the newspapers about his credentials so that we can move together?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olega, I have heard the point raised by hon. Bakkabulindi, but you are not obliged to say anything in respect of that matter. What is that matter?

MR.BAKKABULINDI: Mr. Speaker, they were talking about UNEB querying his academic papers. For us who want to be his friends, we would not like his name to be commented on several times in the newspapers. That is why I want him to use this opportunity to comfort us.

THE SPEAKER: You have now understood what the hon. Member is referring to. I think the Member is referring to a petition. But I think you are not obliged to make any comment on this matter. You proceed with your contribution on the Budget.

MR.OLEGA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling, because this matter is already in court and I think according to the law, I am not supposed to divulge any information to the hon. Members until it is disposed of in the courts of law.
I was actually talking about the issue of water. I mentioned that the issue of water in this country is appalling. I think most of the Members here also have the same problems, we need water very badly because it is life. I think that this Government should be able to come up with a programme, and if possible, fund the Ministry concerned so that Ugandans get clean water. Otherwise, without clean water, our people are bound to get infected with several diseases. That is why we have many cases of bilhazia throughout this country. So, I think it will be better if more funds are availed to get us clean water.

I also want to talk about poverty. Poverty is rampant in this country, and I think if we look at our history, development in this country has been lopsided. You find that the South, since colonial time, is more developed. It is not our own making anyway; it was actually the intention of the colonialists because they came and settled in the South. 

Therefore, it is up to this Government to consider the North so that we remove this ideology where people think that they were marginalised deliberately. I think if the North is left undeveloped, eventually it can cause a problem. As far as I am concerned, this Government has very good plans to develop the North. All the funds required to improve our situation economically must be allocated to the North, and the Minister concerned must also take the initiative to develop the North accordingly.

I think the people in the North, if given time, would have worked a lot because most of them are confined in settlements. If possible, let these camps be dispensed of so that they develop this country. I think if the Northerners are left behind, eventually the country will not be united as it is.

Allow me to comment on the issue of electricity, which appeared in the Budget speech. Without electricity, we cannot talk of investment because investors come in a place where there is power. Without electricity, how can these people come to the North? That is impossible! Therefore, the Ministry concerned should get us electricity so that we can also develop.

MR. KABUSHENGA MBABAZI: Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the hon. Member and the House, that on the issue of electricity, the Government has the programme for rural electrification. But there is a nightmare called, the Electricity Regulatory Authority, headed by Mr. Adramadri, which as I speak is frustrating a 40-million-dollar project meant for rural electrification in South Western Uganda. So, as long as we have commissions like that which frustrate rural electrification for people who already have donors, I think it is impossible to imagine that people who have not got donors will be able to attract them.

MR.OLEGA: Mr. Speaker, I have noted the information given to us by the hon. Member. I think, as a person, why can I obstruct a good programme, which is meant to develop Ugandans?  And that person who is trying to obstruct us can be dealt with according to the law, if he is trying to destroy the development of this country. 

I want now to lastly -(Interruptions)

PROF.NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I felt that since the person accused of sabotaging is not here, it is only fair that the relevant Minister should take up this matter and it be examined, because maybe that in fact it is not sabotaging. So, my role as Premier is to ensure that this matter is taken up with the relevant Minister. I request that the hon. Member gives the information to the Minister of Energy and the matter is resolved, because at the end of the day, I think under Schedule Six of the Constitution, we are responsible for policy and many other things. So, ultimately, we must take the responsibility. I thank you.

MR.OLEGA: I would like to thank the Prime Minister for this important information. I will let us proceed as it is.

I would like to correct an impression, which was expressed by one hon. Member from West Nile, that the people of West Nile or Arua cannot vote for Museveni because the road has not been worked upon. That is not true. When you talk of the road, you find that the people of Nebbi district also need the road, but they still voted for Museveni. When you look at Vurra County, where hon. Andruale Awuzu comes from, these people voted for Museveni. I think the issue is not actually the road. The issue is that the people of West Nile, - may be somewhere the cadres who are supposed to be identified as the Movementists are not actually identified and not even given the chance to stay with the Movement. The people who are sent down to Arua are not the people who are supposed to handle or talk to the people. It is like when you are a butcher man, and you employ a leper to sell your meat. How many kilos will you sell per day? 

So, the issue is; the people who have been sent down to sensitise the people on the Movement are not competent enough to do that. Therefore, the issue of saying that, we in West Nile or Arua cannot vote for Museveni because of the road is out of question.

I think as I talk now, when we look at the set up we have, it is easy for us in the future to allow our people in West Nile to vote positively, even for the Movement.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Government and the Sixth Parliament for promoting Aringa to a district status.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Mr. Speaker, this being my first time to make a substantial speech, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, and all the Members of Parliament that showed confidence in you to unanimously elect you to that high seat in this House.  I also want to thank all my Colleagues who have been able to make it.  I know it has not been easy, but we thank God that we managed to come to this august House.  

A number of hon. Members have contributed to the Budget Speech, and some have also made reference to His Excellency the President’s speech.  But what struck me was that many Members were making special reference to His Excellency the President’s personal manifesto, and there seems to be no distinction between the Movement Government manifesto and that of His Excellency, the President.  

I would like to know whether there is that distinction, because many Members who spoke here were referring to the speech made by His Excellency the President, on his campaign trail: Roads were promised, bridges were promised, hospitals were promised, electricity was promised and a number of things. And now Members of Parliament are finding it hard to report back to their constituencies, what the President’s action is going to be like.   This kind of thing makes us get very concerned because it looks like the Members of Parliament have come here to make a follow-up on issues raised by the President of the Republic of Uganda, other than the Government of the Republic of Uganda.  I would like to go back to my constituency with clarification over the distinction between the Government’s well-conceived programme and the President’s personal manifesto.

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that the President fought a Presidential election and presented his manifesto, so did other candidates. As a result of the elections, the President was elected and therefore he became the Head of State and Head of Government. And because he is the head of Government, it would appear that he should implement his manifesto. 

Under Clause 93, any development that has to go on in the country will take money from the consolidated fund. Therefore, it would appear that the Executive would be presenting the President’s manifesto for implementation because one would not be able to present development contrary to the proposals of the Executive, unless the Executive has bought your proposals. That is the problem.   I think that is why they are talking about the President’s manifesto. He is the Head of the Executive and initiates such development programmes.

MR. ODIT: Mr. Speaker, thank you so much for that consolation, but the way the demands are being made makes us look like beggars because, unless we hear from the President, there is nothing we can report back to our constituencies, and this is my concern.  I would wish very much to be persuaded that what we are implementing is the NRM Government programme, and not a personal agenda – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Foreign Affairs wants to assist you.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER & Minister of foreign affairs (Mr. Wapakabulo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The budget for this financial year implements the manifesto of the President as contained in that Budget, and it has two parts: Recurrent and Development.  You can identify from that Budget those aspects of development that apply to your constituency, and you report back what the Government is planning to do in your constituency.  

It all emanates from the general statement of the President, because he won elections on the basis of that manifesto. As Head of Government and Head of State, he is transforming it into budgetary programmes covering one financial year, and it takes a period of five years.  So the implementation of the manifesto and Government programmes are intertwined in the Budget.  So, as far as you are concerned, you should find out how much of development in health, education, and roads can be found in that Budget to benefit your constituency. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, thank you, but I think his question is about the difference between the President’s manifesto and the Movement’s manifesto. What should the Members follow?  I think that was his question.

MR. WAPAKABULO: There is not much of a difference because the Movement manifesto and the President’s manifesto are embodied in the general policy guidelines that come from the National Conference of the Movement.  There is a National Conference, its job is to give policy guidelines. The President then writes his manifesto as a candidate because he is urged to stand by the National Conference- (Mr Awori rose_) Maybe he knows it better.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the former NPC, and current Minister of Foreign Affairs, on the matter of urging the President to stand.  Who urged him?  Which meeting? Where was it convened? (Laughter) We are constitutionally supposed to be part of the Movement but I am surprised I was not at that meeting -(Laughter). 

The second aspect of my clarification from the hon. Minister and a prominent member of the Movement is on the matter of promises made by their candidate who is now the President.  One of the promises he made which you kept repeating on his behalf is that, people will not pay more than 3,000 shillings for GPT.  Now I see on the implementation of that particular pledge, you are now progressively moving from 3,000 to 100,000 shillings -(Interruption)

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Is it not deception?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I think that is a detail that should come during the debate. But the issue was - I think we were trying to solve a question raised by hon. Odit. That is what we should clear, so that the hon. Member proceeds with his contribution. I will give you an opportunity also to make your contribution.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, when the Movement Conference took place, hon. Aggrey Awori had gone to purchase a helicopter for his campaigns. So he did not attend.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs and the National Political Commissar- (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Former. 

DR.  OKULO EPAK: Oh! Former.  Sorry, I beg your pardon.  All candidates stood on individual merit.  That means the manifestos were personal to holder. The Movement had two candidates, Museveni and Kiiza Besigye. One of the Movement candidates won. When does the Movement as a system adopt Museveni’s personal manifesto, so that it becomes a Government property?

MR. KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inquire from hon. Wapakhabulo, the former National Political Commissar, who is now the Third Deputy Prime Minister. Does the Movement system have a manifesto? Is it written and where is it?

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you. I will start with where and at what meeting was Movementist Museveni urged to stand?  It was at a meeting held towards the end of November or beginning of December last year at the Conference Centre. The National Executive Committee recommended that a Movementist by the name of Yoweri Museveni, be urged to stand as candidate for the Presidency. Hence, that Resolution was passed.  
As National Political Commissar therefore, and secretary of those two meetings, I did invite all members of the National Conference, who include all Members of Parliament including hon. Aggrey Awori; but he refused to attend the meeting. In fact, he was away looking for money to buy a helicopter. (Laughter)

The question of at what point does the manifesto become adopted by the Movement? The answer is very, very simple.   A Movementist was urged and he stood, and he prepared a manifesto, so that he may implement that - When the people of Uganda looked at the manifesto of hon. Aggrey Awori, and that of His Excellency Museveni, they saw more merit in the one of His Excellency Museveni, and adopted it by electing him the President of Uganda. 

As chairperson of the Movement, the manifesto he wrote reflected the ideas of the Movement. So, when he was elected, of necessity that became a Movement manifesto.  

Then, does the Movement System has a manifesto?  Yes, the 15-point programme. That is the broad one; they are now 15. We began with 10 and added other matters like gender, and the environment.   They are now 15, and so, that is the broad manifesto of the Movement; and then it comes down to the candidature and then adoption by the population.  I thank you, Mr.Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Members, this is clear to the hon. Member holding the Floor that actually the manifesto that the Government is using, is that of a successful Presidential candidate. The Presidential candidate became President, and the Constitution expects a President to present a Budget to Parliament. Because he is the President, definitely, he reflects his policy in the Budget he presents. There is no Movement manifesto, but that of the successful candidate who is the President.  I think we can proceed.

MR. ODIT:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker for the time you gave to Members to brainstorm although, the answer is not yet very consoling. My worry, Mr. Speaker, is that there are some areas where more promises were made than others, and so, if it is a matter of sharing the national cake, it becomes a little bit difficult for areas, where less promises if any were made.  
MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Member for giving way. I have got some little information maybe you could use. In terms of the national cake, definitely, the proportion cannot be the same. 

I will give you an example; Rukungiri has got 4 constituencies as a district, and has got 4 Ministers; Tororo has several constituencies, but one Minister or Minister of state; Busia has 3 Members of Parliament, but Ministers zero; Bugiri has got several Members of Parliament, several constituencies but Ministers, zero; Kapchorwa has several Members of Parliament, Ministers zero; and Mayuge has several Members of Parliament, Ministers zero.  So you see how the national cake is shared - (Laugher).

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Speaker, the Member is misleading this House. Rukungiri does not have 4 constituencies.     But what is interesting is that the districts he has been mentioning, apart from Mayuge, are districts which had Ministers, but they rejected them. 

The Minister in Pallisa was rejected by the people of Pallisa; the Minister from Busia was rejected by the people of Busia; and the Minister from Bugiri was rejected by the people of Bugiri.  So now how do we proceed from-(Interruption)

MR. OPANGE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to be clarified by the former National Political Commissar and hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, that the people of Pallisa rejected somebody; that is why we missed the Ministerial posts. I want the hon. Minister to assure the House, because according to the Movement, there is the issue of individual merit. I contested and I campaigned for Museveni since 1996 to 2001 and I have the academic papers to be a Minister. I want the Minister to assure me that what he has said holds water. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT.GUMA: Mr. Speaker, we are supposed to be debating the National Budget and to see how resources are sent in Bugiri, Budaka and all parts of the country - and Terego for that matter, in Arua. Is it in order for the House to engage in trivialities of discussing the appointments of Ministers, as if it is Ministers who develop the country; as if it is a reflection of how resources are distributed? Are the Ministers national cakes? Is it in order for the entire House, of which I am a Member, to delve into trivial matters of ministerial appointments and so on at this point of our debate? Is it not time for us to discuss issues and we see the direction?

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you that Ministers are not cakes. But I think it is high time we ended this matter, because I am convinced that hon. Odit is now clear about the question he put about the manifesto. I have come to the conclusion that the controlling manifesto is that of the successful presidential candidate who presents the Budget. But, of course, other people can improve on the manifesto by marketing their ideas to the President so that he can incorporate them, so that the particular problems of particular areas are addressed. 

So, hon. Member, you are given two minutes to wind up so that we can continue with the debate.

MR.ODIT: Mr. Speaker, I now turn to the economy. After listening to the explanations, I will ponder over the messages I have received and see whether I can internalise and get satisfied with the little that I have grasped about this kind of scenario. 

In the opinion of the Minister of Finance, the economy has demonstrated its strength in the current Fiscal Year, and real GDP expanded by five per cent and per capita output by two per cent due to some stringent monetary policies. I am sure it is this kind of economy that enabled poverty to reduce from 44 per cent to 35 per cent, and it is the same kind of economic performance that encouraged poverty to rise from 60 per cent to 66 per cent in the North. 

I have also come to discover that the North we talk about actually ends up in Pallisa. So, I think the House should find a better way of describing this North where the poverty is rampant up to 66 per cent. I am concerned with this kind of scenario, it is difficult to persuade any poverty-stricken area in this country that the economy has performed the way it appears to be reflected in the Budget Speech. 

I am also aware that most Members who have spoken from the various constituencies here seem to be convinced that they come from very poor constituencies. Nobody seems to accept that poverty in their constituencies has reduced to the said 35 per cent. If that is the case, then we would like to know where this poverty is on the decline in this country. In that way, we could be able to take affirmative action to consider those marginalised areas. Otherwise, the way the situation stands now, it looks like every constituency is needy. Therefore, in future, we should think of clearly defining the areas which need attentive action and affirmative action other than getting the glossy report from intellectuals that come to present to us that we are doing better than what is on the ground.  

When I listened to the hon. Member from Bokora talking about the act of the Minister of Defense that diverted over Shs.500 million meant for disarmament in Karamoja about a week ago, he was very disappointed that the disarmament may not now take place very easily. But we are worried that if the Karimojong cannot be disarmed as soon as possible, what are they going to do with these guns? I know the issue is going to come to the Floor again for specific discussion. But I want to put on record that my own district has had a number of parishes without people. The people are displaced; most of them are living in my own constituency from far-east and the area is vacant. These are the people supposed to support the economy by paying taxes and the taxes are supposed to come from agricultural production.  Where do we expect these people to earn their living in the absence of land, in the absence of capacity and now they are living in town? That is my worry. I think if we come to the discussion of the Karimojong issue, we need to think about how to find the Shs.500 million which was diverted, and give it to the right people so that we do not delay disarmament. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion. I rise to support the motion with a few comments. One, I would like to bring the gratitude from Bujenje County in particular, and Masindi district in general, about the Government’s decision to upgrade Masindi-Kafu Road. This road was promised by many past Governments, and indeed, even the Movement Government when it came to power. It promised this road but until this time it has never materialised. Masindi people are very grateful and have asked me to lobby you, hon. Members, that when the loan for constructing this road comes before you for approval, please do not hesitate to approve it, because we need it and it will link us and you to Bujenje and Masindi.

 Two; I would like to comment on the medium term competitive strategy, there is only one aspect I will talk about which is in the Budget Speech and the President’s Speech.  They are saying that there will be an attempt, or they will work to strengthen the financial sector and accessibility to financial services.  I am wondering how Government is going to work on this when it is trying to cripple its own efforts! I will quote one example that has generated a lot of debate and that is the sell of UCB.  In Masindi we have only one Masindi Main branch; the others were closed and those who want to buy this Bank are not interested in the up-country branches, because they are not profit making.  So, I do not know how Government will make financial services accessible to the people of Bujenje County in particular, and Masindi in general.  

There is also the Rural Micro Finance support program; this program gives money to people through intermediary agencies.  In my county there are not many of these intermediary agencies. Even those who are in Masindi District are not interested in working in these remote counties.  So, I would like to be clarified by the Prime Minister, because it is under his office or whoever is concerned, how my people in Bujenje will access funds from the Rural Micro Finance Support Program, if we do not have intermediary agencies?  

This brings me to the third point. We used to have what they called ‘Masindi Community Integrated Program,’ funded by the Belgium Government through IFAD.  This Program had started giving credit to people. Unfortunately its term has expired, and I remember some time last year Masindi Integrated Project was part of Hoima-Kibale Integrated Project.  Hoima -Kibale was renewed, and at that time, I put a question to the Minister, because Masindi had been removed and they put in Kabarole.  The Minister then assured me that Masindi Integrated Project had not expired, but when it expires it will be renewed. My people are crying because they do not know what is happening.  The project has expired and government is quiet. I have tried to follow it up with the Minister, the Permanent Secretary, but nothing is coming up.  So, please, hon. Minister of Finance, I would like you to give me an explanation and an assurance that my people will continue having this support, since they have been deprived of benefiting from other programs like the Local Government Development Program, saying that they benefited from IFAD.

I would like to talk about the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture in relation to eradication of poverty, and that is the scheme, which has been talked about so much by the Coffee Development Authority, Coffee Seedlings Distribution Scheme.  1.5 billion Shillings is being provided for, but I do not know if Government is aware that this scheme is grossly being mismanaged, and maybe it is not the fault of the implementers, but members of Government. l do not know, because we were told Government is going to give free seedlings to farmers.  I went out to mobilize my farmers; they dug their holes and waited; the last season the seedlings did not come.  This season, we are told money is there, but UCDA is saying a seedling should be bought at only Shs.200/=.   

Those of you who are involved in this business or program of coffee nurseries will agree with me that you cannot reach the breakeven point if you sell a seedling at Shs.200/=.  So, up to now the seedlings have not been delivered and the season is gone, but the money is there. Now, who is to blame, is it Government or the farmers?  Later, you will tell us that the project failed; the farmers were not active, they did not do this and that, but I would like to ask Government when it is setting its limits or priorities to thoroughly consider the guidelines so that the poor people do not miss out.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that what I know, is that the seedlings are costing Shs.400/=.  The UCDA pays Shs.400/= to a nursery owner in any respective district and these seedlings are left in the hands of the district production department in that respective district to distribute free of charge to the identified farmers.  In case there are some discrepancies, I will have to consult the hon. Member to get more information so that it is subject to investigation.There maybe some malpractice in that respective district.

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you for giving that information, but there is definitely a discrepancy, and in Masindi that is the problem; we could sit down and share some notes.  

 Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the export credit guarantee facility that is going to be set up in Bank of Uganda to help entrepreneurs and exporters.  I really doubt the capacity of Bank of Uganda to implement this project given the past experience –(Interjection) - May, I seek your protection, Mr. Speaker, from the hon. Member.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, maybe you come forward, so that hon. Kabakumba is protected.

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and my time is being eaten up.  I really doubt the capacity of Bank of Uganda to implement this project, and I am sure we will end up having much money being unutilized.  As I talk now, there is money in Bank of Uganda that is supposed to benefit businessmen and farmers, but people cannot access this money, because of the conditions attached to it. The interest rate is so high; and of course, Bank of Uganda requires a guarantee from other commercial banks. I would like to get some assurance from Government that when this facility is set up, some of us who intend to get involved in export business will have access to this fund.

Finally, I would like to comment just on one point, because it is really itching the people of Bunyoro.  This is the land fund.  I have been reading through the Budget estimates on the development budget, but I have not seen any provision regarding this land fund. The people of Bunyoro had a lot of hope, especially those in Kibaale District, that once this fund is set up, the problem regarding land ownership would be solved.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): I rise to support the motion, but with some few remarks. On the issue of infrastructure, in Rubanda County West, the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana road cuts across a distance of something like 40 kilometres; that road at one time went on the budget for two consecutive times, but it was scrapped without reason.  In the last presidential campaigns, the President promised that the road would be tarmacked with funds from President Moi, but -(Laughter)- yes, from the Government of Kenya - but in this Budget, there are no explicit measures that the road will be tarmacked, and yet this road is very essential because it connects our people to the markets of Congo and Rwanda.  If this infrastructure in the area is not developed, then it will be difficult for our people to develop their markets in the neighbourhood - (Interruption).
   
MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  It is true that government plans to use part of the Defunct East African Community Compensation Fund that is owed to Uganda by Kenya to, among other things, tarmac the Kabale-Kisoro road.  Unfortunately, the payment of that fund from Kenya has delayed, and our High Commission in Nairobi is in the process of sorting out a few things. We hope it will be cleared.  So, I believe that as soon as it is cleared, the promise by the President will be fulfilled.  Thank you.

MR. BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Minister, for that information.  I hope that government will put measures to get the money from elsewhere, if that fails, so that this road is constructed. 

When it comes to feeder roads, Rubanda West is where we have Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, which is so well known for its tourist attraction as the gorilla mountains, but the road which leads to that National Park is so bad that whereas one takes 5 hours from Kampala to Kabale, you need another 5 hours to travel from Kabale to the National Park.  So, that is very disappointing, and tourists may not be encouraged to visit the Park. 

On the issue of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, there is one complaint concerning research.  People of Rubanda are agriculturists and they get their money mainly from agricultural products, but there is a lack of information dissemination.  I was happy last time when the President talked about research carried out on sorghum; that 350 kilogram’s could be got from an acre. If that information could be availed to the people in the rural areas like Rubanda, it will help them to increase on their productivity. 

Another issue is about the market.  The Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture has not explicitly provided marketing strategies.

On the issue of health, the people of Rubanda sent me to deliver the message to the ministry concerned to work on the theatre, drug stocking, re-enforcing the efforts of the community and people who are trying to provide health services.  The Government should come in and address the situation. 

Another thing is that being a rural area, people who are posted to work in Rubanda run away because the place is remote. There is a health unit that is being constructed there. Soon it will be opened, but getting a person to work there is very difficult. I propose that a hardship allowance be introduced for such remote areas. 

Finally, I would like to address the question of women’s economic empowerment.  In Rubanda and in Kabale in general, women are economically empowered. I would like to call on the Ministry concerned to put more effort to empower more of these women, especially through these micro-finance institutions -(Laughter). They are not yet fully empowered; they do not have enough money to work on their economic activities.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for having accorded me this chance to speak.

MR. MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. This being my first time to speak, I would like to convey my sincere congratulations to the entire Members of the House for having achieved their various positions. I bring you greetings from the people of Kakuuto, and I would like to support the motion in relation to the Budget Speech.  The people of Kakuuto have sent me to express their thanks for tarmacking the road from Mutukula to the Tanzanian border.  However, I have a few remarks as far as progress of work on the road is concerned.  

This road is linking Uganda and Tanzania, it is under the integration process but the problem is that on the Tanzanian side, work has not started, whereas on the Ugandan side it has already started. Compensation in Tanzania has already been paid.  

Work has progressed. The first grading has reached the border point but the Ugandan people have not been paid for the property destroyed.  The value of murrum that is being derived from the pits is at a give-away price of Shs. 250 per truck.  So, I call upon the ministry in charge of transport to look into the plight of the people of Kakuuto who are benefiting from the road, but also suffering following the construction process. 

I also bring you concerns from the people of Mutukula. This is a border town, which is expanding in a very unplanned way, because of the land owned by the Ministry of Internal Affairs under the Prisons Department. You recall that there is a prison, which is just in the town center. Most of the land is owned by the Prisons, and all along the people of Mutukula have been urging Government at least to allow local investors to utilize the land, so that the Prisons be extended to the lower outer part of the town, so that expansion as far as investing in construction of the town adequately comes into the country side. So I call upon the Ministry concerned, to address this issue so that the people can locally invest in this area.

The issue of UPE is a commendable work; the Government is addressing the real issues of education in this nation. The UPE program is a very good indicator that, the Government is addressing poverty, and there are very good indicators; and results can be seen directly. However, it needs improvement. It is good that the structures are being put in place, but the quality of education has to be addressed. More so, we need to address the aspect of feeding these children while at school.  It is one of the biggest issues which lead to the children dropping out of school, given the fact that they stay more than 10 hours at school. At times, most of these children are not afforded a chance to go back to have lunch at their homes. 

It is very important that the Government, possibly under the Program for Modernization of Agriculture, looks into integrating in the next two or three years, programs which can bring about schools having production centers, which can generate food to feed the pupils. I have tried out this and that is one of the reasons why I have maintained my stake in Kakuuto. Schools are having very good programs. You find a school having three acres of coffee shambas, and the children are participating. In fact, they are benefiting quite a lot, and they are learning the skills, much as they are young. 

Many of you may worry that they are being involved in child labour; but given the number that the school has - about 600 children; and they have only 1000 bushes. So, it is a matter of only one hour’s work at the schools. The schools reflect a lot as far as our education system is concerned. 

We are talking of productivity, but we are training the children in arithmetics, which is not being practiced anywhere on the ground.  We are talking of children learning how to defend themselves from their several skills, but we are not training them into functional primary education whereby they practice. After all, they practice these things in their homes. They practice agriculture; they practice all the trades in their homesteads. 

If the schools can become practical-oriented, instead of going for skills where children are trained not to be in their gardens but to go seeking for jobs, vocationalizing agriculture in schools should also be a component. 

I thank the Government for the partnership it has with the NGOs. I have been in the NGO world for 10 years, and I thank the Government for the positive attitude is has, towards supporting the NGO fields. The Non-Governmental Organizations are doing quite well, as far as implementing Government programs are concerned. 

What is most important now -(interruption)

MRS. MUGERWA:  Point of order.  

THE SPEAKER: You are concluding, why do you not -

MR. KASAMBA:  Let me conclude.
MRS. MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very disturbed by the hon. Member who is speaking about NGOs getting positive support from Government. Most of the NGOs in Masaka District, which I represent are complaining and have given me a special message to appeal to the Government to treat them humanly, because they are here to help us. 

They are over taxed and they do not have the money. They have asked me to come and ask the Government to relieve them of tax.  Thank you very much.

MR. KASAMBA: I thank the hon. Member for the contribution.  I think on the whole, the Government is out to ensure that it increases implementation of programs and then delegating it to NGOs. It is a question of implementation modalities, which needs to be improved upon, so that partnership is increased and performance is realized in the entire development aspect. 

As far as poverty eradication is concerned, the Budget comes out very well on results oriented management aspects, which need to be emphasized by physical indicators.  Government is talking a lot on results oriented management. But the physical indicators as far as poverty eradication, and reduction are concerned, need to be given further outlook.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to ask you on a point of procedure. You promised us that we would have a Report on the state of issues in Katakwi; and I see the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister around. He has always come in when the Ministers are not here, and he does everything.  I believe he is competent enough to tell us the state of things in Katakwi, without dilly-dallying. We are desperate for an answer.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Member. I remember what I said earlier, when we started this debate; that at an appropriate moment, I would interrupt the debate so as to deal with this Report.  The information I have, not from the Prime Minister, but from the person concerned with that Report, is that it may be ready at a quarter past four.  So, just hold on; we shall definitely deal with it.
MR. SULAIMAN MADADA  (Bbale County, Kayunga): Bbale should not be mistaken for Mbale.  Sometimes people have said Mbale for Bbale.  Bbale is in Kayunga District, one of the most poverty stricken counties in Buganda, with no single mile of tarmac road, one Government secondary school, and hardly five pupils in grade one.  So, that is the type of county that I represent. 

In fact, I would begin on this point, that one of our biggest problem, is how we can get connected to other areas. The other part of the country could be bordering with Apac, and the other side by Kamuli, but we are landlocked.  Therefore, as Government thinks about the ferries, one of the urgent issues should be a ferry to ensure that we can easily cross to Apac; and there will be easy communication. 

I will begin BY addressing myself to the issue raised by the Minister of Finance, on the area of decentralization, where he said that we need to remove obstacles in service delivery within the decentralization issues. I highly support this. I am talking from experience; I have been in the District Council for 12 years, and therefore, what I am going to contribute partly is out of experience. 

One of the issues that I think should be looked at is the area of the new Districts. The law that put in place the amended Local Governments Act had something that was left hanging.  One of the issues is that the chairperson is supposed to be the speaker, and when the council is less than 17 people, it cannot have any Standing Committees.  So the big Council is the procurement committee, and this was supposed to be for a period of six months, and in case the period was less than a year – something was to be done to make sure that this Council operates. There is an urgent need to ensure that these governments are facilitated in a way that they can operate, otherwise, it becomes very complicated for these interim governments to continue without improving their conditions. 

The other point the hon. Minister talked about on page 8 is to ensure that local governments become more independent other than waiting for grants from the center.  This is from my experience; it is becoming increasingly difficult for the local governments to raise money following the confusion of the graduated taxes.  There is need, therefore, to help these Local Governments to be able to collect more money, otherwise there is a big problem there.  
When you look at payment of salaries for the people, especially when we want to increase revenue for mobilization, we look at the Parish chiefs who are collecting the taxes; they are hardly paid because the local governments sometimes fail to meet the obligations of paying these people.  This explains why they are prone to corrupt tendencies; they are not promptly paid.  Therefore, we should think about this seriously.

On page 27, the Minister talks about enhancing revenue payments and revenue performances. I don’t agree with the point of facilitating revenue collectors. 

On the issue of strategic intervention, I support and appreciate government effort to provide money in the Budget for coffee seedlings, but there is a very important issue of putting aside some fund for stabilization of prices for sometime, because much as you add a lot of coffee seedlings and people are paid at a very low price, it will be a wastage.  Therefore, there is need to think of putting aside some fund to stabilize the prices such that the coffee growers can be motivated.

Under the area of increasing income for the poor in the process of modernization of agriculture, it is necessary to mobilize the communities in groups. In the President’s Manifesto, he talked about working in groups, and I am aware that under community services, there is a Department of Gender that registers women and youth community based organizations. However, there is no single effort to establish a fund to mobilize people for positive development.  

Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to put in some funds for mobilizing women and the youth groups at community level, such that we can improve their productivity and participation. I am running out of time, but I am about to finish. 

The Minister talked about UCB maintaining branch networks in the rural areas.  It is difficult in Kayunga District where there is no single bank, and the people in Galiraya move to Mukono to get their salaries.  It is even very tempting for the civil servants to move with huge sums of money from Mukono or Jinja to go and work in Kayunga.  So, there is an urgent case of establishing a bank service in that area, otherwise the civil servants there may be robbed.  I call upon Government to think about it seriously.  Thank you very much.
MR. JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi Okolo County, Arua) Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is my first time also to address the House.  It is my honor to congratulate you and your Deputy for having been elected to steer the House. I wish to assure you that Members are enjoying themselves with you and your Deputy guiding the House.

I want to make the following contribution to the Motion on the Floor.  Higher education is still a nightmare to very many parents and students.  Government has done well to increase the intake in our public universities, but this is not good enough.  I would have wished, and indeed urge Government to think about supporting private students in faculties where manpower is highly required like medicine, technology and education.

Reforms in electricity: I do not want to pre-empt what the committee on Natural Resources is going to come out with, but I want to take this opportunity, because I saw that the hon. Minister of Energy is around.  As they say, “the voice of the people is the voice of God.” There is a lot of outcry in the country.  The hon. Minister may wish to note that as a Member of Parliament, I am finding a lot of difficulty in paying my bills, I have resorted to paraffin and charcoal. At my level if I am doing all this, how about the lower income earner!  Basic economics teaches us that when the basic ingredient for any production is cheap, the end product must also be cheap.  Somebody has to convince me that our water at the hydroelectric stations is expensive. 

MRS. BUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Member representing Madi-Okollo that in hydropower generation, the smallest component is water and the biggest investment is in the construction of the dams and the turbines. So if you are saying that the cheapest component is water, then that does not justify your statement.  I thank you.  

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted clarification from the Minister of Energy. Why it was cheaper in the 1950s and 1960s, when water was one of the cheapest components, and today being the cheapest component, it is very expensive?

MR. ERESU ELYANU: Mr. Speaker, I have heard very carefully the information given by the hon. Minister, and I would like this clarification to be given to me and for the benefit of this House. She said that the construction costs and the equipments are the most expensive - I agree. Should I be made to understand that by constructing a new power station, the cost of electricity therefore, must rise accordingly? And in that order, when we construct more power stations, the cost of electricity will be rising each time?

MR. MBABAZI KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish also to beg clarification from the Minister of Energy.  I had brought this up before, but I want to ask.  There are places where there is water and the donors are there. Like in the Ishasha Hydro Electricity Project, where the World Bank and the Agakhan Foundation have already expressed interest in supporting the project. But your authorities in the Ministry of Energy, like the Electricity Regulatory Authority have become a nightmare by blocking the projects, to a point where the donors are pulling out. May I seek for clarification about that, Mr. Speaker?

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to me, where she got her data that water is the cheapest commodity in these transactions.  Because even as we talk now, an international conference is going on somewhere in Europe, that water is one of the things which are going to increase the wars on this planet.  

The problem in Karamoja is water; and Kenya is also suffering from shortage of water.  The population on the planet is soon going to be twenty billion, and one thing which is not going to be available, is water.

So, if a Minister stands and belittles water, and starts saying that oil is important – (Laughter)- I beg for clarification, as to where she is getting her data. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think let us do this; it seems there are many questions directed to you. Let us hear them, and then you will answer them together.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to give information to the hon. Minister, in regard to the same.  The generation of Hydro Electricity, in Science it is very obvious to all the students of Science -(Laughter). What happens when Hydro Electricity is being generated is that, water is pumping down pressing against the turbine, and then the turbines start moving endlessly, and as a result, electricity is generated.  

This is why since 1954 the same turbines, which were used at that time, are the same turbines used up to now. And that is why all over the world, Hydro Electricity is the cheapest power formation in environmental jargon.

MR. OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking for clarification from the Minister.  According to what I read from the Budget Speech, there is a plan for rural electrification. However, considering the high tariffs, which are currently levied, I do not know how the rural farmer will manage this electricity with such high cost. 

MR. YIGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is high time that the Government came out openly on this issue, because it appears that there is a lot to be cleared.  Yesterday, the Minister of Finance told us that we are operating a Deficit Budget; and when you go to his Budget Speech on page 2, No. 5, he made a statement that nevertheless, real GDP gross is higher this year than last year’s 4.7 per cent, because some of our non-coffee export sectors and service sectors performed well, notably electricity, telecommunication and construction.  

He goes further to say on page 3 under No. 7, the last sentence that, electricity exports have also increased by 23 per cent to U$ 17,000,000. It is obvious now that we are exporting much of the power to raise these dollars.  Now that we are having this deficit Budget, and we need the dollars, there is little wonder that we have to suffocate the masses, by hiking the electricity tariffs, in order for us to have enough to export to our neighbouring countries.  

I would like the hon. Minister to clarify on this issue, because both of them are contradicting themselves in the way they are answering this issue.  Thank you.

MRS. BBUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Members who have raised the concerns and sought clarification on the tariff.

Hon. Mutumba was asking if water is the smallest ingredient in the production of power, why was power cheaper in the 50s?  Cheaper compared to what?  He did not tell me. The exchange rate at that time was Shs. 7 per dollar, and today it is Shs. 1800 per dollar.  So, if you are comparing a dollar of Shs.7, to a dollar of Shs.1800, then the comparison is not justified.  

I said that among the ingredients for power production, the cheapest is water.  I did not say that water is the cheapest commodity in the world.  But I said in as far as production of power is concerned, if you consider the other ingredients, which go into the production, water is the cheapest.

Hydro Stations are cheaper in the world over, because the equivalent to the water which they use, is thermo and other sources of energy, which are more expensive. But that does not take away the fact that in hydro, water is the smallest ingredient.  Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of water in this country. 

Rural electrification is one of the priorities of Government.  I have heard one hon. Member saying that my presence in the Ministry is to frustrate the development of rural electrification.  I want to clarify that I have no authority to handle electricity in my Ministry.  The Electricity Regulatory Authority is an independent body –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it is true it is independent, but who is answerable?  Will they come and defend themselves here and explain what they do?  You will have to answer for this regulatory independent body because it falls under your Ministry.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from her whether they are emphasizing rural electrification or rural exploitation?  If people cannot afford power here, can you extend it to Kanungu?  Is it rural exploitation or rural electrification?  Let us be clear!

MRS. BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was just clarifying to the hon. Members who were not here when the electricity law was enacted that I take responsibility for the sector. I do not believe that the Regulatory Authority is frustrating the development of Ishaka, Rukungiri and Bushenyi rural electrification. There has been disagreement over the tariff and negotiations are going on, but when I met the parties yesterday, the Electricity Regulatory Authority, and the developer brought it to my attention that their disagreement was over the tariff.  

The developers, IFC and Aghakhan wanted the people of Rukungiri and Bushenyi to buy the power at 13 to 14 cents, which is higher than the tariff people are complaining of today.  So, the regulator and the transmission company who are the buyers are sitting down today to do some financial engineering to see how they can bring down the tariff. 

If they leave it on the commercial tariff that the developer is offering, it means that the people of Bushenyi and Rukungiri will be buying power at a much higher tariff than the grid connected people.  This may be translated into frustration because the developers would want to get the highest tariff for their pockets, and it is the responsibility of the Regulatory Authority to see that the tariff is fair. The Authority was not satisfied that it was fair.   That is why the discussion has taken long.  But from the meeting we had yesterday, I think that very soon, an agreement will be reached with the guidance of the Minister.

How will the poor people afford the rural electrification we are talking of?  Why is it not rural exploitation?  Who are the first targets in the rural electrification?  Small scale industries which are going to generate employment; hospitals which lack power and yet they have to improve the quality of health services; schools which are going to provide quality education; domestic consumption is the last on the list.  So if it is improved, certainly development will be in the area and jobs will be created. The poor people will get better incomes from their crops, and if they decide to take power to their houses, they will be able to afford it.

I want to state it here that government does not deny Ugandans electricity by exporting it to the neighboring countries.  What we are exporting is the surplus, and we export this surplus –(Interruption)- I beg your protection, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected, hon. Minister.  Please, allow the Minister to explain.

MRS. BBUMBA: Mr. Speaker, when do we export power?  We export power from 11 o’clock at night to 6 o’clock in the morning when people are sleeping.  We don’t export power during peak hours; we only export it when the Ugandan consumers have switched off.  So, instead of complaining, people should be praising the Ministry of Energy for creating revenue for government. 

MR. WAMBUZI:  I didn’t want to interrupt the hon. Minister, but it is a pity for the hon. Minister of Energy to tell Parliament today that there is surplus power when there is endemic load-shedding.  Surely you should tell us something better than the surplus power that we have to export. I think there is a big contradiction here.  Is the hon. Minister in order to give us such a big contradiction and try to convince us that what she is saying holds water?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you explain? 

MRS. BUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  We have the highest demand between 6 o’clock in the evening and 11 o’clock in the night, and during that time, the power we generate is not sufficient to meet the demand.   That is why we have load shedding during the peak period.  But the period from 11 o’clock at night to about mid-day, the power consumption is lower than the supply, and the period when we are exporting is between 11.00 p.m. and 6.00a.m.  Instead of switching off all the turbines that are very expensive to start, we keep some of them running waiting for a peak demand. And instead of wasting water and the running energy, we export that power. I think that that is good economics and the Minister should be praised for that.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister will come and make a statement on this issue –(Interjection)- well, she has declined. She does not want your information and that is her entitlement.  I think you will give the information, but let the Member wind up so that we see what to do.

MR.ARUMADRI: Mr. Speaker, I wish to proceed. I am sorry I rubbed a raw nerve but what is important here, is that the hon. Minister has noted the mood of the peoples’ representatives and it is not expedient to ignore it.  

While we talk about water, let us state it. The hon. colleague from Yumbe talked about the need for Government to move fast in providing clean drinking water for our people. I note with a lot of sadness that Government is going to allocate resources to increase rural water coverage for the next two years from 53 to 58 per cent which is a mere five per cent. As the saying goes, water is life; if we cannot provide life to our people, what else can we give to them?  

MR.SAIDI OKUTI: I want to give information to the Member from Madi-Okolo that much as there is effort by the Government to improve on the rural water situation, in West Nile and Arua Municipality in particular, the people do not know tap water. They depend on bore-holes, which is also against the urban law. There is no flush toilet in the Municipality, you can see the situation. Therefore, we should also look at that.

MR.ARUMADRI: In my constituency, women and children have become beasts of burden. Very early in the morning, they leave their homesteads in search of water, instead of spending those many valuable hours cultivating in the fields. During the rain season, water is collected from standing pools with all the risks of disease contraction. I urge Government to do something now and quickly.

THE SPEAKER: Can you get the answer from the Minister?

THE MINISTER OF STATE (WATER) (Mrs. Mutagamba Maria): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that as far as my records show, Arua district is the most served with water. It actually stands at 65 per cent coverage compared to other districts. In fact, it is a leading district in water service.  


Secondly, the hon. Member should know, and maybe he will come to know, that the Government has divested the provision of water from the centre to the Local Governments. I request the hon. Member and all others interested in following up on the water services within their districts and counties to work closely with the districts, because we have spent so much money there to improve on the water services. 

I also request you to help the districts officials and the districts teams to identify exactly where there is a crisis in provision of water. Otherwise, if you do not get to know what exactly the district is doing, you will come here and we shall keep referring you back to the district. 

I want the Member to know that Arua district has got the highest safe water coverage, and at the same time, it has got a conditional grant for providing water either through bore-holes or protected springs or gravity flow schemes, depending on the decision of the local council.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.OGENGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister. In the last elections, the President promised certain rural towns water. Are those rural towns and the promises the President made provided for in the funds transferred to the districts? If so, are those transfers clearly stated so that we do not have to go and fight with the district councils to release the water to fulfil the President’s promises?

MRS.MUTAGAMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. What I know is that in every district, we provide for one major water scheme; that is one town every Financial Year. Then the rest of the projects that are being undertaken. Those are done at the centre, and it is not something that you plan overnight. It requires a lot of study. You need to involve the consultants, make designs. So, all those towns that have been identified in the various districts for such major projects, their designs are done centrally, and whoever wants to know what project is in the pipeline for that particular district, please feel free to consult the Ministry. We shall give you all the details. Otherwise, when the sector Minister comes to explain what is being done, we shall give the details.

MR.AWORI: Madam Minister, how much does it take you to deliver a litre of water in West Nile and Busia districts?

MRS.MUTAGAMBA: Mr. Speaker, that one is a technical problem. But right now, in Kampala a jerrycan of water costs Shs.12 and then in West Nile, 1,000 litres of water cost Shs.1,500. So you can calculate downward. But the cost of – he is not mathematical, but I believe that the Member next to him will help us to get the calculation. A thousand litres of water is 50 jerrycans, so 50 jerrycans cost 1,500. Okay? You will find that it is Shs.30 whereas in Kampala it is Shs.12. Normally, we have to subsidise the people upcountry in order to keep them at the same rate.

MR.ARUMADRI: Mr. Speaker I am concluding. I thank the hon. Minister for the information. I further want to inform her that over the weekend, I am going to see my people of Madi-Okolo. I want to invite her to come and see the plight of the peasants for herself. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula county, Rakai): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you, as it is my first time to contribute, for having been elected to the office you are bearing now. 

I support the motion of the Minister of Finance, but I would like to make a few remarks on his speech and also on the State of the Nation address by the President. His Excellency the President complained of high taxes and the cost of production, which has contributed a lot to the problems of our local industries’ performance. Some of the industries have almost collapsed, and on the side of the business community, it is worse. When you visit some business premises, you find sad news. However, the speech does not give reasons as to why it is happening. 

On the point of high taxes, we need to have a formula really, because the stakeholders whom we think are contributing 70 per cent to our total revenue are direct importers. There is no deliberate policy to give incentives to the business community. For instance, you all know how many days it takes to import goods here. You find that somebody imports goods and it takes almost three months before they are cleared because of the process. So, these people really need an incentive. 
When you go to the Finance Bill that we have now, it is saying that if 45 days elapse, goods not cleared should be put on auction. I want to understand this. The business community has been facing a problem of purchasing power, which is not there - and in this, do we expect to collect more revenue?

I would like to talk about the high tariffs, especially on some items. There are some prohibitive taxes on bicycles, on televisions and even on radios. These are items needed by my people, as low-income earners. The Ministry of Finance should consider this and know that, the higher the tariffs, the more we are going to face scarcity of these items.  

I would like also to touch on the prohibitive taxes - excise duty on textiles, particularly in the Finance Bill, chapter 54. We do understand that people involved in the business of importing textiles employ many people. They do pay in a lot of revenue, more than the local industries. Now we have entered into AGOA whereby our cotton will have a market.  I think that the Minister for Finance should understand that the more that prohibitive tax is introduced - because this is an attractive commodity for tax revenue, you will find that they are smuggling this textile into here because the taxes to be paid are too high. Look at the second-hand clothes.  Almost 70 per cent is paid on second-hand clothes, but the excise duty on it is really prohibitive and the taxes collected are more.

MR. ALINTUMA NSAMBU: I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, by levying higher taxes on second-hand clothes, in the long run, Government will be able to promote the local markets for our local textiles industry, and that is when we can even have better use of our cotton.  Thank you very much.

MR. KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform you that we are a member of AGOA, whereby the cotton produced here is exported and we have a liberalized trade.  So, there is no need of putting such a prohibitive tax whereby you will get much revenue when you import second-hand clothes.  The more you lower the taxes, the more revenue will be collect.  

Another point, Mr. Speaker, is on tabulation of taxes on imported commodities. You find that there is double taxation. The way taxes are tabulated, it is tax on tax.  You calculate import duty on excise duty then on VAT value. This causes commodities to be expensive.  So, the more the rates are lowered and properly tabulated, I think the more we shall get more revenue, and we shall be able to meet our Budget projected incomes. 

For instance now, in Uganda we are in GAT; that is General Agreement for Trade and Tariffs valuation agreement.  But Uganda Revenue Authority has openly rejected to use this method. As we talk now, they have their own values, which is against this law. The business community is complaining.

I would also like to talk about the shortfalls in the revenue collection.  I do think that it is our negligence or maybe that of the implementers who are not having a general collection input.  For instance, when you read the Auditor General’s report, they are saying 45 judges are not charged Pay-as-You-Earn whereas for me, a Member of Parliament, it is deducted from my money every month! This is an income tax law.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you were supposed to use five minutes but now you have gone beyond.  Would you like to conclude?

MR. KAKOOZA:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would like to conclude with this, which is a big problem. The Revenue Authority and the Ministry of Finance have never known why we have been getting these shortfalls, but I think the tax cost that is put by the Revenue Authority has never been submitted in the Ministry of Finance. So, they do not check how much they used to collect. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Hoima should come next, but I promised that I would interrupt the debate. After we have dealt with the Katakwi issue, you will contribute.  Can I ask the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs to present the report?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  May I first of all, start by apologizing for not being here in time, but that was due to circumstances beyond my control.  The copies of the report are not yet ready, so I wish to ask Members of this House to bear with me and pay attention as I read the only copy that is available to me.  As I reported to you yesterday, I hereby wish to present to you and this House a Report of the findings of the team of Ministers and Government officials that travelled to the Districts of Katakwi, Moroto and Kotido.  

The team travelled following reports of insecurity in camps of Katakwi District as a result of the Karimojong raids.  A list of the Members that travelled is attached to the Report, but I wish to say that it involved the Ministers of State for Internal Affairs, State for Defence, State for Economic Monitoring, State for Disaster Preparedness and the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs.  It also involved two Members of Parliament and Officers from the Vice President’s Office, the Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Finance, Agriculture, Internal Affairs and Defence.  

The objective of the team’s mission was mainly twofold; to assess the situation on the ground, especially for the people living in camps in Katakwi District, and to reassess the disarmament process with the stakeholders in the three districts, in order to come up with recommendations for review. 

 I wish to inform this House and hon. Members, that the situation of the people living in the camps in Katakwi District was forced upon them as a result of the Karimojong cattle raiders.  Katakwi District was most affected, because of its long border with Karamoja as compared to districts like Mbale and Kumi.  Kumi, for instance, has got a natural border or buffer in the name of Lake Bisena and Lake Opeta. 

 You will recall that cattle raiding within Karamoja is not a new phenomenon.  The fact that the Karimojong have been moving to neighbouring districts in search of water and pasture is also not a new phenomenon.  They have always lived in peace with their neighbours.  The new variable in this situation in our view is the gun.  Initially, Government of Uganda facilitated the Karimojong with guns to protect themselves against the attacks by armed pastoralists from the neighbouring countries of Kenya, Somalia and Sudan.  Over time, the Karimojong have turned their guns against their neighbours in the west and south, namely, the districts of Uganda bordering Karamoja.  This led the Sixth Parliament to pass a resolution to disarm the Karimojong, hence the Karamoja emergency programme of mobilization and disarmament as a distinct programme.  Her Excellency, the Vice President, launched the disarmament programme in February this year.  That is why the team of Ministers, whereas it was most interested in seeing the situation in the camps of the displaced people in Katakwi District, also visited the District of Karamoja.  

I wish now to report on the areas we visited and the discussions we had, and the issues that were raised in these meetings.  The team on arrival in Katakwi, held a meeting with the District leaders namely, the District Security Committee, and we have attached to this report the names of the officials that we met. We later on visited some of the camps of the displaced people.  The team was informed by the district leaders that there are over 60 camps in the District of Katakwi.  We were able to visit the camps of Aketa and Achanga, both in Ngariam sub county, and Magoro sub county in Usuk county.  We also visited one military detach in Okoboi in Kapelebyong sub county in Kapelebyong county.  We were unable to visit many of the camps we intended to visit, because of the condition of the roads.  

Some of the issues raised were, one, security.  The security situation in the camps is generally calm.  There are no more mass raids by the Karimojong.  There are 38 detaches deployed along the Katakwi-Karamoja Districts and three of these are army detaches. 35 of them are LDU detaches commanded by the UPDF.  The presence of these detaches has ensured that there are no mass raids, although sometimes there are attacks by groups of three to five raiders.  

I wish to report to this House, that there are no new camps being formed as a result of insecurity in the district.  There are, however, new camps being set up at sub county and parish levels for the purpose of decongesting the originally bigger camps at county and sub county levels.  This process of decentralizing camps up to the parish level, allows people move to camps nearer to their villages, which has enabled some of them to till their fields in the day, but sleep in the camps.  There are a few new arrivals in the camps, but the team was informed that these are people who moved to other districts like Soroti, Kumi and other districts during the insurgency.  Today, when they hear that people have moved back to their sub counties or parish, some of them have chosen to live in those camps near their original homes.  

We were also informed about the problems the security organizations are facin,, the UPDF and the LDU detaches that hamper the enforcement of security.  There is inadequate logistics to security forces like transport, fuel, communication equipment, food, military uniforms and boots. There is inadequate logistics for the security forces like transport, fuel, communication equipment, food, military uniforms and boots. There is also inadequate medical care for the security forces like poor supply of drugs, lack of medical personnel, and lack of emergency vehicles to transfer the sick to referral centres. There is also lack of critical security roads for ease of deployment of troops as well as supplies. 

We were also informed that the terms and conditions of employment of the LDUs, which is necessary for their commitment to duty, are not clearly set. We came out with solutions, which I will be reporting on later.  

We were also informed that at times indisciplined soldiers and LDUs collude with the local leaders in stealing animals and obstructing justice. This happens on both sides of Katakwi and Karamoja, and these have been arrested where the security organisations have been able to get them.  

I wish to report on the social and economic welfare within the district, as well as within the camps. There are figures that were given to us regarding the number of people in the camps. –(Interjections)- I will get those figures later and I will read them. May the Minister of Agriculture please be patient with me because I know I have the figures. The figures were compiled by an entire agency, a team from Government, the UN, NGOs and district leadership, which undertook the assessment exercise from 23rd to 26th July this year. A full report is given under Annex 2.  

According to that report and that of the district leaders, there are over 60 camps with a total population of 88,623 displaced persons. The camps are overcrowded, although the process of decentralisation has offered some relief.  Government has already responded to the health threats by providing mobile clinics so that medical services can be availed where and when needed. 

The process of decentralising camps serves to bring the people nearer to their usual sources of water like bore-holes and protected wells, as well as to relate them more easily to their administrative local units like LC 1, 2 and so on. 

All Government and community programmes like UPE, infrastructure construction, rehabilitation of roads, agricultural extension services, protection and rehabilitation of water sources and community health services were disrupted. Civil Servants who ran away from the insecurity in their areas of service have gone away from the district to search for greener pastures.  Local revenue collection too was disrupted; only 34 per cent of the local revenue was collected last Financial Year and is likely to be less this year.  

I want to move on to Karamoja region. The team proceeded to Karamoja after Katakwi, and met the local people at Iri-Iri and visited the valley dam at Rabwoni. We met the District Security Committees of Moroto, Kotido and representatives from Nakapiripirit. The team also visited Kayirongo dam and met with the people of Labwor County at Abimi. The list of those who attended the district meeting is given in Annexes 3 and 4.  

The issues raised included among others security. The leadership informed the team that the Karamoja region is generally peaceful internally and there is a substantial reduction in inter-tribal raids. The major problem now is to forge peace with the neighbours. The people at Iri-Iri suggested that as a temporary measure to disarmament, they should retain their guns in their manyatas, but not to roam around with them so that they can easily identify culprits who come from Teso land.

At least 146 LDUs were recommended for recruitment, training and deployment at sub-county levels as per the disarmament plan. It was also recommended that all outstanding arrears of the Anti Stock Theft Unit vigilantes should be paid and the system of payment should be reviewed and rectified with a view of introducing internal checks, and involving the local leadership with nominal roles displayed at sub-county levels. That is a solution that came up in the meeting with the leaders.  

Some of the valley dams being constructed under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment are not satisfactory, and Government is addressing the matter.  False information given to authorities by either side usually flare up insecurity in Teso and Karamoja.  Poor communication between the district administration leadership within the two districts of Karamoja and Katakwi has also hampered the good working relationship.  

The people of Karamoja support disarmament - the local people as well as the leaders. In the records that we got from Moroto and Kotido, Moroto claims that 8,000 heads of cattle were lost to Teso and yet Katakwi alone also claims to have lost 3,013 heads of cattle.  

There have been fruitful contacts with Kenyan and Sudanese authorities at the district level, and there are meetings proposed with those counties in September 2001. There has also been reduced movement of pastoralists within and outside the district. 

In an effort to pacify Kotido, the security committee is planning to meet the Karachuna, the youth warriors, to sensitise and have a dialogue with them on peace initiatives. There is also a lot of support from Government, the churches and NGOs on the peace initiatives. There are a number of security roads not yet open and several of them have got dangerous bridges, especially in Kotido, and these are being addressed.

The local leaders expressed concern about the Dodoth people’s fear of the invasions from the Turkana of Kenya.  There was also mention in these meetings of the need for technical vocational training. You are all aware that Government has already planned for community polytechnics at sub-county level, and we believe that Karamoja region will be given priority.

Kotido district does not have any telecommunication facility, and this team plans to bring this to the attention of the concerned Minister to handle. While there has been ample rain generally in the region, some areas of Matheniko and Dodoth have had crop failure and will need relief food. The Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness has taken this up.

The people of Karamoja appreciated the Vice President’s Programme on seed, and also requested that more seed should be availed to enable them to take advantage of agriculture programmes. It was also noted that it is difficult to retain extension staff in the areas of health and agriculture. Further, Government policy to recruit graduates at sub-county level makes it difficult, and the matter will be brought to the attention of the relevant Ministries to address the need for the people of Karamoja to be allowed at least to recruit people with diplomas other than degrees.

On the Government interventions, I wish to say, first of all, that Government is committed to the disarmament programme. Already, security forces have been deployed within the region of Karamoja and along the borders.  This has led to the reduction in the frequency and magnitude of inter-tribal, inter-district and external raids.  

As per the disarmament programme, Government will improve on the logistics to the security forces and recruit at least 146 LDUs for each sub-county. Government will also ensure that LDUs, home guards and vigilantees are paid their salary arrears. The Division Commander and the local leaders have agreed to review the system of payment of these groups to involve the local leadership.

The team encouraged dialogue between the tribes within Karamoja and with the leadership of the neighbouring districts on security matters as is contained in the disarmament programme.  

The soldiers, LDUs and any other persons involved in criminal acts of violence against the people like the incident of Amalatoit will be brought to justice and some of them have been arrested and are awaiting prosecution.

Under the programme for mobilisation and sensitisation of Karamoja, Government is addressing the issues of roads, water in general and dams in particular, communication facilities, food security and actual disarming of the Karimojong. But there is still need for Government to secure funds to ensure that the programme is executed expeditiously.  

Matters regarding the poor work done on the dams visited by the team will be handled, as I said, by the relevant Ministries.

In conclusion, I wish to say that the Government is in control and has taken steps to address the situation in Katakwi district to ensure that the displaced persons return to their homes. Further, Government will consolidate on the achievements so far gained under the disarmament programme in Karamoja. All the relevant sectors of Government concerned with the implementation of the Karamoja Emergency Mobilisation Programme will be expected to give priority to this programme.

I also wish to report that in the absence of the Vice President, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has directed that the Second Deputy Prime Minister, who is also the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, takes charge of this programme.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: As we agreed yesterday, this is a Ministerial Statement where debate will not arise but questions for clarification can be asked.

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. As you said, just for elucidation, I do not take the Government programme on Katakwi or Karamoja and her neighbouring districts seriously, I do not think the Government is serious! Could I ask the hon. Minister to give me a rough idea of how much you are spending per capita on restoration of peace, relief and services to the people who have been affected? 

First of all, in comparison with what we are spending elsewhere in terms of security and development - I am giving a specific example. As I stand before you, we are spending on average Shs.100,000 per Congolese rebel in Kampala, yet we are spending less than Shs.5,000 per person in Karamoja and the surrounding districts. That is why I am saying there is no seriousness on the part of the Government to make sure that the problems of affected people are solved.  
The hon. Minister for Karamoja can confirm; he is given very little fuel to carry out his duties. As a matter of fact, the kind of money the Minister spent on this political tourism -(Interruption)

MR.LOOTE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. I would also like to inform him that, not only is the fuel given to the Minister for Karamoja Affairs to address the vast issues in Karamoja affairs little, but there is also no fund for development in the Karamoja Affairs Ministry; not even in the KDA which is supposed to address the issues of Karamoja. When you contact other Ministries in this country, they always inform us the representatives of the people that there is KDA to develop Karamoja, and that there is an entire Ministry for Karamoja to address the issues of Karamoja development. Therefore, the Government should be very serious on this issue. 

MR.AWORI: Thank you, hon. colleague. On top of what you have just said, I know for certain that the Government sent seven APCs to the Ministry of Defense - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, are you operating under rule 37(2)? I think you stood to ask questions for clarification. Can you ask the questions so that we proceed?

MR.AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was just a preamble.  I was preparing my elucidatory question.

THE SPEAKER: No, if you are not ready, please think about it.

MR.AWORI: I am very ready, Mr. Speaker. I am simply saying that the Government is not serious for the following reasons. First, the Minister responsible -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can that be a question?

MR.AWORI: Secondly, how can they convince me that they are serious about restoration of peace when they sent there seven Armoured Personnel Carriers which have no spare parts, fuel, and no drivers? They are all stuck! Since they were sent there, they have not been doing anything at all. In the same way, the hon. Ministers went there and they have come back and there will be nothing again for the next one month until there is a crisis.

THE SPEAKER: Now, what is the question?

MR.AWORI: The question is, can they demonstrate their seriousness on this matter? (Laughter)

MR.AACHILLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel the report given by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is not satisfactory and it is very unfair to Karamoja. The Minister said that guns in Karamoja have been turned against their neighbours and yet she reports that they were in Karamoja. She has not told us clearly how much suffering the gun has caused to the people of Karamoja, and how many people are dying in Karamoja everyday, yet the Government is there to protect all the citizens.

MR.ERESU: May I inform the Member holding the Floor that he has rightly told us that he comes from Jie which is in Karamoja. I would therefore expect him to give us the amount of suffering these people are going through other than asking the Minister who went there for a few days.

MR.AACHILLA: These people were there yesterday. And when they went to Karamoja, I for one knew I had the information to give. The point I am bringing out very clearly here is that, the report itself does not really give the whole information that we need as per their – I would call it a tour - visitation to Karamoja. It is an unbalanced report - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: What is the first question?

MR.AACHILLA: The first question is, how much suffering has the gun caused to the people of Karamoja?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the second.

MR.AACHILLA: The second question - I am asking the Minister who is a Minister for Uganda, not a Minister for Karamoja.  The other question I want to ask is on the fact that there are 38 armed detaches surrounding Karamoja. This, to me, reveals that Karamoja is being sealed off for very unfair reasons. Does this signify that Government has failed to contain the situation in Karamoja because we have a potential army inside Karamoja that can hold the situation, that it is now appropriate that we must build a wall outside to keep out Karamoja?  
The third question, Mr. Speaker, is that the report given states that there has been collision of local leaders of Karamoja and Katakwi, but I would like to clarify here that, the question of Katakwi - and the press should get it very clearly. They should stop misleading the country that Karamoja has a problem with Katakwi. Karamoja is such a vast region. There is Kotido, Moroto and Nakapiripirit. So the problem of collision which the Minister has said involves the leaders is in Moroto and Katakwi. The report has not given us clearly how these problems have been handled. There is a problem between the leadership of Katakwi and the leadership of Moroto, more so the leaders of Katakwi are the ones  causing a lot of problems. These people have not told us exactly what the chairman of LC.V of Katakwi –(Interruptions)- the people of Moroto district.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what you were supposed to do was to consider the statement which the Minister made, and where the points were not clear, you could ask questions. We are not developing this into a debate. It is only to get information, clarification, and then we proceed. I foresee that it will be necessary sometime in future to have a debate, some kind of motion to deal with this issue. But currently, we are dealing with the statement, which the Minister has made and therefore, let us concentrate on that one for purposes of clarification.

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to express my gratitude before I ask my questions. My sincere gratitude goes to the hon. Members of Parliament from Teso region who took it upon themselves to bring this very serious issue before this House.

Secondly, I am saddened that a matter of this seriousness should have been handled so casually by Government. I have three questions: 
1. When did Government become aware of the seriousness of the plight of the people of Katakwi?
2. For the first time we have been told that Government gave out guns to the people of Karamoja. When were these guns given out and then -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR.APUUN: Mr. Speaker, I rise –(Interjection)- look here, hon. Member for Kasilo. I would not like the hon. Member behind me to intimidate me when I am trying to contribute on a point of order. And Mr. Speaker, I would like you to protect me because he is my neighbour and we can exchange blows immediately, if it can be done (Laughter). 

Is it in order for the hon. Member to misinform the House that the Government of Uganda at one time gave the Karimojong guns? 

THE SPEAKER: Now a point of order has been raised by the hon. Member and it is in respect of a statement made by hon. Member for Oyam County North. I think before I rule on this, what was the basis of your saying guns were given?

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of State for Internal Affairs was giving us her report, the very first issue that she stated in respect to Karamoja was that the Government of Uganda gave out guns to the people of Karamoja for their peaceful protection. If that is not true, that is not my problem. But can I continue and ask her? 

THE SPEAKER: Now you see, I cannot handle two point of orders at the same time. I want to start with the point of order raised in respect of –(Interjection)- No, no, you see, the hon. Member was not denying having made the statement. We are only trying to find out from what source, because if he was repeating the Government statement, my ruling will be different. If it was not, it will be different.  So I am asking him the basis of his statement.  So he is saying that this is contained in the Minister’s Statement. So if it is contained in the Minister’s Statement –(Interjection)- Is that the statement you made, hon. Minister? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (INTERNAL AFFAIRS) (Ms Kiyingi Namusoke) Mr. Speaker, it is contained in my report and I will clarify as he is seeking thereafter.

THE SPEAKER: Then the point of order –(Interruption)

MR.WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Can I continue?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have to rule on a point of order raised. That is how we operate. In view of the fact now stated by the Minister that this is in the report and a Member was talking about the report, I see nothing out of order for referring to the report that has been tabled.

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now there is another point of order. Hon. Minister what is the point of order?

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ECONOMIC MONITORING)(Mr. Omwony Ojwok): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. It is not a point of order this time; it is a point of information.  

Tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, the transcript of the Minister’s speech will be out and the word she used was ‘facilitated’. Now facilitated does not necessarily mean handing over guns and I will explain (Interjections). Let me explain. Let me be protected. 

This facilitation does not mean handing over the guns. What it concretely means in this particular case is that the people of Karamoja got their guns -(Calls of Order, Order)- but having got the guns, the Government did not allow them –(Interruptions)- I am explaining the word ‘facilitating’ means -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, give me opportunity to handle this matter. I will definitely handle it. The hon. Minister stood to say that - because the Minister owns the statement. The hon. Minister is saying, no, what was done is facilitation. Now let us analyse this. You say, I want a gun. Well you say, I do physically do not have a gun but let me give you money so that you go and procure a gun. So what is the difference?   (Interjections) I think we cannot waste time on this. On the point of order, I have already ruled that there was nothing out of order, but I am only expecting questions, not contribution. 

MR.WACHA: Can I continue, Sir?

THE SPAKER: You are still on the Floor, you have your time.

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for protecting me. I was going on to ask the delegation which represented Government;

1. How many guns were given out in Karamoja?

2. When were they given out?

3. What were the criteria of Government giving out guns to Karamoja? That is part one of my questions. 
       
THE SPEAKER:  You have asked so many questions. I think your concern is about the number of guns.

MR. WACHA: No, if you may allow me to proceed, my concern is about the problem of Katakwi and Karamoja, and how it has been handled.  That Government is concerned about the problem of the people of Katakwi and that everything is under control.  I think that is what the hon. Minister said.  How many of these people have left the camps and gone back?  How many are not in a position to go back because of fear of insecurity in their homes?  That Government is committed to disarmament; when was the first time that Government came out with a policy of disarming the Karimojong? How many have been disarmed so far?  Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: These should have been a few questions, but they are turning out to be 100 questions.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, I have with me here, a copy of the motion, which this Parliament passed last year on the 15th March 2000 – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: You mean the last Parliament?

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Yes, the last Parliament, Mr. Speaker. Although this is just elucidatory, I intend to co-operate with my colleagues to bring a substantive motion for debate on Karamoja later as you have assured us. I want to draw the attention of the hon. Minister that, a resolution was passed that: “Government disarms the Karimojong within twelve months from the date of this resolution, and that Government undertakes to remove the guns from Karamoja and deploy the Army there…”

Now, my elucidatory question is this; twelve months from the 15th March 2000, has since passed. Can the Minister tell us how far they have gone with the disarmament process?  Not this fluidity you know; these romantic words “the Government is committed to disarmament of Karamoja”!  You know! It is also nice to hear that Government is committed. So can the Minister tell us, since this important resolution was passed, how far is the disarmament process? Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: So the question is, did Government implement the resolution of the 6th Parliament?

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Yes exactly.

THE SPEAKER: If it did, how successful was the implementation?  If it was not successful, what were the impediments?  

MR. ETONU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to be clarified by the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs. In her report, she mentioned - if I got her correctly - that 80,000 heads of cattle were lost in Teso. How did they get lost?  

THE SPEAKER: I said they were three questions.  I will be inclined to give these questions to people who are very close to the area.

MR. MALINGA J: Thank you very much, hon. Speaker.  Before I ask the three questions from – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have hijacked it? Okay, make your point - (Laughter).

MR. MALINGA J: I am sorry, I thought you had given me the chance to speak.  I would like to appreciate the effort the Government has put in response to the cry of the people of Teso.  I have only three questions to ask. A team was set up to see the plight of people in Katakwi district, and two Members of Parliament from Karamoja were put on the team, but none from the affected areas.  Was it a plan to throw us out so that they come up with a biased report?

The Minister has told us point blank that guns were given to Karamoja to protect them.  It is a constitutional requirement for the Government of Uganda to protect the lives and the property of the people.  Does this imply that the Government cannot protect the Karamajong and their property?  Likewise, can Government not protect the people of Teso and their property? And if this is a new constitutional arrangement, is it possible for the Government to give the people of Teso guns so that they protect themselves?  

We have been told that the main aim was to reassess the disarmament process.  What are the major impediments that the Minister and the team have found, so that we can be reassured that the Government is not going to sweet talk us, because the Teso Parliamentary Group has made noise and when they keep quiet, the story will end there?  Thank you very much.

MR. ABURA PIRIR: Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my gratitude to the team that went to Karamoja to survey the situation and has reported to this House.  Basing myself on the report about water, last year Government got 3.5 billion shillings for construction of dams in Karamoja. Unfortunately some of these people did substandard work.  In Matheniko County, the dam that was constructed was washed away. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I think the report conceded that it was poor work.    So what is the question?

MR. ABURA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker for that.  On the side of the guns’ issue, I would like to inform this House that, it is not the first time that the Government has said that the disarmament is there. I think this time, the Government has come up with a method that can be long lasting. Because so far, the Karimojong have been disarmed five times. 

Since 1961, they have been disarming and failing. I think this time, the Committee which has been formulated will do better work, because they have said LDUs will be recruited and deployment of the troops and the sensitization programme will start. I think it is overdue that we should start this programme. The only problem is the Budget which this House should pass and the programme starts. When will the Government come up with this Budget?

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the hon. Minister to answer; and that is the end of the questions. As I promised you, hon. Members, you can go and formulate your own motion. We shall substantially debate this matter. This was to receive the statement. The statement may be good or may not be good, but that is a different matter. Let us conclude this issue of the statement by requiring the Minister to answer the questions that have been put to her.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will do my best to answer all the questions, and I wish to thank the hon. Members for putting up these questions.  

The first was “How much are you spending on Katakwi?” Hon. Awori believes that Uganda is spending more money on Congolese, than on the people of Katakwi. Since the hon. Member has not given us the source of his information, I wish to be given more time, so that we can liaise with him to get that information for Government to look at for further clarification if need be. But I cannot at this moment give an answer to his allegation, because I do not have the information at hand.

One hon. Member said that there are no resources for development of Karamoja. Mr. Speaker, I wish to request that I skip that question, and perhaps the Minister for Karamoja Development will be able to give us an answer to that, because he is directly responsible for that sector.

The hon. Member wanted to know how much suffering is caused to the people of Karamoja. Mr. Speaker, I said that we went to Karamoja, we went to Katakwi and made a trip to Karamoja, and we talked to the leaders.  But as far as our discussions were concerned, we were not able to measure, neither were the leaders able to tell us in some quantified measurement, the suffering of the people of Karamoja. 

But they told us the needs of the people Karamoja at the moment, and we have taken note of those; and I have given a report in relation to those issues. I am sure the hon. Member, when he receives this report, he will be able to read for himself the issues as contained in the report, and to internalize them.

An hon. Member was concerned that, the matter is so engulfing to include all the people of Karamoja. But I must apologize if that is the impression given by this report.  Of course not all the people of Karamoja are involved in raids. In fact, in our discussions with the leaders, we were informed that it is only a few people who have gone out to engage in these raids. Hence, not all the people of Karamoja are raiders. I must apologize for that impression; if that is the impression the report gave.

The issue of facilitation: I said on page 2, that initially the Government of Uganda facilitated the Karimojong with guns. What I meant here was not that the Government handed over guns to them. I meant that the Karimojong had had guns and what Government did was to say, “yes, you have the guns, you are going to use them to protect yourselves against the Turkana”.  The Government’s facilitation came, especially in giving vigilantees, allowing sections of people called vigilantees to get allowances to protect the rest of the communities, although that is a situation that I am saying has gone out of hand. 

Therefore, the next question on how many guns and so on, does not arise, because it is not Government which gave the guns; the people who had the guns facilitated them to use those guns for their protection. That is what I meant with facilitating the Karimojong as far as those guns were concerned, to protect themselves against the armed pastoralists from neighboring countries of Kenya, Somalia and Sudan.  

I will move to the next question. I said that everything is under control.  Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether this is merely a technical term.  But when I say that the situation is under control, I definitely do not mean that people are able to go back to their homes.  But I mean that the Government is aware of what is going on in Katakwi. The Government is aware of the situation, and how bad it is. That is why I said that the Government has made all the efforts to ensure that the people are living in humane environment.  

Nobody wants to live in camps, and I wish to repeat that Government is committed to having people go back to their own areas. That is why it has also encouraged decentralization of camps from counties to sub-county level, and then from sub-counties to parishes. Each of these areas is protected by small detaches of soldiers, to ensure that people live as near to their homes as possible. Then eventually they will be able to return to their homes.  

The people within these camps are being facilitated as much as possible. The Second Deputy Prime Minister who is also the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, yesterday, informed us that food is being taken.  So, these people have been taken care of, for as long as they have been in those camps. Although as I have reported again, Mr. Speaker, there are inadequate facilities, because people are so many and the Government resources are not as we would want them to be. That is what I meant by saying that Government is in control. 

There is no chaos in those camps and there is no threat of insecurity among the people who live in those camps, as there would be if they were not given protection. There are no terrible threats in relation to medical facilities, although, those facilities are at the moment inadequate.  

The next question was that the Government was meant to disarm within 12 months. The disarmament programme, I wish to say, has gone at a slower pace, but I must say that is a situation that Government has not chosen or has not taken by choice. The disarmament programme is a wholistic programme whereby the Government decided to beef up the security on the borders with Karamoja, especially the external borders, to be able to control the arms when they come in.  

Government also saw it as important to ensure that the Karimojong, even when disarmed, are also assured of food within their own borders. So, Government facilitated them with equipment, seeds, and so on, to be able to grow their own food. The programme to dig up dams and to provide water sources was intended to ensure that the Karimojong do not live under threat as far as the need for water and pasture is concerned.

On the question as to how successful the disarmament programme has been, Mr. Speaker, I have already said that there is need to hasten the process, but Government is doing its best, and each of the departments concerned has been required to ensure that the Karamoja programme is incorporated within their Budgets to be able to carry out those programmes that fall within every Ministry’s sector.

The hon. Member - I suppose from Teso region - asked why we went to Katakwi and Karamoja with Members from Karamoja, but not Members from Teso. I wish to inform the hon. Member that indeed, we tried to get in touch with the Members from Teso and we were not able to get any of them.  We tried to get in touch with members from Karamoja.  We were unable to get more than the two. But I hope that the hon. Member will be comfortable with the knowledge of some of the Members - and I imagine he could be one of them. 

The hon. Members have been to Katakwi and visited these camps themselves with the hon. Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, hon. Aporu Christine. Hon. Aporu Christine was also one of the people in our team and she comes from Teso. So, you are certainly not excluded. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (KARAMOJA) (Mr.Lokeris Aimat): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I only have to chip in since that report is comprehensive. I want to state here that there were no guns given to the Karimojong by the Government. They have been buying these guns from other sources for many years. This was because of the threat caused by the Turkana and the Sudanese, particularly the Topotha and Pokot of Kenya.

When the Movement Government came to power, it found these people with their guns, and they explained to the Government that the guns were for self-defence against external aggression. Therefore, Government did leave that. Then later, when it was discovered that they were causing terror to the people of Uganda internally, that is why this disarmament is on course.  

The disarmament has stages which will be explained later. I am sure even in the Budget which we are discussing, there are sums allocated for disarmament. I am confident that the Karimojong will be disarmed, and they are happy about it.

Currently, Karamoja is in fact not disturbed internally.  I think God has come to them.  As of now, the whole of Karamoja is peaceful, right from the South to the North.  Then with the neighbours; we are discussing with the Acholi and the Sabiny.  We are together. The problem now has been Katakwi.  The problem of Katakwi, hon. Members, just to get a bit of information; initially the Iteso of Katakwi and the Karimojong were living together. Some thieving people organised some kind of stealing of cows.  You have heard of the Lamara Toti incident. They organised and hit the Karimojong and stole their cows. They brought some to Olili and the cows disappeared. They did not even go to the Iteso.  I went there, I was informed the cows walked away.  And if a Karimojong has nothing to eat, he can become rowdy. 

So, this has been taking place and the situation at that border is so fluid.  Whenever a thing happens, the leaders of both sides become aggressive, and when you want to go there, it becomes dangerous. As I was coming back with the Ministers and hon. Members who went there, I heard that the hon. Minister of State for Karamoja was attacked in Katakwi, when he was with the rest.  Yes, there were some people shouting.  That is what characterises such areas, and that is why at times we do not go there immediately, until things are okay. It was a bit okay, but we managed to control that. 

Really, there is a desire by the Karimojong to tackle the issue of these people who cross to Katakwi.  The people of Katakwi speak one language. The Karimojong stayed with these Iteso even in times of insurgency. The Iteso crossed to Karamoja, even including their LCV who took refuge in Matany. And that is Ilimokorit. He stayed there and he knows the people there. So, when we try to have dialogue, things will be okay.

MR. IMUMET:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Minister that at the time of insurgency, Mr. Ilimukorit was admitted in Matany hospital. He was operated, and was not taking refuge there.  Thank you.

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you, hon. Imumet who is also my brother- in- law.  The hospitality he had during that time, a person who was sick  - not all of them - came to Karamoja, and I was SDA of that place, giving sugar, and all the commodities coming to Karamoja and to the Iteso of Iri-Iri. So, as for my office -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the reason I called you was to answer a specific question, which was put to the hon. Minister of of State for Internal Affairs, because she considered you more suitable to answer the question; and that was about your Budget for developing Karamoja.  Is there a Budget for developing Karamoja?

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you for your wise guidance, Mr. Speaker.  As for my office, I am a Liaison Officer; I get donors who take a lot of money to Karamoja.  I coordinate institutions like DANIDA, who are dealing with the Health Sector, UNICEF, and other departments. 

I have got a department attached to my office called KPIU.  It is temporarily doing the work which KDA was doing because KDA sold itself.  The only thing I do not have is fuel for operations - if that can be increased. I also supervise these dams, which are not well done; because I am not an engineer, I go there and look at them. 

Tomorrow the whole embankment will be carried away; maybe they will need to go to train. Otherwise, that is really going to be administrative with the Prime Minister. He might increase the fuel so that I frequently go to Karamoja.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Now, hon. Members, we have finished dealing with the statement of the Minister and her team, which went to Katakwi last weekend. It appears Members still have a number of issues to raise on this issue; and maybe to suggest remedies to the problem.  

I think this will be undertaken under a different procedure, and therefore, it is up to you really if you think you have solutions, to either talk generally during the general debate we are having or you may need to have a motion on this issue.  As I told you, we have had many motions in the past about this situation, Karamoja, Katakwi and other surrounding districts.  But I do not think that we can really deal with that particular motion now. 

It requires formulating, and to be prepared to come and we debate it here.  I promise I will try to accommodate it, if this motion comes somewhere during our programme, so that this matter can again be raised, so that the seriousness of the situation is taken up by the Government and other people concerned, so that some kind of solution; it may not be a permanent solution, it may not be a complete solution, but a solution is found on this issue.  

But today our main thing was to deal with the general debate on the Budget.  Many people still are interested to contribute on this general debate. They should not be worried. I have the list at least of those who registered yesterday, and others have been sending me notes that they intend to make a contribution. The last person I had given opportunity was Member for Hoima - I remember. 

This debate is going to go on for six days.  We have only covered two days. We shall continue with the debate tomorrow, and even next week for three other days.  So, do not think you have not been given time. I will give you time to contribute.  But as I told you in the past, those who contributed on the Presidential speech, I tend to give opportunity to those who did not. After covering those who didn’t contribute on the presidential speech, those other people who contributed will be able to do so. I assure you, you will be given an opportunity to make your contribution. But I do not know whether at this juncture we should continue with the debate or we adjourn. 

Once again, I want to remind you of our colleague who is in hospital, Woman Member for Nebbi District. She is still in Mulago hospital, Ward 6B, Room 7.  So, please, try to find time to go and see her; and pray for her speedy recovery. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.30 p.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16th August 2001 at 2.30 p.m.)

