Friday, 16 August 2002

Parliament met at 10.20 a.m. at Parliament Building, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Sekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, as you will remember, yesterday, we partially constituted a Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS with 14 Members elected to it and the Committee is supposed to have 15 Members. We have to complete the exercise by deciding on the 15th Member. And then, after the Committee has been fully constituted, I think they will sit to decide on the leadership. But this election of the 15th Member will come at the end of the exercise of the Committee of Supply.  However, I understand hon. Dorothy Hyuha has a statement to make. So I will allow her to do so after my announcements.

Meanwhile, I have also received a letter from the Uganda Joint Christian Council, which I think I should read for your information. It is an invitation to the national inter-faith prayer and discussion meeting. That is the subject. It reads: 

“Uganda Joint Christian Council is coordinating a national inter-faith prayer on Saturday, 17 August at 11.00 a.m. at Lugogo Indoor Stadium, with a theme: “Peace building is our collective challenge: Which way forward for Northern Uganda?”

We would wish to invite you to the meeting so that we can pray, share; focus together on advancement of peace in our country, and particularly in Northern Uganda.  As legislature is key in any form of fore development in our country, we have invited all our Members of Parliament to the occasion.  

We believe peace building takes many hands and ideas. It is our wish that we shall continue searching and walking together for effective solutions to the conflicts in the country.  

As the area in question has of recent had fresh incursions of rebel attacks, displacement of families and loss of property, an appeal has been put out for donations in kind to assist the affected persons.  These will be passed on to the Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative for distribution. The collections will last to the end of August. One can either bring donation to NJCC Secretariat, Telephone landline 344250 or to the prayer gathering at Lugogo on Saturday or to their places of worship.  

We would like to request you to announce to the Members, reminding them to come to the prayer gathering. May the Almighty bless your efforts of nation building.”  

This is from Rev. Grace Kaiso.  So everybody is invited. It is an important mission to which we should contribute.  

As to the appeal, an appeal has already been made by one of our Members, hon. Santa Okot.  For people who have shirts, coats, shoes, please I again repeat this so that we can assist our brothers and sisters who are in this conflict affected area.  That is the end of my communication.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Rep. Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. As the Speaker communicated to us, yesterday we had the election of membership on the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and we were to determine the membership – 15 of them – and the fifteenth position was a tie of three people and I am one of them. In the interest of harmony and serving of this Committee, I wish to stand down for my other two colleagues hon. Wesonga Kamana and hon. Idah Mehangye.

Yesterday one of us - that is hon. Omara Atubo - stated here that as we go for election of membership on this Committee, there were a number of factors to consider. He mentioned gender and regional balance. But I wish also to add sectoral committee interest. Mr Speaker, the way I understand this Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS is that it is going to initiate programmes and coordinate the activities.

I am already aware, as a Member of the Social Services Committee, how much we vote and how many policies we generate in the Committee of Social Services for HIV/AIDS. I still feel that the Committee of Social Services is going to be a serious stakeholder as far as activities of HIV/AIDS are concerned. 

Honourable Members, you are also aware that I have been a long-serving Member on this Committee of Social Services. So, given that background, I am aware of what has been happening.

The three ministries that fall under social services play a significant role as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned, for example, the Ministry of Health. Most of the grants, most of the soft loans that have been running the activities of HIV/AIDS have been falling under Ministry of Health, and when we analyze the policies, Ministry of Health plays a significant role.  For example, the programme that has been running STDs - sexually transmitted diseases or infections, that is where the activities of HIV/AIDS fall.

Mr Speaker, I am also aware that Ministry of Education and Sports also plays a significant role as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned.  For example, in this financial year, under Programme ED-35A where strategies on HIV/AIDS and the girl child education falls, we have voted Shs.300 million to carry out the activities.  

I am also aware that Ministry of Education has been carrying out activities to sensitize teachers on HIV/AIDS. For example, in the municipalities of Entebbe, Jinja and Masaka, last financial year we had to pass the money. 

I am also aware that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is a serious stakeholder as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned. We always man our vote money for sensitisation of the youth and the labourers, especially drivers of long distances.  

Given this background, Mr Speaker, I want to call upon members of the committee, which we are forming now, not to move away from the steering. They should know that in Uganda we are taking a multi- sectored approach. So, always consider the stakeholders because, as a standing committee you are going to continue to co-ordinate and initiate bills. The role of Sessional Committees will continue and, therefore, even in my position on the Committee of Social Services, I will be a serious stakeholder and they should always utilise me, Mr Speaker.  

I wish to thank the members who had the interest and voted for me. I thank you very much. The two members I am standing down for are already members of my committee, so I feel that the interest of the social services will be catered for on this committee.  

I was vying for a place on that committee so that I make sure that, given the background I have given you, the interest of Social Services, which is a serious stakeholder as far as the fight against HIV/AIDS is concerned, is taken care of.

Mr Speaker, I also wish to use this opportunity to thank the Committee of Social Services, which has been steering and coordinating most of these programmes on HIV/AIDS, until now when we are setting up a formal committee. 

You are aware that since the formation of the Seventh Parliament, we have received two delegations from other Parliaments. We received Members of Parliament from the Parliament of Mozambique, who came to share with us experiences on how we are fighting HIV/AIDS in Uganda. We also received a delegation from Members of Parliament from the Parliament of Botswana, who came to share with us experiences.  

With those few remarks, I wish to thank the members and I wish the committee fruitful deliberations in fighting this serious scourge in Uganda. I stand down for the two members. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, honourable member, from what you have said, I think the committee is missing you greatly because you are an asset. Thank you very much. But as you have said, there will be collaboration between your committee and that committee, because you are relevant. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is mandated, under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (Rule 124), to examine, assess and evaluate the activities of Government and other bodies, and to report to Parliament on their performance.  

Accordingly, the committee has considered the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2002/2003 of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and now wishes to submit this report to the House for your consideration.  

The policy statement covered the following areas: One, - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsambu, I think you can come and occupy the front seat –(Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Well, Mr Speaker, I am sure the honourable member would wish to do that, but he is shy. 

The policy statement of the Ministry covered the following areas: 

• The mandate of the Ministry 
• The structure 
• The achievements in the last Financial year 
• The programme for the next Financial Year.  

The Ministry requested for Shs 95,360,850,000 for recurrent expenditure. It simultaneously requested for Shs 76,639,786,000 for development expenditure to fulfill its mandate and objectives.  

The committee held meetings with the ministers, technical officials and the heads of autonomous and semi-autonomous bodies under the Ministry of Finance. 

Also invited were representatives of professional bodies and state organisations, specifically Economic Policy Research Centre, Makerere Institution of Social Research, NGO Forum and Uganda Debt network. 

The committee received information in the course of the budget process as provided for under the Budget Act, 2001. We also received information from the report of the Budget Committee, on the indicative allocations of the Ministry and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. 

The committee further reviewed the extent to which recommendations made last year were achieved. In addition, the committee analysed the Background to the Budget, the President’s State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance, delivered on 13 June 2002 to this House.  

This report, therefore, has been compiled after careful assessment and evaluation of the policies and the measures the ministry has taken to achieve its mandate. The report also sets out a series of recommendations for continued progress and sustained development of the country.

We looked at the mission, vision and the mandate of the Ministry: 

• The vision as stated in the policy statement of the Ministry is to eradicate poverty by the year 2017. 

•The mission is to enhance economic development and macro-economic stability. 

• The mandate is to oversee the national strategic development initiatives and to facilitate economic growth.  

The Ministry also, as stated in the policy statement, has a major role to manage and control public finance in a prudent manner and to mobilise resources, both domestically and externally, for public expenditure programmes.  

To achieve the above, the Ministry has a political arm headed by a minister and assisted by four Ministers of State. It also has a technical arm headed by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury with a deputy secretary to the Treasury and three directorates, plus a number of semi-autonomous and autonomous agencies. 

Specific agencies mentioned in the statement include: 

• Uganda Bureau of Statistics 
• Uganda Revenue Authority 
• Tax Appeals Tribunal 
• Uganda Insurance Corporation 
• Capital Markets Authority 
• Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust 
• Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal
• Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Unit
• Uganda Investment Authority 
• National Council for Science and Technology 
• Economic Policy Research Centre.  

There are also other institutions such as Bank of Uganda and Uganda Insurance Commission, which assist the Ministry to achieve its mandate although they were not mentioned in the policy statement.

Policy Objectives and Framework:

It is stated in the policy statement that the main objective of the Ministry is to maintain macro-economic stability, promote rapid, equitable and sustainable economic growth and to mobilise resources for effective implementation of Government programmes.  

To a large extent, the key macro-economic policy objectives and targets have been attained. The real economic growth rate of 5.9 percent was achieved against the set target of 6 percent.  The medium term objective is to attain a GDP growth rate of 7 per cent per annum.  

The annual average inflation rate has been achieved at less than 5 per cent. We note that since the 1990s, inflation has been kept under control at less than 10 per cent. 

The target of maintaining foreign exchange reserves of five months of imports was nearly achieved at 4.5 months of imports. 

Absolute poverty has been reducing. The population living below the poverty line of a dollar per day has declined from 44 percent in 1998/1999 to 35 percent in 2000/2001.  

When we look at macro-economic stability, we see that it has been achieved over the last decade and sustained at the inflation rate and growth rate I have mentioned.

The committee was informed that the targeted GDP growth of 7 per cent was not achieved because of the deteriorating external terms of trade. This was occasioned by a fall in the prices of coffee and a ban of fish exports to the European market.    However, members of the committee observed that this target has not been achieved for the last five years.  

Members of the committee also observed that whereas the inflation rate has been below 5 per cent, the interest rate has not responded significantly, and has remained on the average at 19 to 20 or double digits.  

Members also noted that the Ministry has no deliberate policy to address this discrepancy and is silent on some of the issues mentioned.  

Therefore, we recommend that the Government, through the Ministry of Finance, address the issue of interest rates to ensure that it is in line with the inflation rates. We will come to this point because it is very significant.  

On Economic growth, the Ministry in its statement has a well-intended policy to promote rapid, equitable and sustainable economic growth with emphasis on private sector-led development.  

Poverty levels have been reducing, and the levels have dropped from 56 percent to 35 percent between 1992 and 2000. However, poverty levels in parts of the country, particularly in northern Uganda, have instead gone up. The national average is 35 percent but the poverty level in the north is about 67 percent. This is, of course, due to instability in the region.  

There has also been a decline in performance in the cash crop sub-sector, and we know there is an improvement in the food crop sub-sector. We will come to these two points when we come to giving recommendations. While the food prices have fallen, the prices of manufactured goods have not fallen in a corresponding manner. This, therefore, calls for serious consideration on internal marketing, particularly for subsistence crops.  

Members were also informed about the growth in non-traditional exports and the anticipated growth of the cotton sub-sector, especially with the coming in force of the Africa Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA). Members decried the persisting poverty in the countryside despite the impressive economic growth figures. 

The committee was informed about the reactivating of the co-operatives. This was recommended last year in our report and we are pleased it is being implemented this year. However, this should have been done in a manner that will rebuild confidence in the population and on professional commercial principles.  

We made the following observations, Mr Speaker: 
Despite the impressive macro-economic performance, the country still faces a number of serious constraints to its sustainable development.  

The ministerial policy statement is silent about exchange rate stability, and yet this is a major cost facing the country. The Uganda currency has continuously depreciated since 1987 when the currency reform was carried out. 

You recall the exchange rate at that time was Shs60 for every dollar; today, it is over Shs1,800. Measures ought to be devised to combine steady economic growth with reasonable exchange rate stability. The Ministry should be more forceful on this point.

The policy statement is also silent about the role of interest rates in the use of financial resources. Interest rates represent a major cost of money and, therefore, they are very critical to borrowers, lenders and investors in the economy as a whole. 

Given the fact that since the 1980s, inflation has been kept under control at less than 10 per cent, surely, the interest rates on loans should not diverge so widely as they are today, at an average of more than 20 per cent. Something has to be done, and the ministry must address this issue because it is a major cost and it limits investment.

The impressive economic growth has not translated into poverty reduction across regions and districts, nor has it fully benefited segments of society equally. We bring out examples: Poverty, as already mentioned, is more pronounced in the north, the mid-western region and the eastern regions of the country. Poverty is also more severe in the rural areas. In fact, you often hear that poverty is a rural phenomenon. Poverty levels are also very severe among people with disabilities; it is also very severe among women and it is severe among the youth. We note that while poverty levels in the Northern Uganda have increased, to this it should have been declining. 

Mr Speaker, the Committee raised the need for Government to link macro-economic growth with population policy. It was recognized that while the percentage of the population living below the poverty line has been reducing, the absolute numbers of the poor keep increasing, and it can be demonstrated with figures.  If you have 44 per cent of 16 and you have 35 per cent of 24, you will see the rates are declining but the numbers are increasing. And this issue can only be dealt with if it is tied with population growth. 

It was also stressed that while armed conflict has been a decisive factor in the impoverishment of the North and some parts of the West and East, poverty has a cause and effects. It could cause conflicts, it could exacerbate armed conflict, and it can make it worse. It can create a vicious circle.  Poverty must be addressed! Insecurity remains one of the most pressing problems threatening sustainability of macro-economic stability and growth in the country. 

Mr Speaker, Government has for the last several years adopted the target of 7 per cent GDP growth rates. The Committee observed that this target appears overly optimistic for the medium term and may not be attained.  One could add, growth rates were possible to be very high when there was an under-utilized capacity. But as under-utilized capacities are utilized, the growth is going to come from structural transformation, and that is very hard to achieve and the rates might be very difficult to achieve.

Furthermore, inflation is a very key factor. We have mentioned how important it is and the inflation rate has been kept in single digits and we commend Government for that, but this has been largely due to low food prices and we note the prices of manufactured goods have kept rising. So, those in the agricultural food sector have faced worsening terms of trade because they have not benefited equally from the overall low inflation rate. As a result, the farmers continue to find difficulties to buy manufactured goods, yet they get very low prices for their agricultural products.  Government needs to tackle these structural bottlenecks. 

It is true, Mr Speaker, the price for milk has been Shs200 over the years but the price for arcaricides keeps increasing. The price for matooke is Shs500 but if you want to buy paraffin with money you have got from bananas, the prices keep increasing. So, the issue we are bringing to the attention of the Ministry is that these structural bottlenecks need to be addressed.

While Government’s commitment to achieve low inflation is commendable - and we commend Government for this because inflation is a heavy cost, we commend Government on this because inflation needs to be controlled. It is a heavy cost to the economy. It discourages long-term planning and investment, and it robs citizens of their hard earned savings. The committee, however, observed that when inflation - and this is very important, Mr Speaker - is kept too low and becomes negative, it also has negative effects on growth.  Therefore, there is a case for stimulating domestic demand in order to sustain increased production by establishing an appropriate threshold for an appropriate inflation rate. This point, Mr Speaker, I know is contentious but it has been observed that too low negative inflation can be deflationary. 

The Committee also raised questions relating to the vision of the Ministry.  The vision of the Ministry is to eradicate poverty by the year 2017.  Now, the question the Committee raised is, how is this vision of the Ministry synchronized with the national vision 2025, popularly stated as “building a prosperous people, a harmonious nation and a beautiful country?” How about the independent, integrated, self-sustaining economic development? This was a vision but it is never mentioned in the policy statement. Mr Speaker, these questions need to be answered so that there is consistency in the policy history.

The Committee also observed that for quite a long time, Uganda has not had an official comprehensive employment policy.  The assumption you get is that economic growth and liberalization should have automatically resulted into increase in employment, and this has not happened. A growing segment of labour force cannot easily find productive employment. The situation is made worse by the increasing number of youths graduating from schools and universities. Then when you add retrenched civil servants and demobilized soldiers who have not been trained to join civil life, the situation becomes more compounded. And as Members of Parliament, I know the pressure you experience of people coming to you to help for employment. 

We are therefore calling your attention that it is extremely very important and urgent that Government formulates a comprehensive employment policy and mainstreams generation of employment into all Government interventions and into all Government programmes.  

The Committee was informed of Government efforts to re-activate the Co-operative Movement aimed at improved productivity, at improved marketing, and empowering the population in the production units.  The Committee was however concerned that the re-activation of co-operatives has been too much politicized, and advised Government to use normal processes in policy formulation of preparing a White Paper for approval and using existing institutions and responsible departments to re-activate co-operatives. In principle, we support every effort to re-activate co-operatives.  

Mr Speaker, the Committee was also informed about the potential opportunities for African Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA).  The Committee indeed looks at this positively, but advised Government to carry out a cost-benefit analysis, taking into account the state of economic development in the country.  The reasoning for this is that there is eligibility criteria and a screening method on which you are evaluated.   All this information is not widely known, and there is a cost.  So, what the Committee is really asking the ministry is to show the country the cost of gaining access to AGOA and the benefits.  

The Committee also raised concern about lack of proper planning in the country, and was assured that with the enactment of the law establishing the National Planning Authority, the planning function will be put on sound footing.  

We made a series of recommendations on this section of the report.   First, sustainable human development is now universally accepted as the prime objective of human progress, and the Committee recommends Government to put emphasis on achieving optimum combination of economic growth and employment generation as the necessary condition for poverty eradication. While strong economic growth is a major force in reducing poverty, it is not sufficient to ensure that all regions in this country and all segments in society benefit equally.     

In the field of monitoring, evaluation and analysis of economic activities, the Committee recommends to Government to restructure and rationalize this function in order to avoid duplication and inefficiency.  Presently, the monitoring and evaluation of Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) is conducted by the office of the President, Prime Ministers’ office, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and so on.  

Now, the revitalization of the Co-operative Movement should be encouraged to cover a wide sector of the economy including agriculture, marketing, finance, wholesale and retail enterprises.  All these can be efficiently done on the cooperative principle.  

The Committee also recommends that the re-activation of the Co-operative Movement in the country should be done on professional grounds to avoid the mistakes that were made in the past. Government also should produce a White Paper on reactivation of the co-operatives.

We have also urged that the Co-operative Movement should be encouraged in other economic activities to widen security in the productive process; for example farming and industrial undertakings.

Now, when it comes to the financial sector, it is important to appreciate that for the last years, there have been important reforms in this sector.  The reforms are focused on tightening regulations in the banking system, frequency of on-site inspection of banks and surveillance and improvement of supervision. 

The Committee was also informed that the minimum paid up capital requirements have been raised from one billion to two billion in 2001, and will be raised again to 4 billion in 2003.

The Financial Institutions Bill 2001 and the Micro-Deposit Taking Institutions Bill, 2001 are now before the Committee, and reports will be made to this House.  These bills are aimed at strengthening further the financial sector.  

Efforts are being made to increase efficiency and reduce transaction risks by introducing an electronic cheque clearing system so that cheques are electronically cleared. 

The Committee noted that the financial sector in Uganda, especially the formal banking system, only caters for a limited number of account holders mostly in urban areas.  

The majority of the country’s workforce has no formal banking services.  If you can stretch your thinking, farmers from Nimule to Kisoro, herdsmen from Karamoja to Nakasongola and carpenters and brick makers and the self-employed, all these people have no access to any form of financial services.  This is the point we are really raising here.  

The financial savings are also still low, which limit investment levels and force the country to depend on foreign investment. All these reflect lack of access to financial services and continue to exist on non-monetary sector of the economy.  This issue must be addressed.  Government should therefore formulate a deliberate policy to attract more people to the banking sector as a means of internal resource mobilization, increasing domestic savings and investment levels.  

Now, we looked at the pension sector.  Mr Speaker, the Committee during the 1990/2000 financial year recommended to the Ministry that the pension sector be liberalized soonest, but this was not done.  

It was also observed that continued monopoly of National Social Security Fund in this sector is not only hindering the development of other competing schemes, but it is also promoting inefficiency in the sector. Social Security, pension and provident funds usually represent the most important form of mobilising local resources, and can generate long-term investment capital in the economy.  

The Committee was informed that Government is preparing a Cabinet paper to liberalise this sub-sector.  It was, however, noted that this was the same case last year. So, we would want to press the Ministry to come forward on this Cabinet paper.  

The Committee also noted that benefits from a liberalised pension scheme are quite considerable. These include better interest rates and service to the beneficiaries.

We recommend that pension sector reform should be carried out without further delay, to accommodate other interested parties and to provide competition in this vital service.  

We also looked at revenue performance.  Mr Speaker, honourable Members, the vision to eradicate absolute poverty by the year 2017 cannot be achieved when revenue collection is still at an average of 11.7 percent of GDP, compared to sub-Saharan Africa which is higher at 17 percent of GDP. 

The poor administration in URA and smuggling are some of the hindrances to improved revenue collection. The Committee was informed that there is now a computerised programme, and scanners have come, to check on smuggling of containerised cargo.  This has been the same story for some period. 

The Committee observed that there is still a wide sector of the economy, the subsistence sector, which is not taxed.  It was also noted that there is high dependence on trade taxes rather than on consumption taxes.  The point we are really mentioning here is that the urge for monetisation of the subsistence sector to make it possible for taxation becomes a critical issue in widening the tax base.  

• We recommend that Government should widen the tax base to include subsistence and consumption taxes.  Well, we can add, Government should do everything for the monetisation of the subsistence sector to be able to bring it into a tax bracket.  

• The poor administration in Uganda Revenue Authority should be addressed with urgency. 

• Government should continue tax education in order to create awareness of the need to pay tax. 

• Government should continue to collect non-tax revenue in order to go above the current levels of one percent of GDP.  Incidentally when they did it with the passport fee it worked.  So, we are saying, why don’t you extend it to others?

• Government should develop the capacities at local governments to mobilise and properly utilise locally mobilised revenue at various levels.  This is a constant complaint from even other committees on this issue of decentralisation and control.

Privatisation Process:

Mr Speaker, the Committee agrees with the policy of privatisation, but noted with concern the slow pace at which some institutions are being set for privatisation. For example, National Insurance Corporation has been on for quite some time.  So, there is something like inconsistency. In one case there is expeditious privatisation, in another case there is a dragging of feet and you are not sure what is the motivating force.  For example, NIC has been on while UCBL was expeditiously sold.

The Committee agrees with the principle of privatisation, and noted from the Ministry that to date 110 public enterprises have been privatised and the remaining 39 are at various stages of privatisation.

The Committee was also informed that the current low pace is due to the nature of Public Enterprises (PE’s) to be privatised.  We were told that the larger and more complex the public enterprise is, the more difficult it is to be privatised because it requires more preparatory activities. And the cases quoted were Uganda Electricity Board and Uganda Railways Corporation.

National Insurance Corporation (NIC):
 
First attempt to privatise NIC failed because one of the bidders from South Africa withdrew.  Preparations to re-tender are reportedly in advanced stages.

Members, however, observed that some assets under the “none core” cover are being sold.

The Committee was informed that a Parastatal Monitoring Unit has been created in the Ministry to check on the concerns of asset-stripping allegations.  

Recommendations:

• We recommend that the pension fund should be taken care of during the privatisation of NIC.

• All insurance policies which and are still with National Insurance Corporation should be referred to the shareholders before privatisation.  

Tri-Star CO. and the Coffee Marketing Board Ltd. Complex:

Now we came to this Tri-Star Company and the Coffee Marketing Board within the privatisation concerns.  

The Committee was informed that the Coffee Marketing Board Complex at Bugolobi was transferred to Uganda Property Holdings Limited by DRIC.  This company was set up to manage all Government buildings. Currently there is a Memorandum of Understanding under which Tri-Star Company is operating in the premises of Coffee Marketing Board Limited.  

The Committee was informed about African Growth Opportunity Act, which provides for duty and quota free access for a variety of products including apparels, textiles and so on, which can get access to United States Market.

While the Committee really welcomes the Government initiatives in this field, the Committee noted that there are eligibility criteria to be met by beneficiary countries that are not widely known.

Government should also provide more information on cost- benefit analysis for being an AGOA beneficiary country.

Utilisation of proceeds from Privatisation:

The proceeds from privatisation are utilised in accordance with Sections 23(1) (a)(b) (c) of the PERD Statute relating to payments, to terminal benefits, assumed liabilities to mention but a few. 

Members were also informed that as at June 2001, Shs290,805 billion had been realised, and 191,108 billion had been spent, leaving a net surplus of Shs99,697 billion.

Commitment Control System (CCS):

Now we come to Commitment Control System relating to domestic arrears.  This question of domestic arrears has been commented on year in, year out, and this we note. There has been a commitment control system that was implemented in the financial year ‘99/2000, and since then there has been a reduction in domestic arrears, mainly on supplies, from Shs 87 billion in ‘98/’99 to Shs33 billion for 2000/2001, and it is expected that this will decline further.  

It was, however, noted that there are still some domestic arrears.  Domestic arrears cripple a business that supplies to Government, and there are some domestic arrears being created by accounting officers, especially in court awards, pensions and utility service.  

Some utility services like water and electricity, Government has not paid.  All these arrears make the economy very inefficient and they make some companies go bankrupt and when they come to pay, they never pay interest.  Just as we cry about external debt, I think Ugandans are entitled to cry about domestic arrears.  

Members also observed that the elimination of domestic arrears might not be easily achieved due to unrealistic budgeting and technical transfers within the departments.  

So, every effort must be made really to address this. So we make this as our recommendation:  

• The loopholes that hinder the successful implementation of the Commitment Control System should be addressed to minimise and eventually eliminate the creation of domestic arrears in the economy.  

• Commitment Control System should also be extended to cover all government expenditures and the local governments, as there is potential for domestic arrears created at local government levels.  This point came to the Committee that local governments are also getting domestic arrears.  So we are saying, this Commitment Control System will be extended to them as well.

Mr Speaker, we looked at the projects.  The Committee recommended that there are various projects in the Ministry of Finance, which we think should be housed in relevant sector ministries.  Look, there is a long list of projects in the policy statement here, but we were told that a number of projects which fall under other portfolios like the cotton sub-sector, there is subsidy for upcountry, there is also National Enterprise Corporation to mention but a few, which require Government subsidy and as a result, should remain under the Ministry of Finance.   

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the Committee analysed the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Committee made a series of recommendations for your consideration and adoption.  

The Committee now wishes to recommend to this House the approval of the following funds for both Recurrent and Development Budget for the Ministry of Finance for the Financial Year 2002/03 for Vote 008 and Head Vote 108.  The Votes are – I understand the Minister might have some corrections to make and I leave it to him.  

Vote 008 Recurrent Expenditure 	Shs95,360,850,000 
Head 108 Development Expenditure 	Shs76,639,786,000  
Total                           			Shs172,630,000,000.  
Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Finance and his officials, and I want to thank the representatives of the civil society for their spirited co-operation by reconsidering the Ministerial Policy Statement -(Applause). I also want to thank Members of the Sessional Committee on Finance for their dedication to duty. Mr Speaker, I thank you and I beg to move. (Applause).
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.  Did you say there are corrections to make on the figures; why don’t you make them? 
MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members.  There was a sum of Shs808,428,000, which was erroneously included in the figure for the Recurrent Expenditure.  That figure does not belong to this Vote, it belongs to other ministries and it ought to be subtracted and when it is subtracted, the total Recurrent Expenditure remains 94,552,422,000.  I wish to apologise for that error, but since it is a reduction I hope it does not cause any injustice to anybody.  So the figure should read 94,552,422,000.  I beg to move.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara):  Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I would like to thank the Committee for a good job.  My few comments and clarifications are on pages 4, 10, 11 and 18.  
Before I even go to the specifics, I would like to say that while I like some of the recommendations that the Committee made, I felt they were kind of feeble: they were not strong enough and some of them were not very specific.  So, if you are going to implement some of them, it is going to be very difficult.  
For instance, on Capital Markets on page 4, the clarification I want to seek is whether we have the Securities and Exchange Commission, or something to somebody that does that, because if you go into capital markets, you stand a risk of people playing funny games, unless you have a very, very strong regulatory law.  This you can get from the capitalists; they say so in America. Without the Securities and Exchange Commission, all those markets that you are trying to do will have a problem.  I want a clarification, if there is none, when is it going to be set up and strengthened?
The other comment is on AGOA.  I would have expected the Committee to inquire more about AGOA. I know it is a new concept, but some of us have taken a keen interest to really find out what it is. And my understanding is that there are two AGOAs or two phases of it:  AGOA that ends in 2004 and the AGOA that starts after 2004.  
Now, in 2004, Uganda can export goods, especially textiles produced here even if some of the raw materials to produce them will come from outside.  They call that trans-shipment.  So the factory in Bugolobi is making garments from fabrics imported from China, Korea or wherever but after 2004, that will not happen.  
So the recommendation I would really want is, how prepared are we after 2004 to continue exporting under AGOA, and of course the solution will come from our own factories supplying that factory, say Bugolobi or other similar factories? Also, our cotton sub-sector, how prepared is it to supply that chain?  

Now, when you study that chain, you find a few fundamental weaknesses.  One, that the textile factories that we have - Nytil Picfare and all those others, we were told that they were surveyed and they were found wanting; their quality is so poor that they cannot produce for the AGOA market.  So, we would want to know, how quickly could they be upgraded to produce for the AGOA market? Because you see the cotton that we produce, a lot of it is not to be used here because it is too expensive. If you go to Uganda blankets, they will tell you that they cannot use Uganda cotton for their blankets because a kilo of cotton is US$2, whereas the raw materials they import are half a dollar – US50 cents. So, for our cotton, there is no backward and forward linkage within the sector.  Therefore, I would like a strong recommendation to study the sector and see how we can benefit from AGOA in a sustainable manner.

Finally, on Page 11, the committee talks of lack of planning in the ministry and so on, but I would like to add that in addition to lack of planning, there is also lack of or poor co-ordination. Co-ordination is not a simple thing as you think, because co-ordinating different agencies that are independent, that have their own mandate, is a big challenge. I have made a lot of recommendations to some ministers, the Prime Minister and so on. I said we have a lot of opportunity with new technologies. They are very good at co-ordination. 

For instance, there is a concept called e-governance. You can call it whatever you want.  Some call it Electronic Governance, but I call it effective governance. Electronic Government or E. Governance consists of electronic services, electronic government. It means that you have to make sure that there is very strong and good co-ordination between the various agencies. Once they can co-ordinate very well within government, then they are better able to service the citizens, to service business and to service civil society. So, that aspect of e-governance is good governance itself, but also effective and giving accurate and timely information. 

For that to be implemented, you can follow a model that has been found to work. That before you implement anything, you develop a vision and in fact they say, ‘think big’.  You should have a big vision, but make sure that others, especially the ones who are going to implement it, share that vision. Once you develop the vision, you share it with others; you market it, and then start pilot projects showing that actually, what you have in your big vision is achievable. This is because if you go the whole way without small pilot projects to show that they work, you may waste a lot of resources. Once those pilot projects are working, then you scale them up quickly. 

So, think big, start small-scale first. That model has been found to work, especially in the areas that I deal with. It works fantastically, and I wish the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could pursue that and the country would benefit a lot because of the central role the ministry plays in our economy, and in our lives. I thank you very, very much.

PROF. TARSIS BAZANA KABWEGYERE (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, but I would also like to raise very fundamental questions, at least, for my clarification.

On Page 4, they talk about NPART as one of the bodies in the ministry. From what one hears, NPART has only recovered money for its own use. It gets money and uses it all, and there seems to be no benefit! The body was started, but it has now become a cancer in the economy. I would like to know whether this is true or not, because if it was supposed to be there to recover lost assets, where are these assets? I think that question should be answered.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to challenge this rhetoric that we are all involved in. We seem to be involved in rhetoric partly in the ministry statements and also in the committee statements. We do not ask ourselves a fundamental question; do we really have an economy? Is this really an economy, or do we stand here and deceive the world or deceive ourselves that we are running a big economy?  

If you look at the figures the ministry is demanding, and we are voting today, what is 172 billion for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Why do we not evaluate this in relation to the expectations we are going to get at the end of the year? But we sit here and talk about so many things to happen in this economy when you are operating with very little money. We are talking of high growth, but if you have one and it increases to two, and yet you need ten to be able to feed your family, obviously you have had a big growth, but that growth is not yet adequate to feed your family!  

Why don’t we recognise that we have this growth and yet this growth cannot as yet translate into poverty alleviation? Why can’t we say this clearly? Why can’t we say so for the public to know that we are handling a more complex problem than we are telling them? Sometimes I think it is unfair because we talk of poverty alleviation, and the Chairman of the Committee was saying, “Yes, the poor in absolute numbers have increased”. Do we expect any bigger things? Can this economy deliver? Let us see where you are going to touch and have greater results than we can get!  

There is the proverbial story of the rabbit wanting to mate with an elephant. One day it tried and managed to get to the very top, but the elephant never noticed it you see, because the task was much more monumental than the rabbit could achieve -(Laughter).

Precisely, the tasks that these economies of ours are supposed to achieve are beyond, but we stand here sometimes and say, ‘Oh, yes, government has failed, this one has failed’!  

Let us look, for example, at this issue of corruption.  I have spent some time talking about corruption -(Interjection). Mr Speaker, it is in here; it is related to interest rate. You have told people in Uganda to develop but if you have no legitimate sources of money, how can they develop? If the interest rate is over 20 percent, who will borrow money and develop and invest? So, corruption becomes the only way of accessing money. We cannot say this; when you say this, people think that you are not fighting against corruption but the reality of our economies must be addressed like that rabbit that had difficulties in making an impact.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee and the minister for a good report. I have only two clarifications. First, there has been an on-going exercise on the merger of Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Tourist Board and Uganda Export Promotion Board. Can we be updated about the progress on that merger? I understand there are some disagreements on where the body should be located.

Two, I am aware that in the Ministry of Finance, there are technical advisors like in any other place in Uganda, public or otherwise. Can we know whether this matter of technical advisors has been fully addressed - their terms when they are employed here and also to measure their contribution vis-à-vis institutional capacity building?  Because, most of these technical advisors come here to oversee some of the funds they give us. They take most of the funds back, they do not actually improve on the capacity of our own staff, and they derail our policies.  Can we know whether the committee has adequately covered this matter? Thank you. 

MR OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the committee, and maybe also from the minister.  My clarification is on page 4, on the growth of the economy, as professor Kabwegyere was trying to analyse.  

When you look at our figures of growth - and this brings me to what one author said that when you say the economy is growing at a rate of between 5 and 10 - which is a characteristics of developing countries - normally when this economy is said to be growing in that way, it does not trickle down to the poorest of the poor, and also the poor may not benefit from it. He also says that the poorest of the poor hardly contribute to the growth of the economy. 

However, this argument – one time I went to supervise a school under SFG. You know, for many years there was no construction in the very deepest areas of our country. I can quote what one old man said. He said,  “Thank you for coming to this remote part of our village, you have brought us these classrooms For many years we have looked for these classrooms but they have never reached us. Now the government is awake because it has at least delivered education services to the area. Our children will not learn under trees but they will learn under shelter.”  

Now, does it mean the growth of our economy lies within the trend of the thinking of this author? I feel the poor should feel this growth, and there should be an improvement in the lives of the people. When you go down to the rural areas, people are really poor and you may sometimes feel like breaking into tears. That is the first question to ask.  

The second and final question is on page 17. I would like to be made to understand, under this utilisation of the proceeds from privatisation, we have been told that the income we have got from these assets is Shs290 billion and the expenditure is Shs191 billion. This expenditure specifically goes to solve the problem of the workers of that new institution. Other factors being constant, when these institutions are privatised, they are better managed, there is a lot of income, and so many people will be employed. How do the people of Uganda benefit from these particular proceeds? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start by thanking the chairperson of the committee and the minister for the policy statement. There are many good recommendations the committee has made, however, I would like to seek a few clarifications. One comes from the budget statement in relation with the companies dealing with government. 

The Minister said that for a company to deal with government, they must have paid VAT. We know the thresh-hold for VAT is Shs50 million, however, there are small-scale businessmen who deal with government. What will happen to those who cannot raise Shs50 million?

Another question is on page 8. I would like to agree with my colleague from Moroto. We should not be overworked by the growth rates. An increase from two to three is a 50 per cent increase but an increase from 80 to 83 is about 1.25 per cent increase. We are increasing on a small thing that is why you see a great growth rate. So do not be overworked by that.  

I want to comment on the committee’s report as far as page 10 is concerned. The committee has raised a lot of issues about employment, co-operatives and AGOA. I do not know whether the committee has guided the ministry well. Should the Ministry of Finance develop the employment policy? Are co-operatives under the Ministry of Finance?  Is AGOA under the Ministry of Finance? I wish you could guide the ministry better than that.  

Then on page 16 we have got Tri-Star. I would like to get more information about these investors. Do they bring in equity money or do they come here and borrow? You see, if they have not come in with money, definitely our economy may not grow. If they only come here to borrow money, then they will put us into debt. I do not know what the minister will say to that. Can that bring about development? 

When we go to economic growth, inflation and all that, I wish the committee had given us more details - It is on page five. When you say that inflation is at five percent –(Applause)– I have some queries. For example, when you look at the variables that have been used to determine inflation, they are questionable. Even growth depends on the variables that have been used to determine it. 

By the way, there can be an increase in GDP just because there has been an improvement in the collection of data. For example, if you have not searched your pockets well, you may not know that you have Shs 20. You may say, “I have Shs 5 only.” But when you check again you could realise that you have Shs 20. This does not mean that you have become richer –(Laughter)- but you have improved on the method of searching yourself. 

So I want the committee to tell us more. Was it a good method that they used? Was it real growth registered? They should have even gone further to tell us the sectors that contributed to this growth, and the sectors that we should look at so that the economy can grow further - (Applause). Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we have other matters to deal with, and this is not going to be turned into a protracted debate as has happened before. Anybody standing should be seeking clarification or giving a brief contribution. Each of you has two minutes. We shall proceed that way because we have other engagements on our programme. 

The members who are supposed to go for a Population Census briefing will go after we have finished this business, although they will be delayed. So whoever stands up to talk should heed the time limit, and then the minister and the chairperson will answer to the queries raised.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable Minister about the issue of SWIPCO. There is an existing resolution of Parliament as far as SWIPCO is concerned. It gives Parliament the responsibility of extending the company’s contract. This contract expired in December 2000, and SWIPCO has continued to exist without the consent of Parliament. I would like the hon. Minister to – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is this part of the report?

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, this is something that I came across as I was coming here. I have not seen it in the report. I however really need a clarification from the honourable Minister as to what exactly happened. Who gave the ministry powers to extend the contract?

The second concern is about the contract between the Government of Uganda and Tri-Star. There are two pending issues that have cropped up between the two: One is the issue of rent and the other concerns the contractors who are supposed to renovate – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us deal with the concern of this report, which is the budgetary estimates of the Ministry of Finance. There could be other queries about the Ministry of Finance that crop up, but they should not all be addressed here. Otherwise, if you bring up everything about the ministry now, then we go back to square one. We would be starting a general debate. 

Let us be relevant to the report in as far as it relates to the budget. Have you finished hon. Kikungwe? (Interruption) - Is he a member of the committee? Oh dear –(Laughter)- I did not know that he is a member of the committee.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We passed the National Planning Authority Bill, and I think the President assented to it. Could the committee’s making of a very brief reference to it be a sign of satisfaction with the fact that this law now exists? I think that by now we should know the stage of implementation of that law: Was the National Planning Authority established? What is its relationship with the other financial institutions? Could we get an update on what the National Planning Authority is up to now?  

Secondly, I would like to be educated by the ministry that is charged with the growth of our economy. The hon. Member for Kyadondo has just said that a small growth from one to two is a 50 percent increase and I am saying that from zero to one is infinity. Why is it that they experience large growth rates in developing countries and very low growth rates in developed countries? Why? I would like to know what it is that makes our economies proud of huge growth rates, which have no impact, and the developed countries enjoy very small growth rates and sound economies. Could we assume that large growth rates are now symptomatic and a measure of a poor economy rather than an achievement in the economy?  

The third point I want to make, Mr Speaker, is that I want to give notice to the Minister of Finance that at the appropriate moment, I am going to move a motion for the removal or reduction of tax on mivumba. I think this tax is totally inconsistent with our poverty alleviation policy. I am going to move that that tax be removed or reduced drastically. We would prefer that the minister does the needful before we reach that stage. I thank you.

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the chairman of this committee and the members for a well-written report. I seek clarification on an issue on page 17. It is a follow-up of Tri-Star Company and Coffee Marketing Board Limited.  

Hon. Kikungwe wanted to advance a point on the same but he got confused on the way. I want to build up what he started –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: I did not get confused. I was hijacked.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us put the record straight. First of all, it was out of order for a member of the committee to pause as if he is not one and start making contributions or seeking clarification. That is because the report belongs to him. 

Secondly, he was not hijacked, but he was dealing with matters that were not relevant to the committee and to the subject before us. His were general issues that could be raised some other time. Anyway, since he is a member of the committee, why did he not raise it in his own committee? It has the mandate to deal with the Ministry of Finance. So actually he was not confused, he was corrected.

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you for that correction, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is about an issue on page 17. The chairperson says that currently there is a memorandum of understanding under which the Tri-Star Company is operating in the premises of CMBL. I would like to know whether the committee was unable to see this memorandum of understanding. There is talk going round about this company and the government. I do not know whether they are in business together, government and this Tri-Star company. That should be clarified, because there is talk that government is also contributing money to this company at CMBL. 

Also, there are about 1,000 girls being trained and I think it is government paying for these girls’ training. But there must be a demarcation. What is the input of government in this, and what is the input of Tri-Star Company? How is the agreement, the memorandum of understanding, framed? Is the economy benefiting from that memorandum of understanding? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the elaborate report he brought to us. I respect his observations very much, but I wish to tell him that these observations and recommendations cannot work unless and until our government realizes that the poor man, the cultivator, is assisted. He needs help to sell his crops at a reasonable price. It is like asking a man with one leg to run a hundred-yard race with a man with two legs. Surely, these people are very poor and they need their crops to be subsidized. We accepted liberalization but it is not helping the majority of the people. 

Secondly, I do not know what mechanisms are put in place to handle pension schemes. Our law firms are tired of people claiming for pension. And if you keep on demanding for these pensions, the people only get paid a month’s dues and then they are told to forget about the other months’ dues. You follow it up later on and they say, “he was given all his months’ dues.” We do not know where this money goes so we need to be assisted if we are to help the poor. 

Thirdly, privatization has gone a long way in creating unemployment. I cannot see how the government will be able to alleviate poverty when it is steadily laying off people. These people are not readily paid yet they can use their money for some other businesses. So I continue to be harassed all the time, because I am a Member of Parliament.

People come in with all sorts of demands, “I do not have salt, I do not have fees,” they say. It is too much a burden on our shoulders. We request the ministry concerned to work out a system, which can really help these people to get their pensions so that the worries can be reduced. Otherwise, I accept the report -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please members, before you come in here you should check on your mobile phones to see that they are switched off. I do not want us to have such interruptions. Switch it off please.

MR NSAMBU: They should also improve on the administration of pensions to the public.

MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I note that government uses the terms “growth” and “development” inter-changeably, which is not correct. Growth rates may not necessarily mean development. I would like to request the honourable Minister that next time he says the country is growing at a rate of seven percent he should also say how the growth rates are achieved. 

You will appreciate that if another part of the world exporting similar agricultural products as we do experiences adverse climatic conditions; we will quickly reap from the sorrows of these countries and fill up their quota. This will be reflected in our books as growth, but we would simply be capitalizing on the miseries of other people. So we cannot accept this as being growth, much less development. 

On domestic arrears, when I was still a member of staff of Uganda Posts Limited, we had a Post Office Building on Kitante Road, which was and still is occupied by the Prime Minister’s Office. We had great difficulty in trying to collect rent for this building. At some point the rent had accumulated to over Shs 1 billion. 

And it is rather a paradox. Government is ready to pay some private landlords two years or more up front, but its own parastatals are having a rough time collecting rent! Mr Minister, can we address this anomaly? I thank you.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek clarification from the minister and the committee on a very small matter concerning the rate of interest. 

Last year, when UCB was being sold, one of the reasons given was the inefficiency and lack of commitment by those who borrow money from UCB. It was stated that these made it practically impossible for the rate of interest to come down. Upon the sale of UCB, we were told, efficiency would come in and there would also be serious commitment by borrowers and the institutions that bought UCB.

It was also cited that at the end of the day the above would make the interest rates come down. Mr Speaker, UCB was sold off and was bought by Stanbic. Why is it that the rate of interest has not come down, as we were convinced? We accepted that UCB be sold on that premise? Thank you.

DR JONNY RICHARD BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about AGOA. AGOA brought us a lot of expectations, just as it does when a boy is born to a family.  You start even expecting so much: When he goes to university, you want him to be a doctor; you want him to do this and that. Therefore, you start investing, but you do not start investing from the university. You are supposed to start from nursery school, then primary, and then the secondary. That is why some of us get surprised when the man who came with this company is facilitated to buy materials like sewing machines and other gadgets without seeing anything –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, Members from the Western Region, the meeting will start at 1.00 p.m. not at 12.00p.m.

DR BULAMU: Mr Speaker, when the university is facilitated and where the children will come from nothing, it surprises us. We understand that at one time, 2.5 million dollars were given to this company to import these - dormitories are being built, so much facilitation but in our villages - because I would have been a party to knowing this - we are not seeing how you are rehabilitating the growth of cotton. 

We know Uganda has been given four years’ grace to start exporting to America, and we have a fear that Uganda will not have got prepared at all!  Even these people we are helping to import so that they can use our share will have to go and we will have spent quite a lot of money. What is the Ministry of Finance doing?  Why are we not being helped? Are we also not likely to fall into a big trap that after they have eaten they will run away because the free share of four years will have gone off, and when they say strictly after four years products must be Ugandan and we shall not have any single Ugandan product to export to America?  

Mr Speaker, this would be a very big boost for our locals in the villages –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is why some honourable members here have suggested that maybe we as Parliament set up some Committees to deal with such things as AGOA, NEPAD and so forth so that we push the Executive, maybe in this particular case Ministry of Trade, to deal with this issue. But I think the point has been taken because it was the same point, which was raised by hon. Nkuuhe. But the point is taken. Finalize your contribution please.

DR BULAMU: Finally, even before such Committees you are talking about are formed, I request the Minister of Finance always to be sympathetic with us. Let us be informed of these but not only to hear of the details when they are asking for the budget because we look fools in our constituencies when we do not know what it is exactly. Thank you very much.

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of everybody in the House to commend the Committee for producing this report. I want to seek clarification on the observation made by the Committee, on page 10 that: 

“A growing segment of labour force cannot easily find productive employment. The situation is made worse by the increasing number of youths graduating from schools and universities, retrenched civil servants and demobilized soldiers who cannot easily be absorbed by the private sector. It is extremely important and urgent that the Government formulates a comprehensive employment policy and mainstreams generation of employment into all Government interventions and programmes.”  

We are being told that the labour laws have delayed to come to this House because they have to go through the Ministry of Finance to find out their financial implications; so is the employment policy. Can we know whether this is true? And if so, how much time do you need to take this back to the Ministry of Labour which is supposed to bring it to Parliament for discussion so that relevant labour laws are made?  

Secondly, I understand the process of privatising Uganda Railways Corporation is already in the final stages. The workers of Railway corporation have asked me in writing and verbally to request the Minister of Finance to be kind enough to halt the deduction of taxes on their terminal benefits because this is the only little money they are going with back home, probably to make a living by making small scale industries or other businesses for their survival. I will be very appreciative if you could give me very good answers on that.  Thanks a lot.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin by expressing my sincere thanks to the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee and all the Members who participated in the deliberations, and for recommendations we have listened to from the Chairperson of the Committee. I want to assure you that your recommendations, which we regard highly, will definitely be taken into consideration, and we shall as much as possible try to do what is possible in our circumstances. So, Mr Speaker, allow me to respond briefly to the concerns of honourable members. 

The first concern was from hon. Nkuuhe and he was asking whether we have a Securities and Exchange Commission.  Now, the answer is that what we have is what you call the Capital Market Authority and this is the authority, which regulates capital markets and covers both securities and equities.  So, it is in control of the situation.  

His other concern was on AGOA, and honourable members, I want to admit that Members are rightfully concerned about AGOA.  This is a new phenomenon, not much knowledge is available to honourable members. I will begin by accepting the recommendation that we put in place mechanisms of educating, not only the honourable members of Parliament but also the public at large on AGOA and its benefits. But what I want to say right from the start is that Government is prepared to ensure that it takes full benefits of AGOA in whatever form. Whether after 2004, whatever conditions are put, we are aware of the conditions.  We know that it is in our interest to ensure that we prepare ground to take advantage, and indeed, ground has been prepared for that purpose. We shall be communicating to you and educating you on what Government has done.

I think there was also concern about lack of planning which was termed as poor co-ordination.  I want to say we are trying to build capacity for planning at all levels, and we have now in place the National Planning Authority, which, it is hoped, will streamline the planning of this country.

I will go to hon. Kabwegyere’s concern about NPART. Well, I will not comment on the rabbit story but I will comment about NPART.  He says it has been collecting money for its own use.  That could be partly true but I wish to state that NPART was set up for two major reasons; one, to make a statement to the citizens that when you borrow money, you must repay.  So, even before you go to what we have collected and what we have used it for, we are making a statement, we are inculcating a culture of repaying so that people do not sit back having borrowed money and think that nothing could be done. It is a statement that when you borrow money, you must pay. Now, coming to the proceeds, I know that some of the money has gone to the Consolidated Fund and has been utilised in the normal process money from the Consolidated Fund is utilised.

He was wondering whether we run the economy.  Yes of course. We may be running an economy of scarcity, but we run it. We have to plan.  Actually, scarcity is the more reason why we should plan. It is true we may not be able to achieve all that we want; our means are limited and I am saying this is the more reason why we sit and see how we utilise the scarce resources.

Hon. Ruhindi was asking about the on-going exercise of the merger of Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Tourists Board and Uganda Export Promotion Council. Yes, Cabinet has considered that possibility. A paper was written on the merger and that paper can be made available to Parliament at a later stage. It has been agreed upon in principle that the merger should go ahead. What Cabinet is considering now is where the merger should be housed. 

The honourable Member from Moroto Municipality was talking about growth, and he was saying that growth should be felt by the poor. Yes of course, we agree with you, growth should not remain hanging. That is why we have put in place programmes to ensure that whatever we have trickles down to the poor. When you look at programmes like PMA, when you look at rural micro-finance, which we are soon embarking on –(Interruptions)- well, it is soon coming because a law is already before this august House. Once the law is passed, all those programmes are intended to ensure that growth trickles down to the poorest of the poor.

He was asking about proceeds of the divestiture account. As stated, I think yesterday, those proceeds go to the consolidated fund and they are budgeted for in the normal process -(Mr Amuriat rose_)  

MR AMURIAT: There is a question that, Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague from Moroto Municipality did ask which the Minister seems to be avoiding.  If I understood him very well, he was saying, 75 percent of the money from divestiture has been utilised in overhead costs and other expenses, and just only one third or 25 percent is actually in Government coffers. It appears this is really over the board and it is very expensive. We are recovering very little money and spending a lot of money to recover that little money. That is the clarification I felt he was seeking.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION)(Mr Peter Kasenene): Mr Speaker, and honourable members, the honourable Member’s question about the divestiture funds actually has been coming up again and again, but I would like to assure honourable members that there is strict adherence to the PERD Statute, and the divestiture procedure manual as to how the divestiture funds are used. And this we have made it clear in the three statutory reports, which I have presented to this House. But maybe let me clarify a little more since the honourable Member was asking about the benefits. How do Ugandans benefit from these funds from privatisation and so on?  

As we have indicated in these reports, privatisation has contributed greatly to the reduction of subsidies that were going to these enterprises. There have been figures and statistics to show that enterprises that have been privatised have improved in terms of -(Mr Mwandha rose_)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the minister but is it not better that the honourable Minister of Finance answers the question and then the Minister of Privatisation gives us the report, which he is beginning to give?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe by next week he may have submitted statutory reports, but since this matter has been coming up - it was raised yesterday, it was raised today, now can you in a simple form tabulate what so far you have realised, how you have spent it, what is there in the coffers and how you plan for it? A simple statement like that I think it will assist and Members can then wait for that statement.  Therefore proceed.

MR KASENENE: Thank you, hon. Speaker.  Now, as to how much has been realised, it appears in the Committee’s report but briefly, this is how the money has been spent -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, you leave it.  As I have said, next week, bring us that one so that each Member will get a copy of the details in writing because if you explain now when others are not here, then next week they will come up.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I now go to hon. Joseph Mugambe. His concern was that in the report it is stated that it is only VAT registered companies that will deal with Government and he was wondering what would happen to the others. We are trying to broaden the tax base. Since we are trying to do that, Government should be the starting point. If you want to qualify to be with Government, please register for VAT so that we are sure that when there is a transaction with Government, taxes are paid.  

On an employment policy, I want to state that we are liaising with the Ministry of Labour to make sure that we come up with a comprehensive policy, which takes into account our means today. 

Another concern was whether these investors bring in money. Yes, investors bring in money but more importantly, they bring in know-how and equipment, which we may not have here. Of importance also, investors bring in marks -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Honourable Minister, I thank you for giving way. You have said that these investors bring in know-how, I agree, but do you also take time to evaluate the know-how? What we normally see is that, some of the investors bring people who end up actually not having the know-how. They end up selling mandazi in the shops; they end up doing this and that. Can the honourable Minister clarify to me how they verify the know-how of these people?

THE SPEAKER: That will be a matter for Immigration.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to assure the honourable member that every project is evaluated and its feasibility to this country is first ascertained. It is only when Government is satisfied that we award investment licenses to whoever is coming to invest here. 

I was saying that another important thing investors bring in, which we lack, is access to markets. Most of those investors who come here have already accessed international markets, which we may not be in position to access.  

Hon. Kikungwe was concerned about the extension of –(Interjections)- oh, he was out of order, but somebody else raised it. The minister made the extension of NPART after a recommendation by Parliament. According to the procurement regulations in force, it is not Parliament to extend the contract of SWIPCO; it is the minister. And when that extension was made, Parliament was duly informed and it concurred.  

Hon. Okulo Epak was asking whether the National Planning Authority (NPA) was being implemented. I am glad to say yes, implementation is in the highest gears. As we talk now, the Minister of State in charge of Planning has been mandated by the President to take over the operations of the NPA. He is currently constituting the Authority and very soon it will be in place.  

On economic growth, economies of developed countries are more stable, that is why their growth rates are lower than ours. They have almost had all that they want, so the rate is low. Their bases are stable and you cannot expect them to be at the same rate with us who are coming from down the pit.  

Hon. Tibarimbasa asked about the memorandum of understanding between Government and Tri-Star.  Yes, a memorandum of understanding exists, and if it is the wish of this House, I will at a later stage lay it on the Table of the House. The company is not yet paying rent because, according to the memorandum of understanding, the company will pay rent only when the property has been refurbished and renovated. As of now, it is difficult to know the rental value. In order to decide rent, you must know the value. We do not know how much will go to the refurbishment so we do not know how much the property will be worth after the refurbishment. Those are matters that are clearly canvassed and catered for in the memorandum of understanding.  

It is not true that Government is contributing money to the establishment of the company; the company established itself. What the Government is trying to do is only to facilitate the company’s operations as is envisaged in the memorandum of understanding. I wish to add that the company will, at a later stage, repay all money spent in this exercise. The company has put in its own machinery and its own money, it is training our children free of charge, and as I said earlier -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To settle the minds of the Members of Parliament, you should try next week to bring that memorandum of understanding so that the appropriate committee can analyse it and we can deal with it -(Applause)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am not sure whether it is legal for Government to give away property of Government to an investor free of charge and the whole thing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is exactly why to effectively discuss this issue, it is necessary that you see the document. Maybe the document has a basis. So, that is why I think if next week he brings the document, the committee concerned will study it and then we shall be able to debate meaningfully.

MR RUKUTANA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Now I go to the concerns of hon. Eresu. He was concerned about interest rates. His concern was that when we were selling UCB, our reason was that the interest rates had remained high because of the inefficiency and poor performance of UCB, and since we have sold it, why have the interest rates not come down? 

First of all, as a matter of fact, it is not true that interest rates have not come down. Prime lending at the time when we were negotiating the sale of UCB was around 17 percent, but now they are as low as 12 percent. And of course it will be a gradual process. It is only a few months after lending. Even lending rates - by that time I think the average was 21 percent, but I know that now it is between 18 and 20 percent, or even much lower. That is a matter, which anybody can check on. 

Dr Bulamu’s concern was that members lack adequate knowledge on AGOA -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Honourable Minister, as far as we are aware, when you go to the Nile Bank and several other banks, the lending rate is 22 percent.

MR RUKUTANA: Of course that is not the average; it depends on who you are and how the bank evaluates you.

Dr Bulamu is concerned about knowledge on AGOA. I have already said that we shall, at a later stage, brief Parliament on everything concerning AGOA and that Government is prepared to get full benefit from AGOA.  

As for preparation for continuity of benefit under AGOA, I wish to say that under cotton, for example, 1.4 billion shillings was released last financial year for cottonseeds to the Cotton Development Authority. I wish to state that we are in the process of acquiring 15 tractors for distribution to cotton growing areas. There are so many other aspects, which we shall be bringing to your attention, which will make sure that we sustainably benefit from AGOA.

The honourable Representative of Workers was also concerned about the employment policy, but as I said, we are liaising with the Minister of Labour to make sure that we put in place a proper policy, which will take into account our means. Do not forget that we are operating a constrained budget.  We do not have all the means that we would require for all our needs.

I think the issue of reduction of taxes on terminal benefits is being considered, but I am not prepared, at this stage, to say how far it has gone. Maybe I will brief Parliament once a decision has been reached on that.

Honourable members, I thank you very much. I have tried to be brief, but I am assuring you that all your recommendations and observations will be taken into account. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs94,552,422,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs72,639,786,000 under Vote 108, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for as development expenditure. 

MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, while the Minister did give a correction on the recurrent expenditure, we did not hear any correction on the development expenditure. The figure that we have is Shs76,639,786,000 but you have just mentioned 72 billion shillings.  I just wanted to be clarified on what the right figure is.

THE CHAIRMAN: Sorry! I now put the question that a total sum of Shs76,639,786,000 under Head 108, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved Votes 008 and 108 for both recurrent and development expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/2003.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this completes our consideration as a Committee of Supply for the votes for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Thank you very much.  

Related to this, you are aware that there is a workshop arranged for us on Monday with Bank of Uganda. A lot that was debated or raised here will be clarified when we attend the workshop. You are all invited to attend. 

The next business is the election of the 15th person to the Committee of HIV/AIDS. We are going to use the procedure we used yesterday and the other day. Before I formally adjourn, I will suspend the House for ten minutes so that this exercise can be conducted. We should conclude it so that those who are elected can go and set up the leadership of that Committee and the honourable members from the Western Region go and attend to a meeting with the census people. So, the proceedings are suspended for ten minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended and the House resumed at 1.05 p.m.) 

The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, presiding.)

THE SPEAKER: Today we carried out the exercise of electing the 15th Member of the Committee on HIV/AIDS.  There were two candidates, hon. Ida Mehangye and hon. Kamana Wesonga.  I am happy to declare hon. Kamana Wesonga as the winner. Congratulations!  Now it is up to the Members of the Committee to go and meet and set up the leadership of the Committee.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I would like to know how this is going to happen because somebody must convene the meeting in the first place.  If we leave it to Members to do it, we might – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk to Parliament will assign a secretary who will advise them shortly.  I will direct, Mr Kagoro to arrange for this.  

Honourable Members, now three committees have completed presenting their reports in accordance with the Budget Act but now that they have presented their Reports, I know there are pending matters before these committees.  I think as from Monday, the committees should start working on those bills so that when we complete the exercise of the Budget, in September we then continue with the pending bills before the committees.    

With this, we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.  But on Monday you should attend the workshop organised by Bank of Uganda.

(The House rose at 1.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 August 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


