Tuesday, 17 August 2010

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I want to thank you, you who are here, for exhibiting the diligence in your work by coming to attend Parliamentary proceedings. I know the circumstances under which you are operating, but at the same time the country expects us to do our work. There is a lot of work which is pending which the public, our masters, expects us to clear, but we are not moving at the pace we should be moving. 

Currently, we are handling a very important programme within our calendar, namely, the budgeting process. I need not labour on this; we all know the budget that we are handling is the lifeblood of our system. The system cannot run without it. Yes, we had the Vote-On-Account, but that was a temporary measure, pending the completion of the process. We may exhaust the Vote-On-Account, but without passing the budget, we shall have a problem. 

We have other reports. I see in newspapers people talking about the CHOGM report; but the CHOGM report is secondary to the budget process. We cannot deal with it; it is very important, but we have to finish the budget. 

So, I am really appealing to you that in spite of the campaigns that you may be carrying out, local or national, let us concentrate on this work and we finish it. We should also clear the necessary Bills, because the budget cannot be passed without other Bills - Finance and so forth. Once you do that, I will release you without hesitation. But please give your time to this work. Thank you very much.

3.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, yes we appreciate that we have to be here and we also think that maybe as a way forward we could have compressed our business schedule and harmonised it with our various whips so that when we come in, maybe for two or three weeks, we give it our full attention. 

As you know, Mr Speaker, the situation in the constituencies is a very dynamic one, and it is not one which you can keep away for a very long time. So, if we can have a compressed kind of business for the House, and we get to know so that people come in here knowing they can dispose of the business in time - because as of now, really, it seems we are proceeding more like a gamble. Actually, when I looked at the NRM side, I said, “I will tell the Speaker; now they are the minority in the House and we are the majority -

THE SPEAKER: You take over?

MS ALASO: Yeah, we take over actually. (Laughter) I thought, Mr Speaker, that you could consider that, in order to move business forward.

3.12
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also appreciate your concern. But, Mr Speaker, I can see the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip are seated there because the biggest challenge now that is facing us, which is a reality, is the NRM primaries. So, the biggest challenge, why you do not see on the other side - look at the proportion. How many Members of Parliament do they have in proportion to what they have in the House? 

So, I only wish that the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip could assure the House and the nation so that we can proceed and complete this very important matter, because without that, there is going to be an extremely big challenge.

This morning we were having our committee meeting and some of the NRM colleagues called me and said, “Reagan, how do you continue with committee meetings and yet we are supposed to be in our constituencies?” Then I told them, “But the Speaker has requested you to spare at least one week and stay so that we complete this period.”

So, I think that the challenge squarely falls in the hands of the Leader of Government Business, and he should really assure the nation that we will be able to pass the budget promptly during this very difficult time when people are heading for their primaries.

3.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Colleagues. I just wanted to add, really for the record, because the country may not know that the budget which was read was the budget of the Executive, who are in charge of this country, and we committed ourselves to help them pass the budget, and if there is any delay, for once we cannot be blamed. Our Members are available in reasonable proportion to what we are - as we have always been - and we also desire that this budget process is disposed of expeditiously so that we are all free - not only the NRM Members, but all of us are free to go and review how we can revise our mandate in this House. So, mine is just to say that Members from the Opposition side will be available in reasonable numbers to execute the business of the budget.

3.15
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have learnt that the Government Chief Whip churned out information to MPs who belong to the NRM that the campaign for primaries starts today for an election that will take place at the end of the month. 

Mr Speaker, now that the Government Chief Whip is here, I think he should inform the House whether this was being done in consultation with the authorities of Parliament, because it is going to bog down the whole system of Parliament. 

And Mr Speaker, this is an intra-party election and it seems those who are involved take it more serious than the national election. What is at stake? Because if we do not perform in the remaining term of Parliament, we are cheating the taxpayer. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.16
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I humbly request, if possible, the Business Committee should clearly give us the legislative calendar and whoever is concerned, because we are working in suspense. It is not clear whether even after the primaries of NRM, we shall have quorum, because nomination - according to the gazette which I have seen - for the President, is 25 and 26 October; for local councils it is 27 to 29 October; that is LC3 and LC5. I have seen Parliament nominations are on 25 and 26 November. So, immediately after the primaries, I am sure our colleagues on the other side will continue with the campaigns and will be preparing for nominations. I do not know whether it is possible, in my suggestion, if we could have the priority matters we should handle listed. If we could get the Bills like these financial Bills we are talking about for the budget, which are priorities, listed so that even within this period -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukwago, there is no problem with this. If you remember what I said when the budget was read - it is on record - I said, I foresee problems; and I said, I would have preferred if we could complete the budget process in the month of July. This is what I said.

The programme for finishing the budget estimates is stated by the Budget Act. We should have cleared all the estimates by end of August. That is when we should have supplied; I said so; but you see, you do not expect me as a Speaker to be working on the programmes of parties. I have a party, yes, but as a Speaker, I do not have to liaise with the political leaders in their parties and how they conduct themselves. For me, what I expect from you is to be here and I had promised that if we finish the budget by this month, I would relax and give you a recess of a week or so; but if you invite me now to negotiate, I think it will compromise me.

But the programme is known. Let us clear the budget. Today, we are dealing with the motion which was moved by the minister when she read the budget. Once you finish it, then we go immediately to Committee of Supply. But the only problem I see here is that the material to use in the supply may not be there because the reports, I understand, have not been signed by you. Of course, I can use omnibus supply, in that I can read, “Vote so and so, 70 votes, that amount”; I can do it; but I would prefer that you make comments here and there; but I may be constrained to read omnibus supply.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you for that guidance, Mr Speaker. But I would still request if can get a clear picture as to when we should have the recess because the information I get, the guidance you are giving, break off, whatever you call it -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that I can give. Let us finish with Committee of Supply; we make appropriations; we pass the necessary Bills to back the budget, namely VAT, Income Tax amendment, if any, this and the other; once that is clear, then we shall have tied the budget. Once we do that next week, I can give you a recess of two weeks; but before that, I cannot and I have told you there are a number of other important reports like the CHOGM report which I would have loved to be debated before we go on recess. So, the sooner we finish the budget, the better. Can we proceed? The Prime Minister has a statement to make.

3.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, if we learnt to listen to each other, we would not have reached this crisis. I remember very well in this House, Members telling the Secretary General of the ruling party that, please, the months of July and August are key to the running of the country. Can you please adjust your primaries because it is the time we are supposed to pass the budget? Today, it has come to pass that we are finding difficulty in raising the quorum here.

I think this is a lesson to us to listen to one another because this is something that was very clear. As hon. Lukwago is putting it that there is no timetable, this one is there by law. We know that this is the month for passing the budget, but people did not listen and now we are in this crisis.

Our colleagues who are out there, we also need to be elected just like they also need, but we are able to be here. The Chief Whip is here; hon. Byandala is here, yet he also needs to be elected. They must know that for them to be elected, they must also perform their Constitutional duty. We need to pass money. If they are not careful, they will be voted out because as they are campaigning, there will be no drugs in the hospitals; there will be no water and there will be no salaries for others. So, let them listen to the Speaker’s advice and come back here. 

One or two weeks would not be enough. The unfortunate part is, we are drawing nearer to the voting day, which is 30 August 2010; so I even see the few who are here not appearing by the end of this week. (Laughter) I am worried we may not even see the Speaker because we are getting nearer to the voting day.

THE SPEAKER: You will see the Speaker all the time. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Thank you so much for that assurance. But also, the Electoral Commission I think has failed us. There is a timeframe constitutionally that we know, when we are supposed to carry out the nominations. There is ample time.
Why are they hurrying to bring nomination days to this year? Couldn’t we have done it next year? 

Hon. Lukwago here was just raising the issue that immediately after the primaries, there is going to be preparations for the nominations; so you will not again see the Members. We would have had these nominations in January or so -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the idea is to give you sufficient time to campaign officially. Okay, let us end with him then the Prime Minister says something.

3.24
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I know you have done consultations on our side with the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition, and with most of us, because you have consulted us. I have a feeling most Members of Parliament are not here because their constituents have to elect them.

We have a challenge on our side. Campaigns started today. The joint MPs’ candidates campaigns have kicked off today and they will vote on 30 August 2010. I know the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Mr Speaker you have at your discretion, at least two weeks in the month of September, according to the Budget Act. So, my humble request and suggestion, irrespective of what you have discussed and what we have agreed, is that we allow these Members because with voting on 30 August 2010, we can be here on 1 September, which will be a Thursday or a Wednesday -(Interruptions)- just hold on; just listen to me; and I know it is not the first time we are doing it. We had it in the last Parliament; people had elections and after the primaries - because we had primaries in the NRM - people came back to the House and proceeded with business. 
	
So, my thinking is that, let us be fair to our colleagues. Surely, how can someone fail to defend himself there, because once you lose on 30 August, then you cannot even be here in the ninth Parliament. So, Members will definitely not come; be fair to them; let us reschedule. Two weeks after we have returned we can meet from Monday to Friday, morning and afternoon, and within ten days we would have finished the budget and everything else would be done. I thank you.

3.26
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I want to assure you that we know how to cope with the contingent element. It is ubiquitous, but we have the capacity to cope with it. Even today, we are ready. We are absolutely ready. The Ministry of Finance is ready to make a statement which is going to answer the issues which you raised. And I want to assure you that when there are other problems, we are going to consult with each other and provide viable solutions. Some of the issues cannot be mentioned here, but when we are outside there, we can discuss a lot more. (Interjection) What I am saying is that we have the capacity. (Laughter) You see, I taught for 30 years. Some people find it difficult to grasp the issues, so I am willing to repeat for you if necessary. (Laughter) Hon. Prof. Latigo knows these problems, but we shall cope. And today we are going to make a statement. The minister of finance is going to make a very important statement and we can proceed. I want to assure you that we shall manage; we shall manage. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to remind you that the debate on the motion by the minister of finance has started. It started in June when he read it, and according to the rules, the shadow minister of finance was supposed to make a statement, and the statement was made. What I had expected, if any, would be a statement by the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, but if it is not there, then you are free to make a contribution on the debate. 

Debate continues.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: And the certificate of financial implication?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the certificate of financial implication will be tabled tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then we keep it pending until tomorrow. Next item.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011

THE SPEAKER: Debate continues.

3.31
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleagues, I stand to support the motion moved by the minister of finance, and which has been ongoing. I will only limit myself to two areas. The first one is on the Millennium Development Goals; and secondly, on sustainable development for this country. 

There is a new phenomenon that has come to this globe, and this is the issue of climate change; and between you and me, whether you want it or not, climate change is now classified as a security issue. It should be classified as a security issue in this country. In fact, we even think that in Cancun, it should also be classified as an issue of terrorism. Because if you see what is happening in Pakistan, 20 million people have been displaced; and hundreds of thousands are dying. If you see what has happened here at home; in Bududa, the flush floods in the east and west. I think that countries that have failed to take action on climate change issues should be classified as terrorist countries because I have not seen any terrorism that can kill 20 million people in a few days. That means issues of climate change and global warming are issues that we should take very seriously as a country and as the world, because if we keep glossing over them - I think we need to act fast because we are in real danger. 

I will not dwell on what is happening internationally, but I will dwell on what is happening here. As a country we should not wait for America or China or these other countries to act. Our economy is resource dependant; 95 percent of our economy depends on our resources. There are things that we must begin doing now to help us adapt and accommodate the rigours of climate change. 

We do not need any new technology to keep our trees standing or to protect our fragile ecosystems, the river banks, the lake banks, the hilltops, the valleys and swamps. We do not need any new technology to stop pollution in our lakes. The cost of delivering water into your homes now has more than trebled because of the silting and the disposal of all the garbage into Lake Victoria. 

We do not need any new technology to stop littering. We do not need any new technology to stop degrading our environment. We do not need any new technology to change our lifestyles. Why do I need four vehicles parked in my compound and go polluting the whole world? A family needs one vehicle, at best two; but four, five or six monsters parked in our compounds and polluting heavily, is something that we as a country must stop. 

If you go into most of our homes, you will find lights on. Can’t we even teach our people simple things – and things like finger pointing and politicising climate change should also stop. It starts with me and you and everybody. All of us must take action.

If we have to conserve water, can’t we teach our people to conserve water? You open the tap and it runs even when you are brushing. Water is very scarce. You leave all the lights on. Even in this building, lights are on day and night even in our offices. We have to conserve energy. So, there are certain things which we must do personally, at a family level, at national level, regional level and international level, to mitigate the effects of climate change. 

Mr Speaker, we are here talking about Millennium Development Goals, infrastructure; see what has happened in Pakistan. In a split of a second, everything is gone; and it will happen here because our hills and valleys are bare, but we have encroached up to the lakes and rivers with impunity; with all the best roads that we have in this country. It is a wakeup call for everybody. Something must be done and it must start from this Parliament. Let us do something and it must start from us, and from our homes. Let us not wait for Kankun, Napass, no; our people know these things; let us communicate properly; let us make small provisions; let us go down to the political and technical leaders and provide some little money for them to go and educate our people and communicate on these dangers, because we can manage them.

By the time UN comes here to evacuate people from Bududa they will be gone; but if we can mitigate and prevent those waters from washing down everything, then we shall manage.

When you look at this budget; under health, about 80 percent of the disasters in this country are climate change related. 85 percent of the diseases in this country are environmental related. That is a known factor and even my mother down in Kikagate knows that, but what are we doing as a nation? Small things or provisions.

If you look at the national budget, there is nothing that has been sent to the districts to help them communicate on matters of climate change and global warming, and on matters of environmental protection. What can we do as a Parliament and as a country? 

I think we must re-focus. The other day in Nairobi, we had a high powered delegation, which was discussing and formalising the Disaster, Management and Climate Change Policy at the regional level, but in this Parliament, the Disaster, Management and Climate Change Policy for our national - yes, we can feed into the regional one, but where is our national one?

So, these are things that do not need a lot in the budget, but we need to re-focus ourselves and put a halt on these things. If we don’t act now - act quickly and differently - but act, we are wasting our time on these Millennium Development Goals; on this infrastructure which you are talking about; on the incidence of diseases; on water pollution; on air pollution. It is now that we must act.

So, my call is that as a government and as Parliament, let us re-cast our eye on the national budget and provide something at least to the districts and sub-counties in as far as climate change adaptation, mitigation and coping are concerned.

When you look at the prayers on climate change - because now it is the buzz word - over 150 organisations are involved in repeating the same thing; they are not coordinated and are not doing anything that will bring the tangible results that we want. So, we need coordination. You will find that people have competing policies in the different - if you saw in the budget policies presented by the ministries, they have competing policies on climate change issues. We need to harmonise these and bring them together so that we can stop these dangerous home-made national climate change effects. I describe them thus and they are going to be catastrophic unless we act now.

My other point is on health and the state of health in this country. Yes, we are moving forward, but we have huge challenges. The timeline for the MDGs is just five years from now, but when you look at child health and maternal health, and you look at the present indicators, we are still at 435 of maternal deaths per 100,000 and at about 134 per 1000 births beyond the age of five. So, we are not doing very well.

If you look at the funding, yes 8.2 percent of the budget is really reasonable for health, but there are so many challenges. If you look at the per capita expenditure on the health package, it is so low and we need to do something about this. I know it is a huge challenge, but if we have to achieve - our President assented to the Millennium Development Goals, and in fact, it is going to be reviewed in September this year in New York. I don’t know what we are going to present. 

If you look at other parameters like poor priority setting, mismanagement of public funds in the health sector - the other day the committee was presenting something on this Presidential Drug Monitoring Unit and what it found out, and the biggest problem was the absorption capacity. You remember two months ago, there was an article that the ministries had failed to absorb Shs 700 billion in total. So, there is a poor absorption capacity of funds.

If you look at the human resource, we are at about 50 percent, even in the health sector, of what is required. The essential medicines we are providing account for US$ 0.98 per person instead of US$ 5 per person. If you look at the infrastructure, some of it has not reached that level.

We are moving on and we are doing well, but we need to prioritise our activities; we need to put our human and financial resource where we need them most. 

So, my call is that we need to reorganise ourselves a bit. We could move faster than we are doing if we re-looked at this budget. I am, therefore, calling upon Parliament to re-look at the budget and relocate the priority sectors so that when the ministers and ministries come to present and they don’t show us the tangible - let Parliament and the committees have their own priorities where we can put these resources so that we can improve the delivery of health services. This is the only way we can achieve our MDGs. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before hon. Alaso comes in, please join me in welcoming our children, pupils and teachers of Hillside Annex Mixed Day and Boarding Primary School from Lira. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.43
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start my response to the Budget Speech by addressing issues of agricultural production and value addition.

I note that during the Budget Speech, it was said that the agricultural sector had received a boost; there were a number of interventions in NAADS and that some of the challenges had been tackled, but the aspect of agricultural production that I really want to draw our attention to, is the question of marketing.

If we want our people to break loose from poverty, it is high time Government paid attention to matters of marketing. All over this country as we talk, there are people who have done their very best with their input, which is of a subsistence nature, with the little that they have, and they still manage to produce maize, cassava, groundnuts, sorghum, but there is no market.

I am sure that somewhere on earth, or somewhere in the cities of this country, there should be market for this produce. I will give you an example. If you go through the countryside, you will find that a kilogram of dried cassava is only Shs 100 or even less. Maize is just about Shs 150 or even less. So, it takes one farmer to grow 100 kilograms of cassava in order to eat a kilo of meat in this country. At that pace, I don’t see the progress we are talking about in terms of agriculture. We don’t help the farmers get produce to the markets. If we don’t create interventions that will organise them, it will not help to come here and simply say the agricultural sector is doing very well.

There are also challenges with the NAADS program. Recently, we attended a launch or study that had been done by Konrad Adenauer, and it looked at local governments examining the progress, and understanding of multiparty democracy in local governments. The study established that these days for one to be identified as a beneficiary household for NAADS, you must be a Movement member with a party card. (Interruption) I am talking about research and this is not rumourmongering. I can lay this research on table if the ministers do not know.

This study was launched by the Minister of Local Government and you can now receive it from me that NRM party membership is a requirement for one to access NAADS services. Government should make every effort to distinguish between its programmes and party activities. In Kumi district, they had to collect goats belonging to farmers and show them to the President as NAADS goats. I think Government should take this as very good advice and figure out how to help farmers, because the question of poverty does not know any party. We are all poor and we all need help. 

MR OKUPA: Hon. Alaso, you do not need to go very far to Kumi. There is a living case in Soroti. When the President was in Soroti the NAADS coordinators were finding it difficult to get a NAADS project to take him to. He had to be taken to hon. Omolo’s project in his home. I was there translating to the people. Hon. Omolo has not benefited from NAADS. The President even promised to send people to study in his farm.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable for giving way. Recently, His Excellency the President was in Kitgum district, Mucwini sub-county and he wanted to see some of the NAADS projects. There was nothing that had been done under the NAADS programme. They took him to someone who was growing a few orange trees and that is what the President saw. He even gave her 4 million, which she has used to construct her House.

I was there when the NAADS goats were taken to Mucwini. The distribution which was taking place there was for the cadres and it ended up in a big struggle. I actually saw two goats being torn into pieces; people were pulling from opposite sides until the goats died.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: This issue of NAADS sometimes puts us in great difficulties. When the President went to Pader, there were attempts to take him to Patongo. They sent 50 beehives to a person who is now a parliamentary candidate on the NRM ticket. He was supposed to put them on his farm such that the President could come and see them. That gentleman said he could not do that because he would not be able to send bees into the beehives overnight.

When the President went to Kalongo, the NAADS coordinator was asked about the number of sub-counties in Agago county and she did not even know. Ultimately, we saved ourselves the embarrassment because we have a microfinance that hon. Nankabirwa is familiar with. The President launched the commodity information service, but it was not NAADS.

3.52
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Beatrice Wabudeya): I want to inform the House that for every district there is a committee on Prosperity-For-All which oversees the activities of NAADS and they are chaired by the district chairperson. There is a similar committee at every sub-county, which is chaired by the LC III chairperson. Members of Parliament are expected to be monitoring what is going on. 

MS EKWAU: I respect hon. Wabudeya, but as Members of Parliament, we have always said that we are green about the activities of Prosperity-For-All.  

We have asked for a road map for three years; is it in order for an honourable minister to stand and start giving us information yet we have been pleading with for it for over three years?

THE SPEAKER: They are saying that you should give more information. 

MS WABUDEYA: Members of Parliament have got a role to play in this programme of Prosperity-For-All; the policy was laid here and many times questions have been asked and answers given. I am also wondering where my colleague has been for these years. 

There are some activities which are not running very well and that is why the President put a halt to the NAADS programme until it is sorted out. The problem is the implementation and not the policy. 

MS ALASO: I want to thank my colleagues for their interventions and I still insist that the minister responsible should look into these issues because it is only then that the targeted outcomes will be met. 

Apart from those challenges of appropriate technologies in agriculture, there is the disturbing problem of dependency on the vagaries of weather.

Two years back there was extensive flooding in most parts of the country, and we appealed to Government to explore ways in which this water could be harvested and how it could be channelled to agricultural production. Unfortunately, we continue to experience threats to agricultural production. We are threatened by floods in the Teso and Elgon regions; Government has not done anything to help the communities with the water harvesting that was promised during the season of floods. I hope that again, Government will rethink, because if you do not commit yourself to harvesting this water, then it will be one seasonal flooding and the result will be failure to market produce. It is going to be a cycle of poverty. Unfortunately, we will then hear Prosperity-For-All when actually nobody is prospering.

The second issue I would like to submit on is with regard to private universities. I probably will get to this matter a lot more when I make my response to the Ministry of Education. The key issue I want to raise is the criteria for supporting private universities. I will give you a scenario; here in the budget is listed a number of universities that have benefitted and all of them total about Shs 7.7 billion. They include Bugema, Kumi, Christian University Mukono and others. In this list, you have one university which got Shs 5 billion. On the same list, you have another university which got Shs 500 million. On this same list you have Mountains of the Moon, for instance, that got Shs 500 million twice. Kumi University which got Shs 500 million once, Kampala International which got Shs 5 billion and then you have Islamic University in Uganda which was guaranteed to borrow more than Shs 1 billion. 

I think it is important for Government to tell us the criteria they use; what is it that drives the Government of Uganda to think that Islamic University in Uganda should be guaranteed to borrow just Shs 1 billion and then another private university in Uganda is given Shs 5 billion. What is that type of criteria, because all these universities take care of Uganda’s children? What is the criteria that gives Kumi University Shs 500 million, Uganda Christian University - Mukono Shs 500 million, and then it gives twice the same amount to another university? I think the criteria will help us to understand and explain to our people. (Interruption)

MR OYET: I thank you hon. Alaso for giving me this opportunity to provide information. The information I want to provide to the House is that in this academic year, some of the Government universities were not considered. For instance, Busitema University was given only Shs 1.5 billion as supplementary support compared to Kampala International University which was given Shs 5 billion. So, actually, for us on the committee, we were also wondering about the criteria used to give private universities more money than a government university, which in itself should have benefitted more than the private university. I thank you. 

MR KIGYAGI: I seat on the Committee on Social Services with the Shadow Minister for Health. And for a country, some of us believe that there are certain things that we do not need to politicise if we know the basis. It is clear and we went through the details of why the Islamic university was guaranteed; it is because it was going for an activity which is not funded by the Ministry of Health, and this is the construction of accommodation. That was clear, because Government does not put money in accommodating students and if you want, you get a loan. 

Secondly, the issue of Kampala International University. I think it is high time Ugandans exhausted this. We visited all these institutions, looked at what Kampala International University had put in place in form of infrastructure, facilities, and what it was providing for the Ugandans and foreigners. 

I remember the words of hon. Dr Apilinga when we visited with him because he is on the Committee of Science and Technology, that if it was in Europe or a developed country, they would have matched a shilling for a shilling for the investment that had been done at Kampala International University. So, surely, Shs 4 billion which was given to that university - we agreed as a Committee of Science and Technology that it was even little because the amount of investment, the amount that had been given to propel development in this country, was immense. 

So, for somebody to come here and say the words – because I know my colleague - we went together and surely, let us be Ugandans and nationalistic. The parameters were clear –(Interjections)- I thank you. 

MR OYET:  I rise on a Point of Order. Hon. Kigyagi and I sit on the same Committee on Science and Technology, and sometime back, we made recommendations that for whatever Government contribution is given to private universities, there must be strings attached to it in such a way that the school fees for the Ugandan students must be positively affected in a way that it should be reduced to enable many students access education in Kampala International University, and that was the condition that the Committee on Science and Technology gave for further support to Kampala International University, which was not followed.  

I now want to know whether it is in order for hon. Kigyagi to insist with the member of the same committee which participated in the making of that recommendation - to insist that the support given to Kampala International University –(Interjections)- and even a board member of KIU –(Laugther)- to insist that the support given to Kampala International University was a recommendation of Parliament. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think this issue of point of order should never be raised when the Speaker in the chair will be required to verify the facts. It is not easy for the chair to rule one way or the other because it is a question of facts. We cannot because it will take me time to verify and find out who is telling the facts or not. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank you hon. Alaso for giving way. I think the matter that hon. Alaso raised is a very important one and I am surprised that the hon. Member from Mbarara Municipality suggested that it was unpatriotic to talk about it. The fact of the matter is that the principle owner of Kampala International University received a huge sum of money from this country on basically no account – Shs 20 billion that we are still questioning. 

In the same Bushenyi District, under the Presidential Banana Initiative, Shs 10 billion was allocated. This is not being nationalistic and patriotic –(Interjections)- and if there is a need, we must demand as to why this person in particular gets that kind of money, because we could start universities and we will not get the same support.

Secondly, if it is the issue of medical training, I would have loved not today, but yesterday, to have seen Mbarara Referral Hospital worked on much earlier as it is in a terrible shape. Although they said the East African Development Bank is giving us a loan, we did not need a loan. While you give money to a private institution, you leave an institution that people will go to and be charged recklessly. I think it is not fair.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need with this issue is to really ask Government – Ministry of Education, maybe Ministry of Finance - to tell us the formula and the criteria they use in giving funds to private - we need that kind of statement to clear the problem we are facing now. And since the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is here, I think he will look into this matter so that the House is informed of the basis upon which one is given a certain sum of money, particularly these private universities that do not belong to the government. 

MR OGWEL: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague hon. Alaso. I agree with your concern and with what our colleagues have raised. But I want to inform you that in a civilised and democratic society, any resources from the Consolidated Fund, whether received by the President or the Minister, must first be approved by the Parliament. They took Shs 22 billion, and they have never come back to explain. Under which law was that money taken?

Every resource from the Consolidated Fund should be appropriated using the law –(Interjections)– I do agree that we appropriated Shs 5 billion.

MS ALASO: Thank you my colleague. I hope the message that goes to Government as all this is being said is the criteria, as the Speaker has ably guided. We do not mind giving village schools money, even if you wanted to give it Shs 100 billion, as long as I understand the criteria used, because I am an interested party. Government is supposed to be answerable to the citizens of this country. Give us the criteria you use to choose which university is more scientific and so on, then we will gladly support private initiatives in this country. 

Finally, I want to comment on drug shortages in this country. I decry the drug shortages in almost all Government facilities in this country. I have been moving around my constituency; I know that we allot them money, but the money is not even enough and the deliveries are slow. It is very difficult to get treated now, coupled with the crack down from the Office of the Minister in charge of the Presidency. 

The clinics that used to save our people by selling drugs have been closed. I ran into a very pathetic situation one day, whereby a woman was about to have a miscarriage in Kiyere Health Centre III, and where no drugs were available. I tried to run to a clinic, but those people had also closed because there is a crackdown by the Minister in charge of the Presidency. Mr Speaker, if we think we can deliver healthcare to our people, let us put money in heath and ensure that these drugs are availed.

I also paid a private visit to Mbarara Hospital one month ago. I was shocked to find that Mbarara Regional Hospital is horrible –(Interjections)– it is lacking equipment; I am talking about Mbarara Referral Hospital. It is just as bad as these others; it lacks equipment; it is actually more pathetic than Soroti and I am wondering what we are doing as Government. If we can put money into private institutions, surely, we can put some money in the regional referral hospitals; we can put some money to make Mbarara Hospital a workable hospital.

Finally, may I remind the Prime Minister that at the inception of the PRDP, we requested that this House should be receiving regular reports on the PRDP – the progress, the implementation and the challenges. Unfortunately, we have not received regular updates as agreed with the Prime Minister and I note here that while implementation is going on, the gender concerns which we articulated for the PRDP have been cast aside; it looks like they have been ignored. There is also the question of too many new districts, like my new district of Serere. We are not even sure whether we are going to benefit from its PRDP percentage and how it is going to be to be factored in. 

I would like to ask the Prime Minister to give this House a proper update on the Peace Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I would like first of all to thank the Government and the minister for a well-thought out theme of the Budget, that is, “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Growth, Employment, and Economic Transformation for Prosperity-For-All”, and indeed for the priority emphasis in the areas of infrastructure development, energy, science and technology, increase of agricultural productivity, private sector development and improving public service delivery. 

Starting with the education sector, whereas Government has been very committed to UPE and USE, now USE candidates are sitting for S.4; I did not see in the Budget a component for next year. Our USE graduates are supposed to continue to another level. I would like to discourage Government from putting money in Universal A’Level. I would rather we put money in vocationalisation of education. Our population structure is very interesting; most of our people are of school-going age and dependants, and a few adults are looking after the many dependants. So, we need to do some innovation and put more emphasis on vocational, entrepreneurship and business education so that we can have more of the young people becoming productive and not dependant. 

We have had a debate on the many universities; but for us in Bunyoro, the only thing we have seen so far is the Faculty of Forestry going to Nyabyeya, and Makerere having an institute in Kigumba. The people of Bunyoro have been waiting for a fully-fledged Bunyoro University with a University Act like it is for Gulu University and Busitema. Before we get that, it is still a raw deal for Bunyoro. So, Ministry of Education, we are looking for a fully-fledged university for Bunyoro region.

I also want to thank Government for taking a bold step towards the loan scheme for students. This will solve many of the challenges we are discussing. The private universities we are talking about; if there was across the board interventions to all students, the debate of which university should get how much would not arise because we would only be talking of funding according to enrolment; we would be talking of a scholarship and a bursary. But because the parents are lacking the money, we are now discussing the symptom, which is, which university gets how much?

Also, I would like to urge Government to fast-track challenges related to the National Development Plan. We need to see a serious move from the people arrangement and welcome the NDP, which is a five-year plan. If this is done, then it could also be realigned with the current lack of infrastructure in the oil area.

Whereas we have been in the prospecting stage, now that we are doing a feasibility study; it is very important that this area’s infrastructure deficit is handled. You may want to know that between Amuru and Buliisa where the first production will take place, there is still movement on a ferry, yet by now, we should be thinking of a serious bridge, because you cannot tap all those wells using the current ferry arrangement.

The other related infrastructure – it would be very good for the country – the advantage in the area is that it is not only an oil-producing area; it is a highly-rich tourist destination, which is lacking this infrastructure and even energy. We do not have power connection. So, if we fast-track the energy, the bridge infrastructure, the tarmac – we are now competing with the oil company’s convoys, which are destroying roads almost every three months. And when convoys start, you cannot move until the next day. So, we have a problem of competing with the oil convoys and we need to open more lakeside roads because the lakeside roads –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. colleague. I expected the hon. Member who is an oil expert like you, to respond himself, but I saw him keep quiet. It used be Amuru District, but now, the area is Nwoya District. That would be the correct record.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much. Yes, Nwoya is my neighbour, but the other name is Bukidi. We could use Bukidi for historical purposes. The point I am emphasising is that for this area to still be relying on the prospecting infrastructure, is unfortunate. We are at a stage where we should translate the findings of the feasibility study into the concrete infrastructure development required in the area. 

Related to this is that the Budget is silent on addressing the overdue problem in the Albertine area of systematic demarcation of land. Failure to have systematic demarcation of land and comprehensive land use planning has left us with a scenario where speculators have an upper hand compared to the community. This is causing us a lot of problems; this is causing us a lot of conflict and if we do not address it now, Government is going to have a problem tomorrow if they want to do any infrastructure whether it is a pipeline, whether it is a road or an airport. This is because very soon, individuals are going to claim ownership of all this land when the community has not been helped to systematically demarcate this land and preserve Government interests.

We have already seen these challenges with other projects like the pipeline coming from Eldoret, and the power line from Bujagali. Individuals who came yesterday and are claiming ownership, are asking for billions of shillings from Government. 

So, when we are raising the challenges in the Albertine, it is not about the Buliisa community, it is about the bigger picture and the future of this country.

I also want to talk about the health sector, where a lot been said. I think we need to streamline the policy. Are we promoting health centre IVs, health centre IIs or we are saying, we are going back to the sub-county? There seems to be policy haziness on whether we intend to fine-tune health centre IVs or we are – because there are these buildings which were built as health centre IIs and are not being utilised. I think we need to review the delivery mechanism of the health system if we are going to address that.

I want to congratulate Government for reducing borrowing from 33 percent last year to 25 percent this year. However, we also need to put emphasis on the committed debt by the country. A lot of money is not yet disbursed, yet the country pays money for whatever is not disbursed. So, I want to welcome the amendment of the PPDA, which is partly blamed. I think we need Parliament and the sectoral committees to follow up the loans we commit so that these loans do not take too long.

The problem is not necessarily borrowing; the problem is borrowing when you cannot supervise, monitor and implement well on time. We have been giving reports here showing non-performing loans and loans which need serious follow-up.

The other challenge coming from the background of export and import is that we need to fast-track the talk of revamping railways. If it means borrowing money to have railway infrastructure revamped in this country, it should be done. We cannot continue waiting for RVR. This country’s export and import competitiveness is so much disabled because we are moving by road and not by rail. It just makes common sense to move by railway. Even this axle-load debate is coming in because people are not moving by the means they are supposed to be moving.

Finally, there is this point of private sector development. We appreciate the current increase in the number of banks in the country and more so in the towns and municipalities. But some of our rural areas and new districts have not got any semblance of a bank. We need Government intervention maybe through the Post Bank system. I think we lost an opportunity when we threw away the Rural Farmers’ Scheme, which had a sub-county model of a banking system. We need to have a semblance of that so that we deepen this banking at that level. 

Our people are still complaining of high interest rates in banks. We have been making reports again as the National Economy Committee here on the Floor. To that effect, we think interest rates could be reduced if Government reduced its mopping out of inflation through TBs, so that we have the business community using the money to create more employment, than Government using it as a monetary tool to mop out inflation. This has a crowd-out effect on the business community, which would use this money. Due to this, projects of our business people are dying because they are borrowing from commercial banks when they have projects of a long-term nature. The interest rates eat into what they should be using to expand. That is why so many enterprises are dying out because there is a mismatch – they are borrowing for long-term projects from commercial banks and that mismatch has created that problem.

We would also do better on top of the NAADS programme to see more progressive farmers’ interventions. We need to see more public private partnerships models of Prosperity-For-All. I appreciate what we are doing to reach out to those who could not do anything. There are those who are almost promising. All they need is agro-machinery and some semblance of UDC funding, which gives them some long-term financing. They need to be assisted with the Warehouse Receipt System. We need another model apart from NAADs, which targets those who are already doing it well. I think that will give us faster results. I thank you so much.

4.35
MS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, and as indicated before, for the title, which is “Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Growth, Employment”. Then, when we look at the targeted priorities, we are looking at promotion of science, technology, innovation; I hope and I wish that at that point, we had put research as well; actually, put it in practice.  I feel that without a fully-fledged ministry in charge of science, technology, innovation and research, we cannot move very far. Every time, as Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology, we have got issues with our scientists who are leaving us at a fast speed. When we invite the Ministry of Finance, where they are supposed to belong, none of the ministers in that department has actually turned up for any of our meetings, and yet we are trying to encourage the scientist to stay here. The Ministry of Finance is very busy looking for money and not realizing that science is one way of producing this money.

We have ministries like Luweero Triangle and yet the war ended a long time ago. Why should we continue with those and not be focused? We do not want to increase the number of ministers; we can restructure our present ministries and be a little bit more focused. We have the Ministry of Information Communication and Technology and yet it is a subset of science and research. Why don’t we get a real ministry and then get the subsets and research. I feel that if we do not do something about it, we are not going to get to that priority and we are not going to do much. It will be left on paper and everybody will probably get up and say, “Uganda’s priority No.2 is science, technology and whatever else it is” and it ends on paper.

MS ALASO: Thank you, my colleague. I just thought I would give you this information so that we also keep it afloat as you note that in matters of research and science, the women folk – the women researchers, the women scientists - need to be helped and given affirmative measures to help them move on. And there are organised lobbyists in this country, especially those that have been trying to target the interventions from Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education, to help bring up the women scientists. And I want to report that just like what you have been trying to do, this group is also very discouraged. We would like to implore Government again to help our women researchers. You know, for us women –(Interjections)- the women scientists, women researchers. That is the information I would like to give Hon. Kavuma, with whom I am a partner in this exercise.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Hon. Kavuma, for allowing me to give this information. I am a former Minister of State for Luweero Triangle, Office of the Prime Minister. Colleagues, I am rising to give this information because I heard the colleague on the Floor wondering whether it is still relevant to have the department of Luweero Triangle in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

When Luweero Triangle was created as a department in the Office of the Prime Minister, they were purely dealing with relief because people needed relief. Relief was in terms of giving posho and beans, cement and iron sheets. We could not design a comprehensive development programme like NUSAF and PRDP when we were still grappling with the problem of insurgency in Northern Uganda. 

It is until we cleared this insurgency that Luweero Triangle has come up with a comprehensive development programme to help the people from this area. And this is an affirmative action which could not be done because our brothers and sisters in Northern Uganda and in Kasese were still faced with the problem of insurgency. So, I am giving this information to this House to justify the existence of Luweero Triangle and Rwenzori because these areas still need this kind of affirmative action.

MS KAVUMA: I would like to thank both honourable members for the information, but I am not sure if it is still - and I emphasise - still relevant. And it is basically because we do not do enough research. We think we should continue with “as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be.” I really do not think that is necessary at this point.

Let us sit down and re-think. When we go to NAADS, it is based on issues of agriculture and livestock, but nothing on fisheries. Why? No research. So, NAADS is fixed-thinking. And because it is agriculture, they think that is the easiest and nothing on fisheries. We need to broaden and open our minds, and look at other countries which have had a little bit more progress than we have had here.

We have got the Ministry in charge of Northern Uganda and I am not commenting about that because it is still necessary. But 25 years down the road, I do not think we need a ministry for Luweero Triangle anymore. I thank you.

4.32
MS BETI KAMYA (Lubaga North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The annual State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the annual Budget Speech and the annual general debate by this Parliament have become so routine that if you read the previous three presentations since I came to this Parliament, you will find that they are similar. And yet the lives of the people of Uganda continue in the same misery and are very wanting.

Mr Speaker, we have been told many times that taxation has improved since 1986 from Shs 40 billion a year to Shs 5 trillion plus this year, and that is an increase of 1000 percent. Is that reflected in the delivery of services to this country?

Has the number of schools, the quality of schools, the number of hospitals, the quality of hospitals, the number of roads, the quality of roads and indeed, every service that we require in this country, improved by the same percentage? I think we all agree that the answer is “No”. And the reason the answer is “No” is because we take out too much from the people and plough back too little. The total amount of taxation that we have collected last year or this year is estimated to be about Shs 5 point something trillion. If you add on the Shs 1 point something trillion that we expect to get from donors, we expect to spend about Shs 7 point something trillion.

But how much is going back or went back or has been going back to the people through the local governments? Less than 25 percent. Last year, from Shs 7.3 trillion that was spent in this country, Shs 1.7 trillion went back to the people through the local governments.

Everybody knows that when you take out too much and give back too little, that is called exploitation. And that is precisely what we are doing. And this can be seen by the decline in the productivity of the people of Uganda. We have been told in the Budget Speech that 85 percent of the people of Uganda who live off agriculture in the rural country, produce 15 percent of GDP. This is down from the 85 percent of the people of Uganda who still lived in the rural areas in the 90s, but contributed 41 percent of GDP. And in the 60s, the same 85 percent still lived in the rural areas living off agriculture and contributed 85 percent of GDP. If productivity falls in 40 years from 85 percent to 15 percent, this should raise serious alarm, and serious attention should be paid to it. 

The reason we fought colonialism was because of exploitation. We did not fight colonialism merely to have a black government in the State House; we fought colonialism so that we could benefit from our sweat. It will not happen if we collect taxes from the people and only give back 20 percent to them. In Rubaga North –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, hon. Beti Kamya, for giving me the Floor. Mr Speaker, a colleague is emphasising exploitation and black men seated in the State House. Can she clarify who, in the scenario that I am going to give, has been exploiting others? Last year, the Ministry of Education registered 264,560 students and 104,000 were USE students. None of these 104,000 students is hon. Beti Kamya’s or mine or Prof. Nsibambi or the Speaker’s child. I think this number belongs to our rural people. So, is that really exploitation? Thank you. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the honourable minister has answered her own question. None of those are your children or my children. Your children are in Budo, Gayaza or Namagunga; those children in UPE are not even likely to ever go to Budo, Gayaza or Namagunga. 

The point I asked at the beginning was, if revenue collection has jumped from Shs 40 billion per year to Shs 5 trillion - an increase of 1,000 percent - do we see that increase in the delivery of services like public transportation? Do we see public buses on the road? Do we see railway services? Do we even have a national airline? Do we see the same number of hospitals in terms of quality and numbers? An increase in taxation from Shs 40 billion to Shs 5 trillion plus an extra Shs 1.7 trillion, which is borrowed on our behalf to make it Shs 7 trillion, actually makes it almost 2,000 percent. We should be seeing that 2,000 percent in the service delivery for the people of Uganda.

In Rubaga Division – our constituency – it is estimated that there are 500,000 people. If you go by the World Bank indicator of the poor person who lives below the poverty line spending Shs 2,000 per day, and you assume that all the half a million people living in Rubaga Division are poor and yet not all of them spend no more than Shs 2,000 per day – incidentally I spend almost Shs 100,000 per day on airtime, fuel and other things, and there are many people in Rubaga like me. If you just assume that all of them spend just Shs 2,000 per day and you take 18 percent of VAT off that and you multiply it by the number of people in Rubaga and by 365 days, then you will find that not less than Shs 170 billion is collected in VAT only from Rubaga. But we get only Shs 1 billion to Rubaga Division. If you take out Shs 170 billion out of the people and give them back Shs 1 billion and want Rubaga Division to collect rubbish, and spray mosquitoes, and do roads, and do all that, with Shs 1 billion, then what do you expect? Is that not exploitation -(Interjections)- it is not hypothetical. This money is collected and it goes to the national coffers. Take your calculators and work it out. You will find that I am correct and I have done my research. 

Mr Speaker, we need to find a formula of giving to the people what they deserve. We must find a formula which gives through local governments more money than we give them. The reason that there is so much public outcry about the lack of service delivery is because very little money reaches the people. By the time all the money comes from the top downwards at every level, more than 75 percent is retained for administrative purposes, and by the time it reaches the people for service delivery, it is almost just 10 percent. If we want to be serious and give back to the people what they deserve, what they work for, and what they pay for, we must find a formula of giving back to the people through the local governments, at least 50 percent of what they send to the central treasury, and also empower them with enough authority to be able to use this money. 

We all know that where money is, jobs, good hospitals, good schools and a good life will be. So, if we send back to the people money, then there will be jobs and the multiplier effect will ensure that there is overall development in the country. 

For now, I have been round the country and the country is suffocated; all the money goes and stays in Kampala and whoever wants a good life or a good job or a good school has got to come to Kampala. That is why the rest of the country is poor. I call upon this House to address the disparity between the increased collection of taxes and the delivery of services. I thank you. 

4.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Picking from the Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance has provided some money – Shs 200 million – to the victims of the Mukura incident. In 1989, 87 people were locked up in a wagon and 39 of them died. In October 1989, the President of this country promised Shs 2 million as compensation to each family. In December 1989, Shs 800,000 was given to each family. It has taken 21 years for the government to realise that they need to pay the balance. It is a shame. This is an embarrassment for the government to take 21 years to pay the balance. If you divided the Shs 200 million by the 39 people –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much my honourable friend, for giving way. Whereas my honourable colleague has stated that 39 people died in that railway wagon, on record, I would like to say that 69 known cases actually died, and I am giving this information from an authoritative point of view because during the reburial of the remains of the 69, I worked as a civil servant in Kumi District, and I was among the team that was charged with the responsibility of organising the reburial of these remains. I constructed the monument at Mukura and so I think I come from an informed position. It was 69 as opposed to 39. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you hon. Amuriat. In addition to that, at that time it was also promised that on top of that monetary compensation, a bicycle, an ox-plough and a pair of oxen would be provided to each family. To date nothing has happened.

A library was promised to be built, but to date, the library is incomplete. Twenty years down the road, the library is incomplete. We were told that a commission of inquiry was instituted, but to date, the commanders of the 106th Battalion who were commandeering people at that time - of course some have died, but the rest - are still at large. 

In Kasilo County, thanks be to God, I would not be speaking here today. In Apapai Dispensary, five of us were picked to be put on firing squad. Three of my colleagues were tied on Muvule trees; I and one were pulled by Commander Kibuuka that, “We can leave these, but we must show the people of this place that if they support rebellion, this is what will befall them.” Three people were killed in front of over 2,000 people by firing squad in those Muvule trees. They were shot dead. They have never been compensated up to today, and I have been raising this matter.

In Kasilo Corner, the soldiers went to Kadungulu sub-county and rounded up people. They went to our home, took our family cows - 300 of them - and drove away with people. When they reached Kasilo Corner, they killed 17 people in cold blood. To date, no compensation has been made.

In Ogera Hill, three people were killed again by the soldiers and nothing has been done. When are those others going to be compensated?

We read in the papers, the President directing Ministry of Justice to compensate one elder from Karamoja whose cows were taken by the soldiers. When will the people of Teso, Kasilo and my family be compensated for the 300 cattle that the UDPF took? Not the Karimojong -(Interjections)- NRA. Captain Kibuuka who was leading the team -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague. The clarification I am seeking is actually from the office of the Attorney-General in regard to compensation. There are complaints that the people who go and try to seek compensation and continue to submit their claims are being turned away and they are being told that if they did not see compensation by 2001, you are not compensating them. We would like, for purposes of clarity, that the Attorney-General tells us the very up-to-date position. Can we still lodge in the claim for compensation with your ministry? 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. Those cases are so many. Actually, the majority of killings took place in Acholi. They are so many cases. Is there a Government policy to compensate these people or is it a matter of selecting a particular group when the rest are not being looked at? Is there a Government policy on this?

MR OKUPA: When these issues come up, it brings back the memories of what happened, and personally, for me who survived that incident of the firing squad. I also lost close relatives. One of the 17 people who were killed was a priest by the name of Okupa, who happened to be my uncle. So, when such matters are brought up, I suggest if you are not going to compensate, forget about it and we too shall forget about it. 

The issue of the road sector is so disappointing that despite all the trillions of shillings we are pumping into the road sector, it is still wanting. There is a stretch between Mbale and Kumi for which we allocate money every year and we have been told this road is going to be worked on, but it must be made motorable. Every financial year, money is budgeted, but the regional engineer based in Mbale, I think is just eating the money. I want the minister of works to take this matter seriously because the other stretch of Kumi to Soroti is fairly maintained and yet these are two regional engineers; they get money but why is this road in such a pathetic state? The road engineer based in Mbale is not doing service to the people of Eastern Uganda. In fact Tororo to Kumi is the worst road. It is in a bad state despite the money allocated. Hon. Engineer Byandala, you are chairman of this committee; you must take interest in this. We have travelled on this road and we have raised these matters, but people have closed their ears. 

The railway slips are being stolen and we are raising these matters but nothing is being done. The issue of RVR - we pumped money there. We have been pushing and we were told last year, in the last budget, that we were going to cancel the contract. What has happened to date? 

We went up to Nairobi to meet with our colleagues of the Works Committee in Nairobi, and in fact they are blaming Uganda that we are slow. We had organised for a joint meeting for the two committees from the Parliaments of Kenya and of Uganda, but when we were supposed to meet at the border, it was frustrated by the people who have interests. To date, it is less than 26 percent of the railway line that is operating. It is so disappointing and so frustrating for us to sit in this committee to raise the issues and a blind eye and deaf ear are turned to the recommendations that this Parliament approves.

The issue of air transport. I remember I laid documents here last year where ministry of finance put US$ 500 million in a company called Victoria Airlines. The minister of finance promised to come back here to explain to us what happened to that money. What happened to that Victoria Airlines? Where is it now, four or five years down the road?

The issue of the market for our produce; hon. Alice Alaso alluded to it that a lot of produce is lying idle. A lot of maize is being produced. There was a bumper harvest this year, but our farmers are being exploited by middle men who go and buy a kilo of maize at Shs 150, yet you have to buy a kilo of posho at Shs 1,500. We passed a law here on warehousing and we also passed money. Where are the warehouses to help our local farmers with storage to provide for the Buffer Stocks Stabilisation Fund? Where is it? What happened to it? We need answers to this.

Tourism; Kalangala is an area that has a very huge potential for tourism. During the Speakers’ Conference, we took delegates to Kalangala. They were amazed at the potential that they saw in Kalangala, but the infrastructure - that is a whole district. When will Kalangala get tarmac in order for us to improve our revenues through tourism in this country? In this budget, I was waiting to hear that Kalangala-Ssese is going to be tarmacked and that tourism is going to be improved, but we never saw and we missed the opportunities. “Hon. Kalangala” is now about to leave this Parliament without having what she has been longing for in Kalangala, and without it being implemented. I think we must take it seriously and improve on the tourist potential that we have in this country.

Mr Speaker, as of now, I beg to submit. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Ogwal and then hon. Amuriat.

4.58
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on the budget of this year. I have only two points to raise. First of all, the theme of the budget is very interesting. It talks about prioritising areas that will accelerate economic growth. I would want to know how the government is focusing on those areas of priority that would accelerate growth.

Looking at the budget itself, you find that areas that should have received enough attention have actually been ignored and I am surprised that the ministry of finance or the minister of finance talks about the National Development Plan. This National Development Plan, where does it come from? Has it ever been debated by this Parliament? Do we understand the priority? Do we know the key indicators that are going to drive the economy forward? This Parliament has never had an opportunity to discuss the National Development Plan. We have not discussed it, but I know it is now being used as the bible for development of this country, and this is some kind of forgery -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal for giving way. Last week, the same issue was raised and the Deputy Speaker reminded the Committee on National Economy that they have the document and they should come and report to the House so that we can discuss it.

MRS OGWAL: I think —(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for giving way. It is a legal requirement that the national plan be brought to the House for debate and passing. As far as I am concerned, a few months ago, His Excellency the President went to one of the hotels in town and launched this plan. Actually to me, this was illegal. In fact, the President indulged in illegalities.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not sail in our weaknesses. The document was brought to us; it was the failure of the committee to consider this document in time and now we are blaming other people. We should blame ourselves. Let the committee explain why it did not consider it. It was with us for some time. Let us not exploit this. Let us blame ourselves that we did not do things in time, but the document was with us.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have benefitted from the information given to me. I was not in the House when the minister promised to bring the National Development Plan to Parliament. I think that is where it will derive its authority and power; that we can use a book of reference -

THE SPEAKER: The document was with the committee and that I know.

MRS OGWAL: That is okay. We are anxiously waiting for it to be brought to Parliament so that we can make contributions, and that is our concern, Mr Speaker.

I would have thought that Uganda, with the wealth of economists in the ministry of finance, should have guided us on those areas of priority that would boost production and growth. I think it was two weeks ago that I was able to look at the sketch of the national contribution to the GDP, and you find that 50 percent of services contribute to GDP, 25 percent comes from manufacturing and industry, and then only 15 or 16 percent from agriculture.

To me, this does not show the seriousness of the ministry to focus on areas that would boost production. Every time, wherever we politicians go, we say that agriculture is the backbone of the economy. How can it be the backbone of the economy when it is contributing 15 percent to the GDP? I think we really need to get serious, and the same sector is employing almost 85 percent of the population. I think this is where the ministry should have focused its development plan so that we know that at the end of the day, everybody has been touched in that plan. 

Right now, when I look at the economy of Uganda, it is like the Suharto scenario where 60 percent of the economy is concentrated in the pockets of 5 percent of the population. I think this is very serious, when we know that a big population of Uganda is still wallowing in poverty. It is one area where we need to focus.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether you come from a farming area. I am a farmer -

THE SPEAKER: Farming area? I come from the southern hemisphere. I pass the Equator and go to the southern hemisphere and it is a farming area, mama. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In our area in Northern Uganda, we really depend on agriculture and as politicians, last year we mobilised the population to grow maize instead of cotton because we felt that the population was being cheated through cotton production. We felt that maize could help in two ways. It would help to bring cash into their pockets and it would also help in feeding the family. But the price fell from Shs 600 to Shs 200 and in some areas to Shs 150 and the government did nothing about it. No reference to that matter whatsoever was made and yet we are being told that we should build silos. We are talking about food security. I mean, what is the point of preaching a gospel that you cannot practice? And this was a situation where farmers had grown food and in plenty. If we had a way of buying off this maize, processing it and storing it, it could help in the season when –(Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Ogwal, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the price of maize now in the North and up to Bunyoro, has dropped to Shs 100 per kilo. 

On Sunday, when I was coming back, I stopped at Bweyale, where many of our people are now settled, some foreigners have even constructed their own go-downs and they are buying all our maize at Shs 100, from Shs 600 last year, and early next year they will come round and sell it to the same people maybe at Shs 1,000 per kilo, and our Government is just looking on. It is a very sad situation. 

MR ONEK: Thank you for giving me space. I want to get clarification whether we should go back to a government run economy or free economy, because we are in a market economy where prices are dictated by the market. So, where does Government come in? This is something which we have to resolve as Parliament; should we become a government controlled economy whereby we start nationalising all these industries? We are in a free economy, so Government cannot take the blame for the low pricing in the market. Thank you. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am really surprised that a statement like that could come from an engineer and an economist in particular. One wonders that if you are talking about a free market economy, the laissez-faire, why then would we plan? Why are you telling us about the budget? Why are you telling us about strategic plans for acceleration of growth? I think, Mr Minister, you should just apologise. Your economics doesn’t work. You should refer to your teacher’s notes. 

There is one practical aspect where the government could have helped, particularly in Northern Uganda. When 16 or 17 or 20 tractors where given to the Acholi for the purpose of boosting production while leaving the camps, if those tractors were converted into ox-ploughs and oxen, every household would have been given an ox-plough and two animals, and every household would have produced food for itself. This is a practical thing. You do not need to go into an economics class to learn this. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Hon. Cecilia, I am one year and some months in the Office of the Prime Minister, but I have read both documents, NUSAF I and NUSAF II and this PRDP. The review of NUSAF I and NUSAF II indicated that the communities were not involved. So, in PRDP now, the communities are the ones that decide on activities to be financed, and work plans are developed from the sub-county and sent to the district for us to release the money to the Chief Administrative Officer. 

Some areas have identified oxen ploughs as a priority and we have actually distributed them. A number of them have been distributed in Lango sub-region. In Northern Uganda, people decided that because of the time they spent in the camps, it would be easier to mass produce using tractors, but they also have the option of having oxen ploughs. So, it is not us dictating what people should be given, but it is the people who are demanding. 

MS AOL: Thank you. I would like to give information that Acholis did not receive those tractors. The tractors were given to commercial farmers and a few people like the RDC Ochora and the ministers. So, our people are still grappling and tilling using hand hoes. Thank you. 

MR ONEK: There is so far only one minister from Acholi and that is me. I have not benefited from any tractor; and I am not a farmer of that magnitude. So, really, it is not good to misinform this House and be a cheap populist. Is she really in order to misinform this House? 

THE SPEAKER: I think we are going to investigate these allegations and find out more, but the point has been made. Move to another point.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, it is important that these honourable members wait for their opportunity to contribute. Their points are very interesting and some of them are even getting annoyed and it is very rare to see hon. Onek annoyed. (Laughter) 

What you have told us that rural people or the districts are now supposed to design their own plans of boosting production is good information. I would like to advise that Government is supposed to provide the guiding principle so that all other districts can take that principle and maybe modify it. But for us to say that we just send the money and let the district decide, and we know -(Ms Mukwaya rose_)- wait for your opportunity because I have really –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: My eldest sister should really not distort information. With all due respect, the Office of the Prime Minister does a review every six months. Recently, we had a review of PRDP and only six Members of Parliament from the 44 beneficiary districts turned up. 

Your chairperson is hon. Okot Ogong. We had video coverage and we covered Karamoja, Lango, Acholi, Mbale – hon. Okot Ogong was there. He had a sub-committee which went reviewing physically. They presented their report. 

So, I would really appeal to you, senior citizens, to attend –(Interjections)- no, no, no! We have been inviting you and it is on record. Only six MPs turned up. Hon. Okot Ogong visited and gave us feedback. 

I want you to take keen interest in your district - all the districts that are participating in PRDP. I will deliver both the video and hon. Okot-Ogong’s report to this House for distribution.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we move from this point and discuss other issues because you will never agree with each other? Why don’t we move to another point?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, as you recall, I had asked the Prime Minister for an update on the PRDP and I used to be very regular whenever I got an invitation, but as you know, there are selected Members of Parliament (two per region) that represent the rest of us in PRDP and sometimes that information is not adequate. That is why I was pursuing a resolution of this House way back, which requested the Prime Minister to continuously update the House so that we all benefit. If you take six of us to a workshop, the rest of us may not get that information and I think I am really entitled to this information. Don’t look at me like that; I am serious about PRDP.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for the information. I didn’t know that everybody is interested in farming. Maybe I should now change the topic. (Laughter) This matter is very important particularly in areas where poverty is still biting very deep. It is important that we design a method that will make an impact on the welfare and lives of the people we are targeting. 

I am just giving you free information that instead of providing us with a tractor - and you know seasons are static; once it is a season for planting, it is a season for planting. You have 10 or 20 tractors, but they will only benefit 20 or 40 people. What about the other farmers? It will not make an impact, but if you give an ox-plough per household, everybody will be engaged in production. That is a very simple and practical approach to boosting production, and we look at it as a bottom-up approach and of course the government should also be ready to buy off the products and make sure that they get good markets for the crops. I think that is one of the things that the government should focus on.

I am surprised that extension services –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. You don’t have to labour much about the ox-ploughs and the oxen. That decision has already been made and a committee is in place. I would like to inform this House that the MPs from the Lango, Acholi and Teso sub-regions were invited for a meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office to operationalise this decision of providing ox-ploughs and oxen to the farmers, but to the disappointment of Government; the MPs did not turn up. They were only two and this was last month.

So, the main information is that the decision has been made and I want to plead with my colleagues to please get interested in these programmes.

MRS OGWAL: I think this information has sunk that MPs have been invited -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope this is an on-going programme and any programme can be reviewed. I would, therefore, appeal to the stakeholders, especially Members of Parliament from the affected areas, to have a meeting with those concerned with the Prime Minister’s Office, to look through what has gone on, review and make appropriate recommendations, which I hope can be followed. I think that will be a solution because we may not be able to decide which way forward here, but in a smaller meeting with those stakeholders, you will be able to reach an understanding and decision that will help the people in the area. What we are interested in is that people benefit from what is being done there. I, therefore, suggest to you that as soon as possible, you hold a meeting to discuss the details about this programme.

MRS OGWAL: I think it is important to know that this is a national programme. We should not only target people from the North or the affected people. I believe that even the Baganda want to know how the poverty situation in Northern Uganda is being addressed, and so if you only target the “northerners”, it is not right. This is a national programme and everybody is interested. I believe people from the South and West are very concerned about what has been happening. Next time, call all of us and whoever is interested, and if the “northerners” don’t turn up, let the “westerners” and “southerners” make decisions on their behalf. I will be very happy about it.

THE SPEAKER: Then what we can say is, that should be the approach, but I think those who are in the area are more knowledgeable about the requirements. However, if you want it to be considered, then we can say, let the appropriate committees of Parliament handle the matter, but I think the input of people from those districts is very crucial. There is the chairman here.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am talking here as the Chairman of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. We have had a number of meetings with Members of Parliament from that region and we have made a number of recommendations to Government.

In 2009, Government agreed to spend Shs 100 billion and this was distributed to all the districts. The implementation was clearly stipulated. We invited all Members of Parliament, and as chairman, we have been sending messages informing Members to go to their districts and monitor the implementation of PRDP. I have also asked Members of Parliament for each and every constituency to bring a report to our office about the implementation of PRDP because I don’t want lamentation on the Floor of Parliament. I want results to come; where we have problems, each Member of Parliament should stipulate these.

Recently, together with some Members of Parliament, we toured some four districts to sample the implementation of PRDP. I am glad to inform you that as per now, the implementation is going on very well. We went to Kitgum with video clips and reports. We also had a meeting in Lira where all chairpersons and CAOs were represented. They presented their reports and actually Dokolo scored 97 percent, Oyam scored 92 percent and Lango region was the best in the implementation of PRDP, followed by Teso and other sub-regions.

Generally, the implementation is over 85 percent and the release of money is more than 97 percent. The balance is only Shs 500 million, which was not released by Government. There are challenges and in our report; we presented to the Prime Minister and Government the challenges that we got when we went on the field trip, and we hope that Government will try to rectify those challenges. All in all, let us all work together for the benefit of our people.

I am happy that Members of Parliament from the Greater North are working hard because when we went, they all worked. I believe PRDP will succeed. 

The other programme about animal traction will be launched by the President. He has agreed that he is going to supply ox-ploughs and oxen in the North. Money has already been got for this and implementation is on. I went for that meeting in the Office of the Prime Minister, only two of us turned up. One minister made a statement that annoyed me so much. He said that by going for that meeting, he was doing charity. I do not want to back-bite anybody, that minister was hon. Kajara. 

MRS OGWAL: I want to thank Members for the information that we did not even have. I must say that the distribution of animals is already being mismanaged. There was communication from the Office of the Prime Minister that the minister would take animals to Dokolo, which is my district, and I was monitoring to see which groups would benefit. While the district was compiling the list of the beneficiaries, the Office of the Prime Minister came with their own list. They told the chairman not to bother with compiling a list because they had their own. They insisted that they wanted two people to be in attendance, and that was the CAO and the RDC, even the district chairman was not mentioned anywhere. 

We should include some money for extension services in the budget. This is the only way farmers can be exposed to modern ways of farming, and I have seen that there is no provision for such in the new estimates. This shows that the budget is not anchored on the theme of strategic planning for accelerating growth. 

There is one thing that hurt the district of Dokolo very much. There has been a deduction in the budget for water and sanitation. The ministry of finance said that this was because of the new districts. When districts were being increased, we were told that there was budgetary provision for them, but we are now being burdened with carrying the new comers. Dokolo has been affected by Kony’s insurgency and if there is no supply of clean water, then health will be badly affected. The ministry should address the issue of clean water supply in rural areas.

When we celebrate increased revenue collection, we should also look at how much is spent collecting the money. We might find that we are spending more than we are collecting.

5.31
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I wish to thank his Excellency the President of this country for presenting the budget in accordance with the Constitution.

The President stated that since 2006, the economy has been registering an 8.4 percent growth rate. Sometimes I wonder what creature is between the population of Uganda and this economic growth. I would have expected that this growth would be seen in the improvement of lives of the citizens of this country. I would have expected that we would have better education from primary to university level, health units overflowing with drugs, improvement in agricultural production, better road infrastructure and better security. But unfortunately, when you compare our economic growth to that of other nations such as Japan whose growth is much lower than ours, you can see that Japan is better because it has changed the lives of Japanese. I would like to challenge the Government to show us in practical terms where this 8.4 percent can be found. 

I have five points that I would like to contribute towards. The first one is on education, and I want to address myself to Universal Primary Education, which was introduced by the Movement Government. I would like to register my disappointment with the low quality of UPE, not because the population does not support this government programme, but because Government is not putting enough into the promotion of quality education at primary level.

For example, the capitation grant to every pupil in primary school is in the range of about Shs 4,800 per year. You would like to call this free education, but when you distribute these capitation grants over nine months, simple arithmetic will suggest that from the nine months of the three terms of the year the school calendar contains, this narrows down to Shs 533 per month. This scaled down, would reduce it to Shs 20 per day per pupil to study. This is scandalous! What can Shs 20 do in this country today? It can do nothing, and we still claim we are offering a free educational service to the population. I would like to challenge Government to offer an explanation as to what this Shs 20 per day per pupil would actually buy for the benefit of the school. 

I would like to further challenge Government, and I do not see a deliberate attempt made in this budget, to provide housing for school teachers. I do not know whether the other constituencies are as affected as my constituency. I will tell you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, that today in this country, we have teachers who have to ride over 10 kilometres from their homes to get to their place of work, and we claim that we are offering quality education. I am sure that even you who drive from your houses to Parliament feel a sense of exhaustion when you get to this House. So, what kind of exhaustion will such a teacher be facing? I think Government needs to do better in this area. We require that Government provides housing and not the community. The community has now been condemned to that level of scratching through their meagre resources to provide housing for the teachers, which is often sub-standard, but to them something is better than nothing.

On education, I would like to hail Government for providing salary enhancement to scientists in a bid to promote science technology innovations. However, I would also hasten to say that I am disappointed with the level at which science is being taught, especially in secondary schools and universities. Science cannot effectively be taught without a well furnished laboratory. In many secondary schools in this country, a science laboratory is a dream; it is a mirage – something that Government chooses to give hope that it would come one day, but as we get closer to that targeted time, we never get there. 

Additionally, if you went to universities today, especially to the science-related faculties like the faculty I went to many years ago in Makerere University, they are carcasses. If you went today to Makerere University, what you would see is a carcass of what existed a number of years ago in the faculty that I was trained in. I went to the Faculty of Technology at Makerere recently and I saw for myself the world of a difference that exists between my times and this time when we claim we would like to emphasise science –(Interjection)- Can I just wind up, Mr Speaker, because it looks like my 10 minutes have been exhausted. Was it information?

THE SPEAKER: Wind up.

MR AMURIAT: I will now contribute on just one final point, and this relates to what hon. Okupa raised before – PRDP. In my understanding, PRDP was affirmative action to try to assist the districts that suffered from war to come up to the level of those that were in relative peace during that time. Unfortunately, it has been interpreted by some sections of Government to mean giving back to the people what they lost. 

In Teso, for example, we lost a lot of lives. The areas hon. Okupa has cited are just a tip of the iceberg. You could talk about Mukura, Ogeyi, Akisim, Apal-Itunga, Serere Corner – all these places were scenes of brutality that was meted out to the people of Teso. Many people lost their lives and they have never been compensated. We lost our cattle, sheep and all sorts of livestock, and the people have not been compensated for this. The Shs 200 million – well, we are grateful for it, but I think it serves as a mockery to the people of Teso. 

I would like to call on Government to institute a commission of inquiry into what exactly happened in Teso, and to quantify the level of loss that we suffer as a people in that region, and also to make deliberate arrangements to systematically compensate the people of Teso. Otherwise, this will continue being an issue even during the time of elections; our people will never forget what they lost. We are poor today, not because we are a lazy population or because we are people who do not work hard. Indeed we were among the richest tribes of this country before the advent of the NRM government. 

I would like to end at that point, Mr Speaker, by thanking you again and asking Government that since it has offered to pay LCs Shs 120,000 per year, when are you going to pay their arrears? The LCIs have been working all these many years; you recognise their contribution towards the development of this country, towards peace in this country, but you are just beginning to think this is the time to pay them Shs 120,000 per year. It is not even per month, if you think you have misheard, it was Shs 120,000 a year. I thank you very much.   

5.44
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum):  I thank you for the opportunity. I would also like to contribute to this Budget Speech. 

First of all, I wanted to give my colleague who has just left the Floor some information, but time caught up with him. I just wanted to say that as much as we are talking about science and technology, efforts by Government for them to be introduced in this country as core to our development - Kyambogo University, a Government university, as we talk right now, does not have Internet and enough computers. The leadership there came to me and I brought them to the Minister of ICT to get this problem solved. It is really a shame that a government university like Kyambogo, which is within reach, is not connected. How then do they do their research as students? They do not have enough computers and it is a shame. Government, please take up from there. 

I would like to take note of the following issues from the Budget Speech: 

The issue of environment; the environmental issue has not been a priority in so many speeches and plans in this country. It gives me a lot of pain when I see that the country we are living in is under great threat with climate change. We are expected as a country to prepare ourselves and give a deserving agency to address this problem, but I did not see this agency being put forth in the Budget Speech. 

As we talk, we do not have a policy for climate change as a country which is addressed a lot globally. As we speak now, we have put in more effort in finding out how they address the issue of climate change - even last week we, the Members of Parliament, interacted with colleagues on the continent - but it seems we do not bring back home what we learn. We have made so many trips abroad, but as Parliament, as the people’s representatives, we do not have the information on how to track climate change. There is no official update on climate change. This has put the country in darkness as far as climate change is concerned. 
 
The climate change unit in the office of the minister and the Parliamentary Climate Change Fora have no direct obligation to come and report to this House and update us on how we are handling the issue of climate change. Therefore, I request that the minister be caused to give us periodical updates on how we are handling the issue of climate change, because it is a real danger to this country. The Members seated here have to send the message to our people on how to mitigate climate change. We have been lacking in this. We would make trips abroad, but we do not bring reports back to this Parliament. So, I challenge the Government to do this as an obligation, rather than to wait to see people die and then come in to act. 
 
Secondly, degradation of the environment has also tremendously increased and gone unabated. As much as we all know the dangers of degrading our environment, the effort that both the Government and the citizens have to undertake to ensure that we make our environment a better place to live in, has been left to waste and no one seems to care. The institution NEMA, which has the mandate to oversee the implementation on how to save our motherland, is incapacitated. As I speak now, a lot has been abandoned. 

I want to give an example of how the wetlands of this country are being degraded without anybody being brought to book, and it is the big shots of this country that degrade our environment without shame. I have a document that has been presented to me as the Shadow Minister of Water and Environment to help in this situation. We have a big shot in this country by the name of John Toto who seems to be the proprietor of Fuelex Petrol Station. He has degraded the wetlands by building in the Nakawa Ntinda industrial area - he fenced off that area – and he has been given soldiers to guard that construction. National Environment Management Authority has made efforts to stop him and have written two files to that effect, but he is untouchable. The ministers, including the Minister of Water and Environment, cannot touch this person. As if that is not bad enough, he went to Kansanga and fenced off the wetland to build a petrol station. 
 
We already noted that this country has too many mushrooming petrol stations and they are dangerous to our communities because they are unplanned. We agreed that something has to be done about it. As if that is not bad enough, I was told that this proprietor even imports his fuel illegally and that is why he sells at a cheaper price. I used to take fuel at his petrol station, but now I think we should blacklist such people. 
 
I request the Minister of Security in conjunction with the Minister of Energy to get this untouchable degrader of our wetlands, who is building petrol stations with guns. Nobody is able – even the Minister of Water and Environment has not been able - to bring this gentleman to book. National Environment Management Authority surrendered to him and this country cannot just look at this person as he degrades our wetlands. I want the minister to get to the root of this problem and bring a report for us to take action on this gentleman. Otherwise, these are the people who are degrading out environment. 
 
In the same vein, I am very disappointed in the Budget Speech of this year; last year, we made it clear that we do not need a certain amount of polythene bags commonly referred to as kavera. The committee of natural resources agreed that we do not need a certain amount of polythene bag, that is the thin type, let alone the classified ones which are exceptional. As we speak, that has not been implemented and the budget of this year has not alluded to it. I am wondering, is Government going to make a budget provision and not implement it? Does that make sense? 

We would like to see the ban on polythene bags, commonly known as kavera, take effect. We have told the Minister of Water and Environment that approval of her budget is tagged to implementation of the polythene bag ban. Otherwise, we are going to withhold the ministry’s budget as the Committee of Natural Resources -(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay, only two minutes more.
 
MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to make a comment on water harvesting in this country. This is an issue which Government should take as priority. You are going to take a few water tanks to institutions yet the households need this water badly. We have plenty of water at certain periods. 

I made a suggestion in my alternative policy statement last year, that we could integrate this water harvesting plan with the building plan in the country - whoever wants to build should make a provision. The engineers are here, they can help make this practical. We can even have traditional pots provided so that households harvest water rather than waiting for institutional provision. 
 
Lastly, I want to tell the House that there is a lot of wastage by Government which has to be unearthed. My first job was with Uganda Fisheries Enterprises Ltd (UFEL) in Masese, and I was the depot manager in Kamuli, Luwero and Mbale. As I talk right now, the properties of UFEL which were taken over by the ministry, like the centre where I last worked, remained closed when I left. When you are going towards the North from Luweero, there is a centre which, when I left as a manager, has never opened. That was 1993. The ministry and the government should account for this wastage. 

It is not only this; I am mentioning this as a particular issue which has to be addressed and maybe a report be brought, but we are also building PIDA and vehicles in the ministries are being wasted. We are already passing budgets when that wastage is not being accounted for. (Member timed out.)  

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, it is a simple procedure. I would like to request the previous speaker to lay on the Table the files she has been waving for Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to surrender them?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, in my submission I said I have received documents for me to go through. I was giving information to Parliament. I have to scrutinise them and if the House wants the details, I promise probably next week I can lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, get us a photocopy.

MS ANYWAR: I have no problem with that.

THE SPEAKER: To enable investigations, get us a photocopy.

MS ANYWAR: Yes. Mr Speaker, because we have to save our mother country; there is no secret about this. I will bring photocopies of the communication of this particular untouchable John Toto of Fuelex and lay them.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Agreed

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, the NEMA law provides for an inter-ministerial committee comprising 11 ministries and this committee has been working. So, the information my colleague is raising is not new. Actually, the man who put up that petrol station was stopped and the matter is before court. We secured, using the Attorney-General, a court injunction stopping him from proceeding. So, Government is aware and we are handling the matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You do the adjustment.

5.59
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament, I salute you. I would like to make a contribution on the issue of physical planning. 

We have a problem in our urban centres which are coming up. I came back from West Nile after taking off from Arua this morning. As I was moving throughout the urban centres of West Nile, I discovered that people had a lot of problems in the areas of planning settlements, institutions and infrastructure, particularly roads. The National Planning Authority, which has recently been talked about, and particularly Uganda National Roads Authority, need to be empowered and encouraged to spread their work to the rural areas and to the urban centres which are coming up. 

Along the road, I could see some good work being done by Uganda National Roads Authority in marking the road reserves. That is a good sign, but Uganda National Roads Authority has a limitation in the sense that they work on national roads, but these are not the only types of roads we have in Uganda. There are feeder roads, which are the responsibility of the district local government; there are also the community access roads, which are under the sub-counties. What is being done on the national roads also needs to be done on the small roads - the feeder roads and community access roads.

Governance, especially in the area of physical planning, needs to be given a lot of attention. Today the population of Arua town has increased, but if you look at the roads, especially the Main Street Adumi Road, and you see some kind of a jam coming, you ask yourself, “Where are we as a Government?” There was forceful creation of a road within Arua Municipality, I think, last year. It created a row between the RDC and the municipal authorities yet the road was necessary. It had to involve a lot of destruction of houses. It was not a good sign of necessity versus destruction. 

With this, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Local Government to do the following: We have new districts which have been created in rural areas. These new districts and their urban centres need to be helped by giving them a model of a plan, for example, how the town should be planned, where the settlements should be, the roads, the road reserves and the institutions. If it is possible, let us extend the physical plans to our rural areas. 

As an example of a rural area, I want to give you Obongi’s problem, how we attempted to solve it and how we were faced with obstacles. In one of the Obongi days, especially the Obongi day of 2006, the people of Obongi sat for a three-day conference and talked about their problems. One of the issues they handled was how the physical planning of Obongi should be handled, which the local government of Moyo had failed to do for them. 

After a long time, Obongi is not yet a town council, it is not yet a town board, but people with minds, people with ideas, came up and hired a private consultant who was then working for the Lutheran World Federation. People contributed money to produce something to guide the people as a physical plan for the town. It was produced from the same source in Entebbe, but through a private consultant. Unfortunately, instead of the district local government of Moyo coming to advise, coming to support a good local initiative which had never been done even for the sake of the district itself, they came down to fight it. They came down to distort it. 

I foresaw all this as a Member of Parliament and as a steward of development. The population is increasing; if you do not show the people where the road should pass, how the piped water would pass if they got it, then there will be a mess in future. When Government gave us a pilot project of piped water, they used the same plan which we made locally, which was rejected by the district of Moyo. Therefore, I would like to appeal that the rural people should be supported, especially the arms of governance there, the LCs. 

Unfortunately, in this House, we forget that much of the governance which is fused in terms of the Executive, the Judiciary and even the Legislature, in the eyes of LCIs, is not handled properly. Can you imagine that this regime of ours is ending without a corresponding LCI? Local council elections were not conducted. When it comes to education, planning and support for training on how the LCIs can participate in the planning of their settlements and their roads, Government does not support them in that. I would like to appeal that we strengthen the LCIs by not giving them only Shs 120,000 per year, but giving them knowledge and skills on demand in their area of responsibility, especially physical planning.

I thank Uganda National Roads Authority for the work they have done for us, especially in demarcating road reserves. I would like to appeal to them to extend their hands to the feeder roads, to the community access roads, by giving knowledge of the standard size of a road - how big should it be?   

Secondly, there is this issue of Government making a good plan, amusing people temporarily and then not implementing. Obongi has been promised a ferry; it was there in the previous year’s budget, it is there in this year’s budget again, but it has never been delivered. I would like to remind Government that we have not forgotten about the ferry that was pledged and appeared in the budget. 

We gave land for construction of the necessary landing sites and facilities for the Uganda National Roads Authority, but we have not seen any construction taking place there. On our part, in Obongi we have tried to be ahead, but Government is not coming correspondingly, especially with guidelines such as “do this or do that” and giving the technical knowledge.

I appeal to the government, particularly Uganda National Roads Authority and the Ministry of Works, to help the people of Obongi to improve the infrastructure there. So far, I am happy to report to this House that something has been done about the terrible Moyo-Obongi Road. Even the increased rains of this month have not created the same menace of floods as they used to be in the past, though few areas still need to be improved.

Government put in the budgets of several financial years a bridge called Kia Kia Bridge on River Inyau, linking Obongi, Rhino Camp and Pakwach Road. This bridge has been appearing and disappearing from the budget. This time, it has appeared again. I wonder whether it is not going to disappear. 

I appeal to Government that once you have included something as a plan on the budget, implement it so that next year we go and talk about something new. We should not mark time on the same thing all the time; for example, the people of West Nile have been marking time on the issue of power. My senior brother there, before he was shifted to another, was mentioning Nyagak, Nyagak and every time they would give a deadline that, this month, next month it is going to be on. You then wait for the month and you wait for the date until it passes. The year also passes and another financial year comes and goes. For how long are we going to be on the same issue? Are there no other problems to handle?

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, hon. Fungaroo, for giving me an opportunity. As Government, we have started to build Nyagak Power Station. The contractor who had been given that work failed us and that is the reason why it delayed. However, it is now reinvigorated and it is going to be done. By December 2010/January 2011 we should have Nyagak on.

Secondly, for West Nile, because Nyagak Power Station is only 1.5 MW capacity we have gone ahead to requisition for thermal power generation to be added on Nyagak and to be stationed in Pakwach. So, we are going to extend power from Pakwach up to Nebbi, Arua, Yumbe, Koboko and Raba because Nyagak will not be sufficient. The thermal generation in Pakwach is in full gear. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you, hon. Fungaroo. The issue of involving UNRA is a good idea, but as you know, the Physical Planning Bill which was passed guided that the local authorities – the urban councils - are supposed to do their own planning. I think the difficulty we are getting is that some of those local authorities do not have that capacity, but that problem can be solved through a kind of framework.

Secondly, the Obongi ferry is now under the procurement stage, and it is expected that around October/November, you will have that ferry. The Kia Kia Bridge was affected by the overall Badia project. The costs went extremely high and there were also problems with the bank. Of course, I do admit that there was some bit of problem from our side, but recently the contractors went to the site and it is expected that by September, the construction will start. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for this information. Hon. Prime Minister, I am amused temporarily -(Laughter)– by this information that has been provided. As history shows, when we near an election season like this, Government becomes very active and very sweet in talking, but when time passes, you find that everything cools down and goes back to zero. I hope that we are not going back to the vicious cycle of pleasing and disappointing people by making promises without delivering them. For the time being, I am happy with the update. 

Lastly, West Nile has been in a state of arrested potential of development and growth. We have markets in the neighbouring DRC and Southern Sudan, but the development of economic infrastructure in terms of roads, railway, air transport - like airfields - and power, has been holding us back. I would like, therefore, to appeal to Government and people of goodwill towards West Nile, that what has been initiated should be completed on time so that we can also fight to catch up with the rest of the country and the world in terms of development. We have potential, but it has been retarded just because the infrastructure is lacking. The people -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members, for the contributions. I think we have made some progress and this debate should conclude tomorrow. I ask the Minister of Finance to come prepared to wind up the debate. I know tomorrow is a Wednesday, Cabinet Day, but I am appealing to you, the Leader of Government Business - the Prime Minister - that you be here by 2.30 p.m. so that we start at 2.30 p.m. and conclude this debate and go to the supply of the money.

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your permission, I would like to lay the certificate of financial implications of Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2010.

THE SPEAKER: Now, the Bill has received the First Reading. It stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequent report to the House. 

Hon. Members, once again I thank you for your time and commitment. I am very happy that you sat here for all this time and made contributions. Let us do the same tomorrow. Please try to counsel others who have not been able to come -(Laughter)– so that they come tomorrow and we conclude this general debate and then do business. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. prompt to continue with the debate.

(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 August 2010 at 2.30 p.m.)


