Monday, 16 August 2010

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and thank the committees for the work they have been doing; but I want to urge them to sign the reports. I understand the reports are ready but they require signatures. If we fail to get the signatures, I may be forced to request for your consent to lay them without signatures because we are getting into a bit of trouble. That is why I am urging members to come and sign the reports so that we complete the budget process. 

Secondly, I want you to join me in welcoming the children and teachers of St Cecilia Boarding School from Rakai District. They are up there in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.10
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I rise on a matter of national importance and this is to do with the state of affairs at the Cancer Institute of Mulago Hospital. As you may have read in the Monitor newspaper of yesterday, the description of the state of affairs in this institute is alarming. It is reported that there is acute shortage of drugs in the hospital, particularly in this institute. 

I visited this institute about three weeks ago and I saw helpless members of staff, helpless attendants and very desperate patients. It is reported that in the recent past, 250 people have died and in the words of Dr Jackson Oryem, the director of this institute, the rate of death is very alarming. It is not the first time this matter is coming to this House; it is a matter that has persistently come here and despite consistent promises from Government to remedy the situation in this institute, nothing much has been done. 

I am made to understand that because of the acute shortage of drugs, patients have to buy the drugs from outside the institute. Ordinarily, a single dose would cost Shs 93,000. Currently, because they have to buy drugs from outside, they have got to pay Shs 450,000 and this treatment goes over a period of 10 days. And so, I would like us to place ourselves in the position of a poor peasant in this country, who must pay Shs 4.5 million within a period of 10 days. I think as a country –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Amuriat and I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to confirm what hon. Amuriat has just stated here and to also give information. I have a lady in the hospital by the names of Cecilia, a wife to Mr Ochola, who comes from Pingere sub-county in Kasilo county. I have been personally responsible for buying the drugs outside Mulago Hospital. So, the figure quoted by Eng. Amuriat here is the correct figure. I have been supporting this family; they have been in the hospital for two months. They were discharged last Wednesday and I asked my driver to drop them home. Yesterday, I was in Kasilo and I passed by to check on them because they are supposed to come back on the 5th of next month. If a patient cannot afford to raise that money, then definitely, the person will die. 

Most of the people who are affected in this hospital are women. So, I think Government must take it seriously and ensure that the drugs that can sustain these patients in the hospital are availed to them. Otherwise, the number of people who are going to die in the hospital because they cannot afford treatment is going to increase. And even if it were one or two people dying, I think it is the responsibility of the government to ensure that drugs are available. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving that information. It is known that the prevalence of cancer in our country is on the rise and many people actually move with this disease unknowingly. You might be surprised that some of us seated in this House may be victims of cancer without knowing. The ping-pong game continues between the National Medical Stores and the PPDA. Whereas the National Medical Stores has been provided with the necessary funding and is also given the responsibility of providing drugs, not only at the cancer institute but also to the various health units in this country, it is failing in its duty and the excuse it gives is that there are procurement procedures that are entrenched in the law that the PPDA would like them to follow. Madam Speaker, it is this House that makes laws and it is this House that is also charged with the responsibility of amending those laws. I think it would be irresponsible of us sitting here and deliberating on behalf of this country, and yet not be sensitive to the plight of the innocent people of this country. I would like to remind this House that a majority of the people that I saw sick in the hospital in this cancer institute are children and if you are not brave, I would like to advise you not to go to this institute. 

I would like to challenge the government by saying that we cannot continue this way. I think we have to be sensitive to the pain of the people of this country, if we, first of all as Parliament, must be taken seriously and if Government must be taken seriously. I thought I would raise this concern because today it is those people who are lying sick in the institute and feeling the pain; tomorrow, it could be any of us. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.18
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising this concern touching on the Uganda Cancer Institute, but the general feeling in Uganda now is that the health sector is very sick. What hon. Amuriat has touched on is part of what - in fact, he has pre-empted part of my response to the ministerial policy statement. There are a lot of problems and in fact, we might have to even propose a national day of mourning for the health sector. Things are very bad. 

On the issue of the procurement of drugs, this Parliament recommended that we shift 70 percent of the credit line fund to National Medical Stores and 30 percent remains for Primary Health Care, but Government unilaterally decided to change it to 100 percent credit line. There are many things and I would actually be pre-empting my own report. But I have raised a number of concerns. 

Generally speaking, I think Government is not showing the will to help the majority of Ugandans attain health because whereas this Parliament has been making serious recommendations that we increase health sector budgeting, this financial year, the budget has nosedived and it is because of such anomalies in other sectors that we have even had these problems now affecting the health sector. A number of development partners have pulled out because of obvious reasons of corruption with impunity and Ugandans are the ones to suffer. The poor citizens suffer as the corrupt walk with their heads high and when the corrupt fall sick they get treatment abroad at the expense of the poor citizens of Uganda.

Unfortunately, I do not see my colleague, the Minister of Health here, but the situation is so bad that I just have to say, in simple summary, that the health sector in Uganda is very sick.

MR OCULA: Thank you hon. Epetait for giving way. Madam Speaker, I see on the Order Paper that there should be a report to discuss something about the health sector. I think this should be taken as a matter of urgency. Across the country, you find health units which are built and they are empty - no staff, no drugs.        

Today, I was even shocked to read in the papers that some 10 people have died in Busoga where you come from, from jiggers -(Interjections)- in the year 2010, people in Busoga are still dying of jiggers. In my village, I last saw people suffering from jiggers about 1979, but up to now people are dying of jiggers, and for us, life continues as if things are normal. I think this is not correct. So, the health sector should be checked properly. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I have even undertaken a certain survey on the health sector.  I will lay it on Table during the time of presentation of my response; a big report about the health sector and all districts are captured in that report - the non-functional health units, I have them by name. It would be of interest to Members to know how their districts are operating as far as health is concerned.

And when you go to the staffing levels, I also have them by name - health unit by health unit - the staffing level gaps in each of the districts in this country. This time, we want to open the health sector bare and let Government show cause why they should claim to be in charge when things are going wrong like this. I am sorry for being emotional, but it is the situation which has made me so. 

3.22
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Epetait and I are members of the Social Services Committee and what he raises are issues of great concern. Hon. Amuriat knows that this House took a decision to shift 70 percent of the resources to National Medical Stores and we went through all this process. Now, as a country, we must also bring out what is happening. For a long time - in fact, there is a week beginning 24 to 28 for the Cancer Institute and I am calling upon Members - letters have been sent - let us be there. For a long time and particularly in the last budget, we provided enough monies for procurement of cancer drugs. In fact, last time, we even put more and we insisted and the money is there because cancer drugs have been provided by the cancer institute free of charge. But there is a very serious problem which needs to be addressed beginning from this House.

When we brought this policy - first of all, this policy was totally opposed and the biggest opposer was Mulago Complex Hospital. For them, you remember Dr Epetait, they were not even remitting 10 percent of the money to National Medical Stores. So, there has been a very strong resistance because institutionally, people had become affiliated to certain pharmacies where they would order these drugs to come directly to the Cancer Institute at Mulago. So, when Parliament disenfranchised this, there was heavy resistance. 

Now to make matters worse, Government also moved a step further and moved this amount of money, as hon. Epetait has said, from 70 percent to 100 percent, after visiting and finding out the level of corruption and the illegal health units. They thought by having one control centre for the delivery of drugs, this would solve part of this problem. 

Now, two things happened.  One, I think the minister has to come here and explain because when we last met him, I was not around. It seems National Medical Stores can manage to procure, but when it comes to the issue of delivery and sorting out, they still have a challenge because they have not increased their manpower. 

Secondly, the institutions themselves are a bit reluctant because they are fighting this system. So, as Government - I am happy the Prime Minister is here - something must be done within the health sector to support this system because they want it to fail; that is true, and you can see what has happened to the Cancer Institute - this thing of saying that the drugs cannot be procured in time, these are emergency drugs. If we have an emergency situation like we had an emergency of some of these diseases, we approved money here and within two weeks the drugs were in this country. You remember when we approved Shs 4 billion. So, I do not see any problem. The PPDA Act can be - these are human beings - it can be dealt with. I think there is an administrative problem between the Ministry of Health, the National Medical Stores and the institutions which are concerned with procurement. 

My mayor rang me yesterday. There are no drugs in Mbarara. When I tried to ask about the delivery, I got confirmation that the last delivery was in May. This is August, May is a long time ago. When I rang the person who was supposed to be procuring, I said, “Read me the procurement number and the date and your order.” Up to now, since yesterday, he has not rang, which indicates to you that he might not have reordered for the replenishment of the drugs since the May delivery because they are infighting there for the resources which they have been sharing. 

So, the Prime Minister is here. You have to take action. It is immediate; it is not only cancer drugs; it is drugs throughout the country. There is a problem in the process of delivery, procurement and handling by the institutions that are concerned. It is urgent, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. You have to act and maybe ask the Minister of Health to come and explain or summon the team to come and make sure that these things are put right because very soon you will hear that there is a problem throughout the districts especially now that honourable members are campaigning and the hospitals are empty. It is such a terrible situation and it is going to cause us a problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I have a related matter but before I get to that I just wanted to – following the information that hon. Ocula raised, it is very embarrassing for us leaders at all levels that even up to today in this generation, Ugandans die of jiggers. I was personally touched last year in December. There was a documentary that followed the news on WBS showing how children and adults have been inflicted by jiggers in the Busoga region and it took a celebrity from Kenya to come and help the situation. 

Madam Speaker, you remember very well I came to your office after I had watched the documentary. I said, “this was embarrassing to us and something must be done.” You summoned the Minister of Health, we had a meeting, and that was not the first meeting. We found out from that meeting that you had earlier on summoned the ministry officials, Dr Okware and group; you had called the district leaders from Busoga, but it is so disturbing that up to today, the Ministry of Health has not done anything. The district officials have not done anything too. 

In this footage, children were being chased away by their colleagues at school – they cannot study because jiggers have eaten them even up to the lips. You need to look at this footage. We should be embarrassed as leaders. How can jiggers go up to the level of the lips? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. This is a very touching issue. In some areas, we last saw jiggers in the 70s, as one Member has said. But my concern is, much as it is true that Government should be seen to be addressing this issue from various levels of leadership, from the local level up to LC V to the Member of Parliament, I would wish to see somebody contributing by saying, “we have done this, we have sensitised Members to this extent, but Government has not come to our rescue.” What have we done as leaders? Much as this is a sensitive issue – we are talking about what Government has not done, but I think it is a collective responsibility for all of us to be seen to be sensitising our people on how to eliminate jiggers. Jiggers is something that can be eliminated without necessarily bringing it to the government level. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Education, let me tell you what I tried to do. I called the Minister of Health, in person, to come to my office with all his technical officers and I told him that there are jiggers in Budondo in Jinja and Nakibungulya in Kamuli District. I told him even about the schools. He never came back. When I called again they said Dr Okware was dealing with that. Dr Okware told me there is no treatment for jiggers. I have been on these fellows for I do not know how long, but before you eliminate, you must first treat. 

But anyway for your comfort, hon. Members, there is an initiative which we have started but we need support because the problem is big. There is something which is going to be done, but I am disappointed with the Minister of Health because I called him twice to my office with his officers and I even identified where the jigger infestation is in the region. I told him the schools and villages.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is to help take us back to the contribution of the Shadow Minister of Health. The House remembers that when hon. Lyomoki went to Mbale Referral Hospital, he was bundled up by the RDC, the Police, for just doing the simple work of trying to go and see what is there and to help improve things. 

That year when we were responding to the State of the Nation Address, we actually suggested that Parliament should institute a select committee to look at the condition of medical services in this country. 

Jiggers are merely a manifestation. This absence of drugs is not a physical thing that you cannot overcome. It is a manifestation of neglect, total disregard or abuse of the resources that are provided. Unless we deal with them comprehensively, these situations will continue to arise. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, when we have the debate on the health sector, perhaps we will probably close with some kind of a resolution.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am disappointed with the remarks of the Minister of State for Education. I had talked about the attempts the leaders had taken and the meetings, but I am also disappointed with him because schools had to close because of jiggers. What did the Ministry of Education do? Can you tell us what the Ministry of Education did? Let people not just jump up to talk because they want to defend Government. 

I started by saying leaders at all levels should have taken responsibility and helped those who had been attacked by jiggers. The problem is there. In some areas, people have done sensitisation, but we need those who have been affected to be treated. 

In the last Parliament, there was a village which had been attacked by jiggers in Kasilo in Katungulu sub-county. When I was told, I knew it would be an embarrassment to me, so I visited the area. I took the LC IIIs there, the LC V and the district health officer. I said, “We cannot allow this,” but they did not do anything. 

What I did next was to get private veterinary doctors who told me that they could apply a powder if I bought it and paid them. We did that. We went and sprayed. We also got liquid medicine and I paid them for the job. 

But that was an isolated case. If a problem is bigger than just two or three families, the Member of Parliament cannot do that; it needs a ministry and that is why I brought it to the attention of the minister to involve all the stakeholders in the ministry. They are the ones with appropriate resources for addressing the situation. They must do their work. Where they fail we should point it out rather than just jumping up to try and defend them. In fact, you should be apologetic to Ugandans for embarrassing us. 

Regarding the delivery of drugs – hon. Kigyagi talked about the corruption. The procurement law and regulations do provide for emergency procurement. There are four types of procurement provided. It caters for those emergencies. So, let people not hide under procurement, it is just corruption. 

On 29 December 2009, in Soroti, after I had moved in the health centres in Kasilo county, we found out that there were no drugs. I asked for the evidence of delivery or requisitions for drugs from National Medical Stores, but they hid them from me. I went to National Medical Stores to find out whether drugs had been delivered, but they told me that no requisitions had been made. The last time they had delivered was in the last quarter. Even those that had been delivered had not reached the health centres. I got a tip off on the drug shops where the drugs were ending up. We mounted an operation and arrested these people, but these people are out of Police custody and nothing has been done about it.

I informed the team in the President’s Office, which was constituted to address this matter, and nothing has been done. Even when I got a tip off that in one district drugs are sent from the district, purportedly heading to health centre B, but you find the drugs ending up in Soroti instead. We were given the registration number of the vehicle that does that, but I was also disappointed that when we planned to mount an operation, I was again let down. 

Some of us can provide information that would help us get these people but we must address the issue of corruption. Once people are caught, they should lose their jobs, but these people have even returned to their jobs. I am happy that I was able to chase those who were heading the health units in Kasilo. 

Back to the point that I was trying to raise of public concern, again, with regard to the Ministry of Health. There has been an outbreak of rabies in Teso and Lango region. This matter started last year in December. I went to Soroti and there were no drugs. I went to Joint Clinic in Soroti and met Dr Epodoi who happens to be an OB. He told me, “This child you are seeing here has been brought from Lira. There is no vaccine in the whole of Teso, Lango and Karamoja areas. Can you bring this to the attention of the minister?”

I brought it to the minister’s attention but up to date, there is nothing. Yesterday when I was addressing a rally in Kasilo, this matter was raised. The level of animals that have been attacked by rabies has increased and so many people have been bitten, but it is only Joint Clinic in Soroti, which can avail the vaccine at Shs 150,000. How many villagers can afford that?

Prime Minister, can you re-echo this to your colleague, the honourable minister? For how long will we continue like this? How can the whole region not have a vaccine for rabies?  Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

3.39
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, let me deal with hon. Amuriat’s issue, which is extremely important plus all the other issues, which have been discussed.

Today I visited the Cancer Institute and I grasped the problem; absence of cancer drugs for three months and I also learnt that people have died. So, I rang the minister. I tried hon. Malinga, but I couldn’t get him. You know people are busy campaigning, but I was able to get hon. Kakooza and I told him, “How can you allow this kind of situation to persist? The NMS must provide drugs as people are dying.”

He did inform me and made two points: One, that he is going to handle that matter; and second, that the procurement law is being amended. We set up a committee chaired by hon. Kategaya and it is amending the PPDA law and does include the problems which NMS is facing.

I said before we solve those problems, he should handle the issue of absence of cancer drugs and he did inform me that he is going to get in touch with the Permanent Secretary so that an interim solution can be found as we deal with larger issues, including the capacity of NMS to provide and distribute the drugs.

I think he should actually make a statement on Wednesday because by that time, he will have sorted it out. So, I require him to make a statement on Wednesday afternoon.

Regarding other issues of jiggers and so forth, I think he will have to respond to them; and rabies, which is a grave matter.

Hon. Okupa, in the past you were good enough to inform me in advance because I handle these things as you know. You remember there have been cases where honourable Members of Parliament have said, we have consulted or this matter has been reported to the sector minister, but it persists, and I have intervened to the satisfaction of honourable Members of Parliament. I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2010

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. (Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: I am just warning the Minister of Finance that in the Finance Act, 2009, certain provisions, which were supposed to be brought to this honourable House like exceptions to polythene materials that would be allowed to be manufactured have, up to now, never come. So, I want to put him on notice that I will move to block this Bill and I will also move to block the budget until this provision, which was put in the Finance Act, 2009 is complied with. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, those four Bills are statutory Bills. I commit them to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for urgent perusal and report back.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009-2010

(II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, last year we received the response of the Shadow Minister for Finance, of course after we had received the budget statement and the attendant issues. So, I think we now need to debate. I was hoping that the reports would be ready, but I don’t know how we are going to do it.

MR NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, our view was that the Ministry of Finance would like to respond to a number of issues raised so that we do not have a distorted discussion and he is ready. So many issues were raised and a number of them are incorrect. We request that you allow the minister to clarify them so that we have a debate where people have correct information.

3.48
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Morris Ogenga-Latigo): With due consideration to the request of the Prime Minister, the matter is for us to debate a motion on the budget. The very first response from the Shadow Minister for Finance is just like my response to the President’s State of the Nation Address. It does require the President to come and respond before the debate continues.

We believe that the best thing to do is to proceed and debate this matter and at the end, the Minister of Finance will make his clarification. Our Shadow Minister for Finance will also have to respond and we will sit here and wait for all that up to the end. I actually oppose the proposal by the Prime Minister.

3.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I raise this at the risk of being disciplined by my Leader of Opposition. I am asking for a slight variance. There was the issue of figures; I think it should be explained because as an economist I will be reluctant to debate given the figures that my Shadow Minister gave vis-à-vis what the Minister of Finance gave.

I do concur with my Shadow Minister for Finance, the figures that we, the Opposition read had sources, and they do not tally with what the Minister of Finance had.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that hon. Nankabirwa made a clarification.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The attempt that hon. Nankabirwa made was to clarify on the figures in the President’s statement. This was about tax revenue and the tax to GDP ratios from which we derived GDP and then GDP growth. That clearly showed that the figures that we were referring to were not correct. I heard that the minister made her explanation, but we had made our point and we did not want to press it any further.

What hon. Okupa is saying is different, because it is like hon. Okupa knows how the minister is going to respond and he sits on the Opposition side; I do not know whether he is not being compromised. Let us debate and then we will deal with that later. 

MR OKUPA: Leader of the Opposition, I will be the last person to be compromised. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I think you listened to the Budget Speech and the response; let us debate.

5.53
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): A budget is a statement of facts, if it is distributed by the other side; we need our minister to confirm. They are proposals from targeted revenues. We cannot stand here and respond to what the Opposition is saying without knowing the minister’s take on some issues. I would like our minister to give a position and then we start debating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe nobody is going to bring up those figures. Let us just debate and he will come up and explain.

3.54
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, we have just seen the Order Paper and I will ask you to give us time so that we start debating this Budget Speech effectively tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I appeal to all Members of the House to come tomorrow in the morning and sign the reports of your committees and then in the afternoon we have a debate on the budget. So, there should be no excuse tomorrow.

MR KIGYAGI: If the minister is ready with his response, he can circulate it so that it enriches our debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, House adjourned to 2.30 p.m., but please, sign the reports.

(The House rose at 3.56 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 August 2010 at 2.30 p.m.)

