Friday, 12 August 2005

Parliament met at 10.35 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for finding time to come.  It appears people still want to rest yet we have important business to transact this month. We have not started on the Budget, the State of the Nation Address, and the remaining part of the Constitution Amendment Bills. Now that we have had rest for some days, I hope all of you will be here next week so that we complete the Constitution amendment. I had intended that we complete this exercise this week but because of what happened, we could not achieve that. We should now ensure that we complete this amendment by Thursday next week, latest Friday morning. I appeal to you to persuade other members to come next week so that we finish with the work before us. I do not think we can proceed with any business today –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just a word of thanks. The “weather” this morning is extremely good. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is very good. You should go planting.

10.37
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the members’ attention to this issue of national importance. In the New Vision of Thursday, August 11 there was an article written by a reporter from Kasese about the blood crisis in my constituency in Kasese District. This crisis is not only in Kasese District but also in the whole region. The article further reports that it is a national problem.

I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to the Minister for General Duties who is here in the House to deliver this concern to the Minister of Health. This is a crisis in which more than ten people have died and perhaps even now more will continue to die. Can we get a comprehensive explanation, since this affects people’s lives? You can never have life again when you die. 

There is also a crisis of the increased attacks of malaria in Kasese hospitals and health units. They lack a number of important supplies, for instance the intravenous fluids. I talked to the Medical Superintendent of Kilembe Hospital and he said that there is need for increased supply of intravenous fluids and quinine in the district. He is planning to request all the Members of Parliament from Kasese and the Rwenzori region to support his initiative. He intends to put up a building that will accommodate the equipment to help in local production of the intravenous fluids. He told me that he has done enough study in as far as what is required is concerned. The whole exercise needs around Shs 40 million. I take this opportunity to request the Minister of Health to move in immediately. I do not know how much time you will give him, but I urge the Blood Bank in Nakasero to take this seriously.  

10.45
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to supplement what hon. Bwambale has said. I was in my constituency a week ago and I was told that in my entire three sub-counties and a town council, the cases of malaria have increased drastically. The rate at which life is being lost due to malaria is worrying. The people also noted that most of the malaria drugs are resistant to its treatment and Artenam, which is one of the few available responsive drugs, costs about Shs 15,000. Most people cannot afford this.  

The people are very desperate and they asked me when the Government would start the spraying of DDT, because they are willing to take all possible alternatives to have this malaria reduced. Although in our capacity as Members of Parliament we have intervened by supplying mosquito nets, this cannot be felt since they cannot reach everyone in the constituency. Therefore, I would like to add my voice to that of hon. Bwambale, to ask the Minister of Health to address the nation on this particular issue. Malaria is becoming epidemic in my area and many others in Uganda. I thank you.

10.47
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Concerning the provision of health services, when I was in my constituency I was shocked to learn that ambulances, which were given out to help expectant mothers during delivery, are now actually hired out. For a patient to leave a health centre from Muko to Kabale in an ambulance he must first pay Shs 15,000.

The concerned authorities claim this money is for fuel. As a result people have died and -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is this supplementary to the subject before us? This is an independent issue and yet we are dealing with Malaria and its treatment.

MR BANYENZAKI: It is supplementary in the sense that it also concerns health service provision. The people who suffer from Malaria need to be transferred to referral hospitals in case it is severe. Therefore, patients who cannot afford to hire these ambulances are never transferred to referral hospitals. The minister should address the reason these ambulances are being hired to patients who are dying in hospitals for lack of such amounts of money.

10.49
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for bringing the issue of Malaria up. Recently there was a downpour in my constituency and we are worried about the floods. I think this cuts across the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Works. We have the construction of the greater road, which will ease the traffic. However, as they are carrying out the construction, some of the drainages are blocked. Some of the detours have not been constructed such that when it rains the water has got out of hand, since it cannot flow freely. The mosquito population is increasing at a very high rate. 

Mr Speaker, I urge the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to pass on this message to hon. Nasasira so that his ministry can inspect the area where the road is being constructed in Lubaga. This is the area that hon. Kayongo represents. Some of the streams have been blocked, the water cannot flow and now all the houses are water logged, prompting the mosquito population to grow and worsen the situation. 

Lastly, they have not made a detour where traffic can also flow. They just blocked the roads without provision for a detour for motorcyclists. I request you, Mr Speaker, to pass on this message to the relevant authorities. 

10.50
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable members who have raised a number of issues. As members recognise, none of the three ministers in the Ministry of Health is here. I have taken note of the concerns raised by members and I will definitely communicate to the ministry to make sure that these issues raised are attended to.

I appeal to my colleagues the Members of Parliament to use a direct approach to the various ministers. I spent about eight years on the Backbench and, therefore, I know a bit of what happens there. Therefore, colleagues could use the relevant offices in addressing these concerns. It is only when you do not get the response you require that you should raise it here in Parliament. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for accepting to take the responsibility as part of teamwork. I have spent a long time on the Back Bench and I know how government and ministries operate.  By the time I rise on an issue, all avenues to redress it have been exhausted. For instance, on the shortage of blood in Kasese, I was on the ground - perhaps I did not give enough information. The Kilembe Hospital Medical Superintendent and the District Chairman have already contacted the Regional Officer of Buhinga hospital. He said he was also faced with the same crisis. 

They also rang the Director of Medical Services at the ministry, where they did not get any redress. I do not know what his portfolio is but there was no redress as far as blood is concerned. They rang the ministry’s permanent secretary, who did not give any immediate remedy. Having failed in all these channels, it was necessary that we the politicians take it up and find out where the real problem lies. I would like to clear my case since I raised the issue. Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for the information but as members appreciate, the proposal I made is still reasonable. Hon. Byamukama has told us about many activities that have taken place. However, she has not told us whether she got in touch with any of her political colleagues in the Ministry of Health. Quite often bureaucracy slows down work and, therefore, it is necessary for political leaders in the various ministries to be informed.

I will take it up. In order for expeditious action, direct contact with various ministers should be exercised. I would like to assure members, on behalf of the Government, that if any of you has any difficulty communicating with a minister in any ministry, the Office of the Prime Minister is always ready to receive your complaints and immediate action will be taken. The Government policy is that Members of Parliament should have free access to ministers and ministries at all times during working hours. 

As far as the floods in Kawempe are concerned, Ugandans should thank the Almighty God for making this country what it is. Our people have a tendency to think that government has a magic way of stopping floods. There isn’t much we can do about downpours. You have seen this all over the world, where floods have killed scores of people. In Kawempe one of the major problems is settlement in very low-lying areas. Water cannot flow even if channels are made. There is no way we can make the channels deeper than the levels of the lake. So, my colleagues should advise people in their areas to leave wet areas alone so that they settle where floods are not likely to be a problem -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Point of information –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But we are not going to solve this problem in this House.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am taking note of the honourable members’ concern about irregularities by the contractors. Sometimes these contractors may only be interested in nothing else other than their work. The complaint is valid and we will make sure that they do not block either the roads or the existing channels for drainage. 

Regarding what hon. Banyenzaki said, I really do not know. Perhaps it would have been better if he had contacted the local Government in Kabale because these ambulances are handed over to local governments since they are the ones managing them. Even if this were true, the leadership in Kabale ought to address this problem. I think that is all I had to say, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

10.54
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to talk about the blood crisis in this country. I used to head the Blood Donor Recruitment Programme of the Uganda Red Cross, so I know what happens there. Blood is got from people and, therefore, we must donate blood if we are to have it in the blood bank. If blood came from mushrooms, we would grow them and get blood for people. This is not possible, even though it would have been a good option. 

The blood donor recruitment exercise has never been addressed at all in the Budget. It has been under the Uganda Red Cross Society for a long time. As far as I remember, during the ten years I headed this programme there was never money allocated for recruiting people to donate blood for the four regional blood banks. As we debate the shortage of blood, we should also look at the Ministry of Health’s budget. There should be appropriate allocation in the blood area assigned to the Uganda Red Cross so that it can recruit enough safe blood donors. We need enough blood for the patients all over the country. I would be happier if we became exemplary as leaders. We feed well and I am sure we all have enough to donate –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Salaamu I should inform you that I have so far generously given ten pints of blood.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, ten is not enough. It is a good start but we need more than ten. If we donated just once a month, we would have given up to 12, and 12 times 300 Members of Parliament is a real boost for the people of Uganda. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is very good advice to honourable members and those of us who have not donated any blood in their life are encouraged to start today.  

10.57
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Mr Speaker, there has been persistent media reports about a looming fuel crisis. If you rewind to the 1970s during the era of the economic war, whenever there is any shortage unscrupulous citizens take to hoarding, which compounds the whole situation of scarcity. All along the Government has not come out to say what steps they are taking to divert the crisis. The sooner they do this, the better for the country so that we do not experience unnecessary inconveniencies. The price of fuel is surely already high enough. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think this should have been in form of an inquiry about what steps are being taken to ensure that we do not continue to face this fuel crisis. The concerned minister will in due course inform us about this.  

10.59
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification regarding the position of government on a matter pertaining to the media in this country.  

There is a general panic in media houses since yesterday regarding the future of the freedom of the press. This morning I expected a statement from the Government clarifying on two major items. This includes the speech of His Excellency the President at Kololo Airstrip regarding some sense of irresponsibility on the part of the media and the action, which was taken yesterday against one broadcasting organisation. We need detailed clarification from government.

Secondly, I was also expecting a matter of policy or a matter of direction on the part of the Attorney-General to explain to the media and to the public on how the law pertaining to the freedom of the press and freedom of expression is being handled by the state. I think the state is intimidating the press. Likewise, some of us who tend to use the press to explain policy and political issues to the public are being victimised indirectly by the Executive arm of the state. They claim that such and such a programme offends the highest authority in the country hence justifying the steps they take. 

We have heard from various sources that the Monitor newspaper over and above KFM station, which was banned yesterday, is also in danger of being closed next week. When the President was speaking at Kololo he mentioned three papers in an intimidating tone. When we asked him what about the Red Pepper, he said, “Okay, they have been dealing with naked girls, but now they are getting into this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you trying to inquire whether the Government intends to make a statement on this?  I think it should have been a simple question of whether the Government intends to make a statement on freedom of speech, rather than turning this into a long submission.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you are very simple and to the point, they seem to miss it. Therefore, you have to widen the territory for them to comprehend it. Could the hon. Minister in charge of the Prime Minister’s office tell us what the position is regarding the future of the media in this country?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I suspected that hon. Awori would raise this issue anyway. First, I assure this House and the public that the future of the freedom of the press in this country is bright and it is brighter than it has ever been. The press is free in this country but it is only free for as long as it reports responsibly. The press is not supposed to engage in fiction. If they want to be thriller stations, they must tell the country so that what they are engaged in is thrill. Therefore, -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Point of clarification.
  
PROF. KAGONYERA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker and that of the honourable member. The freedom of the press is guaranteed. 

Two, I want to inform the honourable members of this House that the Government intends to make a detailed statement about this matter early next week. Therefore, I would like to plead with hon. Awori to give us a bit of time. This morning I held consultations with the Prime Minister who would have been here to say this himself. He is elsewhere representing His Excellency the President so this is authoritative and a statement is going to be made about this matter.

BILLS
FIRST READING

LAW REVISION FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS IN CRIMINAL MATTERS BILL, 2004

11.04
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL  (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker Sir, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Law Revision Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2004” be read for the first time.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development certifies that the Law Revision Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2004 has been examined as required under section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001. I, therefore, beg to lay this Certificate of Financial Implications on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I explained to you earlier this morning and to the Prime Minister, I intend to come back here with a comprehensive ministerial statement in the presence of Inzikuru. I have already arranged, for she is expected to arrive in this country on Monday night. This means the statement will be ready on Tuesday.  I thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like a clarification from the Minister of Sports.  Yesterday I heard on the news that he had received Shs 200 million from Coca Cola on behalf of the Government in respect of promoting sports. I remember that in this House we contributed to the Police Department and later the President said nobody should receive money on behalf of the state from any source. May I know whether there has been a change of policy so that members of the Cabinet can now walk around with baskets to collect money from whoever wishes to put anything in that basket? Thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much honourable member. I just received a dummy cheque. In fact the contribution of Coca Cola has been since 1993. Recently there were senior secondary school competitions in Masaka, which cost Shs 85 million. Coca Cola contributed everything, from mineral water, to the last trophy. The minister did not necessarily receive cash.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the question was, “Is there a policy allowing private companies to contribute to activities, which are funded by the Government?” That is nutshell of what she is asking.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you much, Mr Speaker. This one is very clear and it did not start yesterday. There is no policy prohibiting private sectors from funding primary and secondary school activities. It is not only the ones I mentioned but also certain other games like basketball and many others, which are not necessarily initiated by the schools, are funded. Therefore, this is something, which has been going on for a long time. To the best of my knowledge there is no policy prohibiting private sector from sponsoring or supporting sports activities in any form.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, on matters of policies regarding resources to sports, my honourable colleague made a statement to the media the other day after we had paid tribute to our gallant girl Inzikuru that she would be exempted from income tax on her prize money. I would just like to know whether it is going to be a policy applying to all athletes and sports persons in this country. 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Aggrey Awori is quoting the press, not me. I do not recall saying that. I said, “If the principle is Pay As You Earn, whatever you receive is taxed. If there is any provision of exempting what Inzikuru will get, that will be a different arrangement.” Those were my words. I did not say, “She is going to be exempted.” I am not changing any policy because I do not have the authority to do it.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

11.10
THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, this is the Committee Stage but it is lamentable that as I see, I need not even count the people present. I am certain that we do not have the required number. I suspend the proceedings for five minutes to assess the situation and then decide what we should do. Sergeant-At-Arms, ring the bell.

(The proceedings were suspended at 11.15 a.m.)
(On resumption at 11.26 a.m._)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the situation has worsened. Well, I have no alternative but because we were going to deal with constitutional provisions and I require a quorum of at least 96 members, the number present is far below that and we cannot proceed. However, once again I appeal to you to be here next week. We should be more diligent with this business so that we can complete it next week and then deal with the Budget.

With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned to Monday at 2.00 p.m. when we shall resume. I wish you a good weekend.

(The House rose at 11.26 a.m. and adjourned until Monday, 15 August 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


