Thursday, 14 August 2008

Parliament met at 3.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I would like to make two small adjustments to the Order Paper. One is to permit hon. Tanna to present a petition and the second one is to permit the return of the report of the Committee on National Economy which was deferred last week relating to the loan for the Public Service reforms. Those are the two adjustments I am making to the Order Paper.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION

PETITION ON THE RISING PRICES OF 
ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ON UGANDA MARKET 

3.14
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, I would like to present the humble petition of the people of Uganda represented by myself, Tanna Sanjay, Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality, states as follows. The subject matter of this petition is: “The rising prices of essential commodities on the Ugandan market. 

The humble petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda reassures the nation that Government is concerned and doing everything possible to save the situation. 

That Government adopts tax and subsidy policies aimed at discouraging the export of essential commodities stifling domestic consumption. 

Government institutes price controls on essential commodities.”

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 

Hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures as attached. I beg to lay on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That petition will be committed to the relevant committee. And you will recall that during the general debate on the budget, these matters were raised by several Members. Let our committee handle them and report back to this House. 

RECONSIDERATION OF THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 70 MILLION FROM THE WORLD BANK FOR THE UGANDA PUBLIC SERVICE PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT PROGRAMME

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, last time we deferred this issue because there were a number of controversial matters which had to be resolved. We have since interfaced with various people and those matters have been addressed. Let me be specific as usual. 

The first one was that the National Records and Archives Centre should actually belong to ICT because there is a ministry in charge of it. But we have been advised by Dr Ham Mulira that the National Records and Archives Centre belongs to the Ministry of Public Service because it deals with the content rather than the technology. That is why Public Service should be in charge of this matter. And Dr Ham Mulira, as you know, is an expert in his own right. I do not know whether he is here. 

There was another issue of a civil service college and the view was that we should not have a civil service college but this matter should be handled by the Uganda Management Institute (UMI). We agreed that UMI should take charge of this matter but it will have two different centres: a school for public service management and a centre for productivity and competitiveness. It will be restructured. We have taken care of those concerns.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, who is going to address the financial aspects?

3.20
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): As reported by the Committee on National Economy, the amounts have been reduced to US$23 million and of this there is a breakdown indicating that $15 million is for the Public Service improvement, the IPPS and record centre and so forth and the balance is for the civil service college which will now fall under the UMI and then capacity building as indicated. This is the breakdown, Madam Speaker.

3.21
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Madam Speaker, yesterday we further interacted with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister of Public Service. My committee supports the change of money from building a separate college to supporting the UMI.

3.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other day when the matter was deferred, I had actually intended to make a contribution to the subject at a substantive level. 

However, to respond to the Prime Minister, first of all in the Seventh Parliament I was a Member of the Committee on National Economy and the Government Chief Whip was the Vice Chairperson of that committee. At that time and unless the system has changed, the fundamental argument that was always given to the committee when it demanded that adjustments be made to projects, was that the project document had been arrived at through a long process and that to reverse what had been agreed with the sponsor, whether the bank or whatever donor would mean going back to re-negotiate. 

I have not found, in this document, any indication that the committee entered, whether through the Ministry of Finance or any other Government body, a process of re-negotiating and agreeing with the donors or the sponsor of the project –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, when reservations were expressed about the original request of $ 70 million for the Public Service reform, we actually went back to the World Bank and indicated that there were reservations about this loan. 

Secondly, the loan request had actually expired and so we had to write and request that it be re-activated but under new conditions, which we negotiated. The country director responsible for Tanzania and Uganda came here and we re-negotiated and agreed that we reduce this amount to $ 23 million. I would like to assure the honourable member that we had to go to the creditor and arrive at a mutually agreeable arrangement. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: I thank you honourable minister for the information. The intention of my contribution was to respond to the Prime Minister because what we now have essentially is new usage of the money for training while in your negotiation it was for establishing a college. The money now is going to be given to UMI. At the same time when I listened to the Prime Minister very carefully, it is not about UMI undertaking the training of civil servants as has been demanded by Parliament. It is in effect accepting that UMI becomes an umbrella with two institutions operating, whether on paper or in physical terms at UMI, I do not know. In which case, it becomes very difficult for me to appreciate why we should approve this now. 

Mr Prime Minister, there were fundamental concerns raised by Members of Parliament with regard to the actual accountability for support that has previously been given to the Ministry of Public Service. If you look at the document related to this particular loan request, they are actually talking about this being supplementary funding for, if not the second, then the third phase of a project. 

Madam Speaker, I would wish very much to support the Public Service because they are the administrative instrument that the country has. However, the problem is not money and if we keep shifting what we want to do simply to get the money, it makes me even more worried because –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the Leader of Opposition for giving way. Your contribution, Mr Leader of the Opposition brought new insights that I feel should be clarified. 

Is the Prime Minister implying that when we get the loan we shall create two satellite institutions under UMI or is he saying that we shall manipulate and adjust the syllabus to cater for civil servants and traditional people at UMI? This has to be clear. If it is a latter, why then do we need a loan to re-design a course outline? If it is the former, would we have a situation where we will just use the name of UMI like Makerere University and MUBS where you will have two parallel institutions in the name of capacity building? 

I thought Prof. Latigo moved a bit fast on that aspect but we really need to appreciate what exactly the technocratic Prime Minister is up to.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto. Madam Speaker, the point I am trying to make is that money is not really the problem in respect of the Civil Service and that unless we fundamentally address those problems, even this money, like the money we approved when I was a Member of the Committee on National Economy in the Seventh Parliament to implement ROM, will end up with virtually no results.

Madam Speaker, I have taken the trouble to go to various ministries at 8.30 a.m. and I say, “I want to see so and so”. I do not know if my colleagues have experienced that. You will go to most ministries at 8.30 a.m. and the people you want to see will not be there. Also when you go to see them, you follow your problem expecting that there is some systematic order in which problems are resolved but you will have a problem. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall that in the Seventh Parliament even while my father was still alive, I raised on the floor of this House the fact that in 1993 his pension file- I am a Member of Parliament and a university professor, so I have some kind of power- Since that time, I have been chasing my father’s pension. Up to now, it has not been possible and I ask myself what this money will do to help those who do not even have power at all to resolve their pension problems. It is a very terrible challenge. 

If we focus on the money, we will not achieve the results that we need to achieve. And therefore, Madam Speaker and Rt hon. Prime Minister, my appeal would be that the fundamental queries that made Parliament defer final consideration of this loan should be upheld; and the things that you have brought to us should be the things that the Ministry of Public Service prepares and submits to the Committee on National Economy in a formal way, and they are fully considered. But I can still assure hon. Members and the country that the problem in the Ministry of Public Service, like the problems in most ministries in this country, is not money. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the chair of the committee. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, one of the things this loan intends to address is the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition, where people leave the payroll and do not earn their pension. The IPPS system - we visited Zambia and it works in a way that the day you leave the payroll is the day your assessment for pension begins to click in. The biggest question will be the commitment of Government to avail money for pensioners but otherwise this system is trying to address that.

PROF. LATIGO: I thank you very much. You see, hon. Members, if some of you would remember, there was a project to digitise land records in the Ministry of Lands. Money was put there, there were American consultants working there. Go and find out what goes on in the lands records.  That is why I am saying that fundamentally –(Interjection)– no, hon. Otafiire, you were the minister; please -(Laughter)- that is why I am saying that fundamentally, unless we begin to re-think what we must really do for our country -(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: I thank the Leader of the Opposition and I invite him as the Leader of the Opposition to have time and visit the Ministry of Lands. I think he has been visiting other ministries for purposes of pension, but he has failed to visit the Ministry of Lands where people report at 7.30 a.m. in the morning and the minister at 7.00 O’clock in the morning and so forth. (Laughter)

But the important point is that it is true I found World Bank money of US$23 million, which is intended to deal with the land project generally, but in particular areas of computerisation and decentralisation of the land office. And we are going to have about 19 offices for land registration built; Gulu is one of them, Lira, and we launched this project. So, the computerisation process is on schedule and as I speak, we are at least up to 40 percent through. It is a long project and some of these things take time. I would urge you that the computerisation as well as the decentralisation programme for land registration is very much on course. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: More information, hon. Mbaguta? 

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I want to give information regarding the civil service and achievements of the Public Service Reform, and clarify why we are talking about the third phase. The Public Service Reform has been implemented in phases. 

The first phase did the removal of excess baggage; the second one dealt with the doing, improving of structures and harmonisation of functions; and the third phase that we are starting is looking at sustained performance and improving the Public Service and enhancing its effectiveness. That is how the Public Service Reform has been arranged. I will, in our response to the budget this afternoon if it is there, respond to the issues raised on pension, Madam Speaker.

PROF. LATIGO: I thank both the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Lands. I just want to give you assurance; I was very specific, I talked about the civil servants and I pass in front of your ministry while coming to the office and I always see your vehicle there. So, there is absolutely no worry about that. But -(Interjections)- I get your point; I will come. 

Even the point on land, hon. Minister, just illustrates what I am saying because you got that project there and if you look at the years it is supposed – and it is not only that project; there are too many projects in this country which we struggle to get money for and once we have got the money, nothing happens.  

I am particularly worried, Madam Speaker, about a project where what must be done can be changed very quickly. In my experience, it means that the project has either not been thought out thoroughly or it is founded on very flimsy ground. It becomes a problem and it does not even give me assurance that the people responsible for that project are prepared to handle it the way projects are done; and therefore, I brought this out for the House to consider. I am not going to pronounce myself at a personal level, but the facts speak for themselves. If we think that it is okay on the basis of what the Prime Minister is saying to pass the loan, we will have said what we have said. Thank you.


3.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I seek more specific assurance from the Minister of Finance because Dr Suruma and I go to church and I know he has heard of a story of a one Thomas who could not believe without seeing. I am that type of person this afternoon.  

If the loan has been renegotiated, if there is a fresh M.O.U, can Dr Suruma give us those documents and we send them to the committee so that the rest of us are able to scrutinise? (Interruption) Yes. Because this is not what the committee scrutinised initially and that is why, Madam Speaker, we have our committees to do the basic work for us.  

Secondly, if, as both the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance would like us to believe, the money is now being redirected to the Uganda Management Institute, do they want to tell us that the financial requirements of the Uganda Management Institute to run the public service training are equivalent exactly to the amount of money that was provided in the initial loan to establish a totally new college? Can we look at the needs assessment that was done in the last three or four days to establish this?  I sit on the Committee on Social Services and we are the people you have mandated to look at our training institutions, and this new demand has not been presented to us.  Who else scrutinised this on behalf of this House?

I also would like to just –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Minister of Education.

MR GABRIEL OPIO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The question which is being raised by hon. Alaso is very pertinent and I would like to state that Uganda Management Institute had requested for funding, and they have already developed the strategic plan, 2008 and 2015, and in that they have requested for money.  We could not provide that money in this year’s budget. But when this issue came about establishment of the Centre of Excellence College, we looked at the strategic plan, and Uganda Management Institute had that portion, a school for Centre of Excellence.  We said, “Okay, Mr Prime Minister, we have this strategic plan; we have this request which we could not accommodate. 

We know that IPA used to be for retraining and training civil servants but its mandate was expanded and it lost direction more or less of training civil servants.  Now that Uganda Management Institute has revived that special assignment of retraining and training civil servants and they have worked out a budget, we could use this money, if it were given to us, to do that.” That is why we said- but we had not presented it to the committee because we knew we would not have the money during the discussion.  That is what I wanted to inform hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: I want to thank the honourable minister, because he even brings out my concern in a better way.  As a committee we are conscious of the needs of these institutions, and we would like to be involved in making the decision and scrutinising what comes out as priority in addressing the needs of these institutions under the Ministry of Education.  Now that we have not been involved, is it possible first to give the committee on Social Services the opportunity to align the requirements of the Uganda Management Institute to the loan that is being availed to them?  

Finally and most importantly, Madam Speaker, I think this House should be careful not to borrow money just because there is money to be borrowed. I can imagine what it means to be in this country 40 years from now and be the one who will be paying these loans.  Sometimes we gather every loan everywhere with whatever conditionalities as though we are not envisaging the heavy debt burden that will befall the children of this country. 

It is therefore important that we should be absolutely convinced that a particular loan is necessary. And I would like to be on record to say that, up to now I am still not convinced that this loan is necessary and is a necessary burden for the children of Uganda 40 years from now.  Why?  Because I said the other day, ghosts, we can get rid of them.  We created them; we can get rid of them. We do not need a loan to get rid of them. 

Public Service Reform, I was on the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for almost the whole of the Seventh Parliament.  We passed monies and we have not seen the effect of those monies up to now.  Hon. Latigo has just talked about going to offices and not finding people at 8.00a.m.  Let me tell you. Some of the crudest secretaries in public servants in this country are in the Ministry of Public Service.  Do you need a loan to teach them how to behave?  As Ugandans, do you need a loan?  It does not make much sense to me, and I am reluctant to associate myself with this loan.

3.48
MR SAMMY OGWEL (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance and the committee, and perhaps the Prime Minister.  In fact this morning I jumped into a taxi and quite a number of people in the tax asked, since I came from that area where at least you know this is an MP, “That you passed a loan? Why are you passing loans every other day without scrutinising institutions and how this money is being used? You are making us indebted in this country.”  I felt ashamed.  But I tried to labour with the purpose of the loan.  

Now, there are two things here, Madam Speaker.  The Prime Minister has categorically told us that they have gone through and they have really reviewed what was raised by the Members of this House about using UMI. 

The minister also said that they re-negotiated and agreed.  But I thought the loan had its own terms and conditions, and objectives at the time they requested for it.  So, if now those terms and conditions have changed to re-developing UMI, I do believe such things should have been reviewed because those are the terms under which the loan was given. And some of them are very conditional; the money should not be diverted. It is specifically fixed to what the lender wants to achieve.  So, I do not know whether during the negotiations –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The information I want to give my colleague from Moroto is that the moment the objective of the loan is changed, then that loan must be re-negotiated afresh.  If the loan was for $ 70 million and now we are talking of 23, which means the scope of that loan has changed. So –(Interruption)  

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member, having come late and not knowing what is going on in the House, to take us back to matters that we have already cleared? I have already indicated to this House, that this loan was re-negotiated with World Bank; that in fact it had expired and we had to ask World Bank to re-activate it under the new terms.   So, is it in order for the hon. Member who is also a Shadow Minister, to behave in such a way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the issue of the quantum was dealt with actually before the deferment.  So, it is not a new matter; you ought to have been well knowledgeable about that.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am very aware of that.  Yes, the quantum was done, but the information I wanted to give to my friend is about the objective of Uganda Management Institute - we already have Uganda Management Institute. So, there is no need for us to go and get money - if we saw this as a very important issue, why didn’t we put it in the original budget of our central government? Why go for the loan?  Forgetting a loan means it is not a very important thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you were here when the Minister of Education spoke, but he had addressed that matter.  Hon. Loote, please continue.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the information given by hon. Mafabi, but what I am trying to say is, if it has been re-negotiated, there must have been amendments on some of the objectives.  

Secondly, the request by UMI for some funds to increase its capacity should have also been integrated into the objectives, and the terms and conditions of this loan.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I know that human development is one of the fundamental instruments of developing a state and promoting economic growth.  And I have no problem with the philosophy of getting this money to develop that resource. But I think the modalities - if you have identified a mistake, I think we need those documents and the objectives for this House to analyse. That is very fundamental because we do not want to say we are changing the money today and tomorrow the same money is used to construct the same thing.  I think let us be straight forward; we need those things that you have negotiated, agreed upon and reviewed so that we can have the loan fixed to its current objective.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.55
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum):  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think I should first commend the efficiency of Government when it comes to borrowing money.  I wish the government was as efficient at everything as they are at borrowing money.  

Madam Speaker, this matter was referred six days ago and today we are being told that it has been resolved including re-negotiation with the donors.  There are no such donors in the world that can negotiate within one week, including weekends; it is not possible –(Interruptions)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker is it in order for the hon. Member to say that we have re-negotiated the loan in the last six days, which is totally untrue?  Is it in order for him to say that we have done that when in fact we have stated that this was done many months ago and that we met with World Bank and agreed to reduce the amount to $ 23 million?  

The issue of the civil service college, Madam Speaker, as indicated in documents will be located within an existing institution, and this is a fact.  So, is it in order for the hon. Member to say that we have re-negotiated the loan in six days?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do recall that when this matter came back last week, we were informed that there had been re-negotiations and the sum came down from $ 70 million to 23 million.  It was done before it came back to this House.  Proceed, please.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, my understanding is that even the change of user must be negotiated.  If I give you a loan to buy a bicycle and now you say you want to buy a wheelbarrow, really you have to come back to me and I see whether it is really appropriate for me to give you a loan to instead buy a wheelbarrow.

Madam Speaker, public service, for very many years since the colonial days –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-Mafabi: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Local Government to sleep while in the House -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government was listening, intently, to hon. Okello-Okello.  Proceed, please.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  What I am saying is that for very many years, since colonial days, public service had a training centre. Nsamizi Institute in Entebbe was the training institute for public servants for very many years. I was trained there myself. However, the compound of State House Entebbe had to be expanded to cover almost one square mile and they acquired that institute. When that happened, Public Service transferred the training centre to Kitante Road, where CMI is now. Some donors gave money and the place was rehabilitated and it was so good.  Again I went there for some training as a commissioner. 

In 1992 before the place was taken over by CMI, it was rehabilitated with borrowed money and now we are talking about borrowing money for the same purposes - a college for public servants. How many times in our lifetime shall we borrow money for the same purpose? –(Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)- I am well informed about this matter. I do not accept that information. I know what it is.

Madam Speaker, when the Kitante Road centre was rehabilitated, Public Service came up with the proposal to build government archives. A plot was allocated where the Ministry of Health is now, so that the centre would be on one side of the road and the archives on the other. Later on, the Ministry of Health developed interest in the side of archives. The matter was resolved in favour of the Ministry of Health because they had their loan - also that was built by a loan – and they took over the side where the archives should be. I believe –(Interruptions)
 
PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, UMI grew to be an institute to teach an expanded civil service. In 1971, I was teaching at that institute where we had some 30 types of categories - that is when he went there – but we are now talking of 30 million people. So, is the honourable member in order to divert us from talking about expanding that institution to teach more people needed in the public service and start talking about archives?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter should not be just looked at in isolation. All the loans in this country are loans of this country. So when he talks about the sequence of events and about why we are continuing to borrow, I think he is right.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My purpose of saying this is that when this House is making a decision, it should make it from an informed position. That is why I am bringing out these issues. I believe I am a well trained civil servant –(Interruptions)
 
MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I want to give information about the site for construction of the national archives and records centre. The plot the honourable member is referring to as having been taken by Ministry of Health was divided and we still have our plot for the construction of the national records and archives on the same plot.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for that information but I find the information not very helpful to me because I was involved; I attended meetings in which the plot was given to Ministry of Health. If there is any side left, it must be very small. However, this is not my point. The point I am trying to make is that we should have archives, we should have a training college for civil servants, but the speed at which this matter is being handled is worrying me. You sit for six days minus two - four days – and resolve everything. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I think this is a very dangerous speed. I would not have minded if documents were brought here and given to all of us to study and really satisfy us that in these six days, the government has done wonders.

My request is that we are all Ugandans so let us not rush this loan. Let us differ the matter again so that we get all the documents from the Ministry of Finance and study them together with the recommendations of the committee. We do not want our civil servants to be half trained; we want them properly trained and we want archives. However, we must do our work properly as the Parliament of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.06
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we should congratulate ourselves as Parliament because we have managed to put our feet down and say US$ 70 million is a little bit too much and we might not be able to give proper accountability of it all so we have reduced it to US$ 23 million. I think, first and foremost, we should congratulate ourselves for having done that.  

I want to allay the fears of my colleagues who have been talking about Nsamizi. Nsamizi was meant mainly for community development assistance. (Interjection) I said “mainly”; mark my words. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my OB, hon. Alex Byarugaba, for accepting to take this information. You see, here is a situation where we want the records of the Hansard straight. Honourable, you are talking about the function of Nsamizi when it became an institute for social development. Earlier on, the original purpose for which Nsamizi was established by the colonial regime was one, to train civil servants. Secondly, it was to provide training for people who were employed or appointed to go and serve outside as ambassadors or high commissioners, along with their wives because they were now going to serve and portray the image of Uganda. So, that was the purpose for which that institute was established by the colonial regime. The fact that it now took over training of social workers and development workers is a thing of yesterday. I wanted that record right. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very for that information, honourable colleague. I think that was the time when I was not yet born. (Laughter) By the time I was born, I only knew UMI. I think that is all I can say. (Laughter) That was the time of the colonialists and I was not there anyway. 

Secondly, Uganda Management Institute has been in place to give hands-on training to all sorts of civil servants, small and big, in civil service cadreship. Graduate, postgraduate, undergraduate, certificate; think of any cadre of civil service, they had at least to go through Uganda Management Institute. Over time, Uganda Management Institute transformed itself into an academic institute till to date, denying you and me and my brothers and sisters in the civil service the original idea for which it was put in place. Hence there is a need for this other component of the loan to expand the physical infrastructure of Uganda Management Institute so that our civil servants can be reoriented. 

I did agree wholly with the Leader of the Opposition; today’s civil service is not what it used to be. The honourable will bear me out on this. This is the essence for this loan, to re-orient the civil service into businesslike behaviour. You go to office at 8.30am, you find somebody and as a client you are served and you go. It is not the case now and that is the more reason we want this loan. That is why we insisted that these other monies that were not clear should be cut off and saved for another better deal. I do agree with that. 

Do we consider the civil service as one of the key result areas in as far as our body politic and our general wellbeing as a country is concerned? If the answer is “yes”, I think this other component of five, six or seven million shillings that we are going to pump into Uganda Management Institute is worth it. That is the more reason why I want to associate myself with this loan. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification on the change of UMI from a training institution for all cadres of civil servants to an academic institution now, which is a university. At what time did it happen? It could have happened in the Seventh Parliament but why did they not prioritise? As a very important training institution for our civil servants, instead of changing the institution to an academic institution at once, they should have been adding. They should have been adding to it rather than just putting off the training aspect. Why did it happen? 

What you are trying to indicate right now is that we have left out the training of our civil servants and we are concentrating on only the academic aspect. Why was management training left out? I really seek that clarification. Maybe if I get to know that, I could then be convinced that what you are putting forward is right or you were not part of it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Byarugaba, please answer quickly. 

MR BYARUGABA: Well, everything has its own time. Because the Seventh Parliament did not see it necessary, it should not necessarily apply to me in the Eighth Parliament. These are two different parliaments. We see it fitting now that we should re-orient our civil service and that we should put in some little money to do it. If we all really think positively as Ugandans, the civil service as one major component of our body politic is very necessary. It is necessary if we are to make any meaningful transformation of our society, our economy and our general body politic. 

Look at the records centre for goodness sake! I have had an opportunity to visit the current national records centre or the archives - hon. Okello-Okello really knows this as a former civil servant - it is pathetic. Honourable colleagues, it is just pathetic. In fact, the sooner we pass this loan the better for this country. It is a total shame. I even wondered why they should not have brought this request a little earlier than this. 

Those of you who have carried out research at a certain level and you want information about Uganda, it is total chaos. It is terrible. I think let us play a good role for the future generation so that what we are doing today will benefit the other generation that is coming by putting in place at least an archive centre. We need it. Whether you are opposed to this loan or not, whether we are to get this money from whichever source, we honestly need a national archive at the end of the day. So, we need this loan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up. 

MR BYARUGABA: I am about to finish, Madam Speaker. The planning component in the civil service is but a dismal one. My constituents – there was a policeman who retired about seven years ago but to date, he has not received his pension. (Interjection) Yes, that is the only one I know. (Interjection) Not because there is no money to pay but because the system – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I guess there were issues that led to this loan to be rejected last week or to be deferred to this week. I felt it would be procedurally right for us to restrict ourselves to those issues such that we stop wasting time in going back to debate the same issues. No one is opposed to the purpose, we all agree to that, but honourable colleagues are debating as if we are debating for the first time and as if we are rejecting it. We should be restricting ourselves to only those issues which made this loan to be deferred and we move on. So, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for members to start debating this loan as if we are debating for the first time. I need to be guided, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, this matter is really quite old and by the time we deferred this matter, we had narrowed down to a number of issues. Please focus on those and we finish. You know I still have to deal with the budget.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is okay, but elucidation, elaboration is very necessary. For purposes of emphasis, to put everybody on board, we have to say a few things about why we need this loan.

Finally, we need this loan for purposes of motivation if our civil service is to be counted among the best in the world as it used to be. Motivation does not necessarily mean money or a car; motivation could also mean office space, the environment or training. I thank you very much.

4.18
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You know me; I am one of those who have always refused loans because I sometimes see them as not going to help our people. However, when I read through this loan request, I felt I should support the allocation of this loan. (Applause) 

One of the issues which struck me in this loan was the training of our civil service. In the Seventh Parliament, we were looking at expanding UMI but we did not have the capacity. Now that government has secured a loan to give to UMI as a centre for excellence in this country, I want to support the loan. You know that we have always been losing money in sending civil servants abroad to go for management courses. Now we are going to have it here. You know that UMI has been giving certificates, diplomas and it has even gone to giving bachelors degrees and PhDs so, why can’t we have this in our own country so that our civil servants improve?

When I looked at the second reason - having an archive in this country - honourable members, you will agree with me that we need this. I have been passing through Kitante Road and what you see there as an archive, you cannot even believe it. One time I went to the Ministry of Agriculture and I wanted to know how much cocoa is being produced in this country, how best we can market it and what was being done in the 1960s. The Ministry of Agriculture could not give me the details. They told me that they had to look for those records. I think it was in the 1950s or 1960s so it was very difficult. Because of that, I want to support the loan request. We need the records put right for the development of this country.

Madam Speaker, I also want to support the loan because it is going to clean the civil servants’ payrolls. We have been losing a lot of money to ghost workers in different programmes of this country. So, when the payrolls are well maintained and kept, I think we shall not lose a lot of money in this country. We shall have money which should be allocated to other development activities. 

I want to support this loan request and I want to congratulate this Parliament because many times we do not get involved when loans are being brought in. Loans are brought in and within a short time we pass them, but with this one we got involved; we have reduced it from US$ 70 million to US$ 23 million. This is how we should move. I want to congratulate Parliament. I support this loan. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery we have pupils from Namayumba Primary School, Busiro North Constituency. You are welcome.

4.23
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true my colleagues have raised a number of issues on this particular loan, so I will not repeat everything that they have said. However, I do appreciate the concerns of the members, for instance the Leader of Opposition who raised a number of issues and was concerned about the issue of education. 

I want to inform members that UMI has a strategic plan where it has to cater for general education and also to address the problem of civil servants. The Ministry of Public Service came up with this idea and yet UMI already had the same plan and their only problem was funding. In my opinion, I see it necessary to give UMI an opportunity - if the money is really there - to move forward with this programme. I do not see why we now come up with another institution because in the first place, UMI has –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I think we have moved away from that institution. I think the money is going to UMI. Is that not what the Prime Minister said? There is no other institution.

MRS SENINDE: Okay. I strongly support that we approve this loan so that the money does the work that it is actually expected to do. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Seninde. I think we should not really be misunderstood. The point that has been said over and over is that you must link the need that UMI expressed in their document with the actual acquisition of the loan. If there is no binding basis, tomorrow UMI will come and say, “You passed money for me but where is it?” They will say, “Show us the project document where it was agreed to give the money.” So, even when we are insisting, we are really trying to protect the interest that you are arguing about. These are legal things; they are not beer party decisions. They are based on concrete documents. 

All we are asking is that let us do that so that we know that in this project, even the donors have agreed. If you pass it here and tomorrow we hear that the donors have disagreed and they say that they had not been consulted, what are you going to do when you have already passed the loan? This is the point. I agree with hon. Opio; let UMI bring their proposal to Public Service and Ministry of Finance and let it be agreed that this money is going to UMI. Let us get a new memorandum that the donors have agreed and we shall pass the loan.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate what the honourable member is raising but I think that this is already in place. I am sure we cannot –(Interjection)– Members, of course we shall demand for these but how do we really demand before this loan is actually passed? So, honourable members, let us give this an opportunity. We should not block this because once we block it then we may not benefit at the end of it all, Madam Speaker. 

4.27
MR SANJAY TANNA: (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the fact that we are all here today and we all recognise the dire need that the civil service has for continuous training to upgrade standards and times of delivery in the various sectors that they hold. Principally, like all the members that have spoken before me, I support the acquisition of the loan. However, I would like to raise the concerns that have been raised by other colleagues. 

As long as we cater within the framework - for example, in the past we have approved loans like the Northern Bypass and it is incomplete up to today. For the roads during CHOGM, we passed the loans hastily and we can all witness what is going on. The Minister of Lands has just said that when he went there, he found money but up to today the implementation of the digitizing of land titles is not yet there. 

I was totally shocked a few weeks back when I interacted with a colleague of mine. He pulled out a driving permit that actually looked like most of the advantage cards we hold, whereas my driving permit gotten from Face Technologies is laminated. There was a shifting of the paradigm or of the calibre of work that is supposed to be delivered. When they started, they were giving out hard cover driving permits but today they are giving out ordinarily laminated driving permits. 

Madam Speaker, the loan is necessary and must be acquired, but we must be assured by the requisite implementing ministries that it shall be correctly used for the purpose that it is being acquired for. We have just heard an honourable member telling us that we have acquired loans for educating the civil service three times within a lifetime. Colleagues, 40 years down the road, it will be our children to pay these loans and not me and you. We will not be here. So, are we going to load ourselves for the future in the correct manner? I beg that assurances be given and the parameters be put in place for the implementation of this loan as soon as possible. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the Minister of Education said that at some time UMI had made a strategic plan but had no money, so the plan must be existent. Also, I think that once you pass a loan, you do not just let it go but you keep on monitoring and you know we are here; you keep on monitoring and hovering over the Minister of Finance. I wish you could go along those lines. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure as a Member of Parliament for Aruu County in relation to Rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure and in relation to the Commonwealth parliamentary precedence, where a parliament should be very reluctant to reconsider a decision it just made less that five days ago. Last week, this Parliament voted outrightly rejecting the proposals submitted by the Prime Minister to them –(Interjections) – I wanted procedural guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, I was here and there was no vote taken. We were discussing until the Prime Minster said, “Please, can you hold on.” There was no vote. 

MR ODONGA OTTO:  I voted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You voted! Who put the question? 

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Most obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How did you vote; by yourself? (Laughter)

4.32
MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Government has been making very minimal contributions to UMI. Government allocates very little money to UMI so I am happy when I hear that government has remembered UMI. 

Madam Speaker, all that has gone on about this loan is actually a lesson that should be taken up by the Executive. This loan request was brought to Parliament over six months ago and it has kept changing. That is a sign that the people in charge or this ministry did not package it very well. They failed to convince the people concerned. So, I will request the Executive, especially the people in the ministry concerned, to please take your work seriously because it has taken us so long. Sometimes it could even appear on the Order Paper and it would be withdrawn by the minister on the Floor. Why waste Parliament’s time? I request ministers, please when you are bringing something to Parliament, take time and read it yourself and understand it. Do not just carry a document to Parliament. (Laughter) I request ministers –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Lumumba, for giving way. The information I would like to give you comes in form of a direct appeal to the Prime Minister, that the reshuffle of your Cabinet is long overdue. (Laughter) There are so many non-performers on the Front Bench. Some of these ministers should be removed and they join us on the backbench so that we have more effective people coming on board. (Laughter)

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, as Parliament, it is so disheartening. The Executive came and convinced us to pass a loan to computerise our land titles but I am so dismayed that a minister can come up and tell this Parliament, which was urged to pass the loan, that “I found there Shs 22 billion and we are planning to use it.” At that time they were saying, “Give us money. Give us money.” Are you fair to us as the Executive? Three years ago! Are you being sincere to us? Are you being sincere to this country? You were saying the need is there and we also saw the need and we passed the loan but you have not utilised the money. People are losing land, people are killing each other because of land and you are here quiet. It is so bad. As people’s representatives, we are not happy about it. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, every year we pass money in the budget to have the payroll of the Ministry of Defence computerised. Every year we pass in that budget over Shs 20 billion and we have done it for the last four years. They have not computerised up to today. It is so bad. The ghost soldiers are there, as hon. Alaso said. We created them ourselves as Ugandans; can we remove those ghost soldiers? 

Executive, I do not want you to hold Parliament responsible when you have not played your part. The President is always saying, “In the Sixth Parliament people failed this country on power” but why don’t you tell him that even for some loans, we have passed the money but we have not utilised it? Inform your boss so that he knows that you ministers have also made mistakes; you have! (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I must thank my colleague for the concern that she has raised. We get perturbed. In 2002/2003, we passed a loan here to modernise 31 landing sites on Lake Victoria, Lake Albert and Lake Kyoga. The lifespan of the loan was five years. Five years have passed but not even 30 percent of those landing sites have been built. Maybe, Madam Speaker, they have built some in Kamuli because I remember Bukungu was one of them; I do not know whether they have constructed those landing sites. So, how can we continue passing loans and yet the Executive is not helping us? What is the fate of that loan, for example? It is very frustrating when they put us on pressure here and we pass the loans and in the end the results are wanting.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you for the information- (Mr Okecho rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MRS LUMUMBA: I have been told to wind up. I am very sorry. Madam Speaker, just on the issue hon. Okupa is raising; out of the 30 landing sites they had planned, it has now come to 14. The money we passed ended only at feasibility study. That is where we are as a country. There is a problem.

Lastly, I want to request members to support the passing of this loan because government at last has remembered that UMI is important. Let us pass this money so that UMI also gets money from government. Out of the money UMI uses, 90 percent is from the fees paid by the students. I want to also urge members; this should be the last loan we are passing where the Executive has not come out clearly. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will appreciate, this matter is older than six months. It has come to the Order Paper in the last two years, I think three times. There were always disagreements between the Executive and the committee but we think that now after your interjections, some agreement has been reached. So, I would like to put the question that the question be put, subject to the changes proposed by the Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Yes, I understand; my neighbours are telling me it is said and it is finished. It is finished, but some of us would still appreciate if we looked at the MOU so that we do not just pass a thing we have not seen. It also affects the image of this Parliament; just passing things when you do not have an MOU.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are also interfering with my work. I said I want to first put the question and then I go to the actual body of what we want to decide. I have taken note of your concerns that we do not want to continue having this matter around with us, so let us pass the loan. I do not think that if we pass this loan today the money will come tomorrow. I am quite sure that our committees will still be available to look at the details, and I think that when UMI comes back next financial year, I am sure that they will have to come back with a plan. I do not think that this money will be available in a few months and spent. 

Members, I think let us agree to pass this loan now but keep an eye, keep hovering over the issue in your committees in the ordinary way. I put the question that this House do approve the provision of the sum of US$23 million as requested and as amended by the Leader of Government Business. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point order. Immediately we passed the loan, I saw very many MPs rushing out as if they came here like machinery for voting passes. We have honourable ministers who have left in a hurry as if it is a job well done. Are they in order to come here to Parliament as if they are voting machinery and abandon us here to transact other business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have been here since 3 o’clock and some honourable people wanted to go and do a few things outside. So, let us proceed with the response of the Ministry of Agriculture.

Thereupon, some Ministers withdrew from the Chamber. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, I think it is not right. Please come back. I think it is not right that you abandon the Speaker after your loan has been passed.

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Several issues were raised during the debate. I will start with the issues that were raised by many people and then end with the specific ones. Many people who debated raised concern over how the ministry was going to ensure food security in the country. The ministry is planning to make sure there is food security by various interventions and majorly to make sure that there is increased agricultural production. We will ensure that people do not shift from the staple foods because the experience in some districts is that people have gone for cash crops and abandoned the staples. A case in point is Bundibugyo District where most people are growing more cash crops than food crops and we have had a problem. 

How are we going to increase agricultural production? We have several interventions that are enshrined in various programmes to increase agricultural production. We are encouraging farmers to open up more arable land available for agriculture. We are also promoting mechanisation and we have, through NAADS, already provided walking tractors. We have started with Northern and Eastern Uganda for the first batch and we used the criteria that these are people who were returning from camps. For us to make sure that there is increased production these are the areas we are targeting first and then we shall roll out to other districts. We are also working with NEC and we have brought in some tractors for medium and potentially large commercial farmers so that we can mechanize agriculture. Government is considering bringing in a policy of giving out agricultural loans for mechanisation and value addition.  

We are also going to increase agricultural production by providing high quality yielding seeds through our research and seed companies. We are going to make sure that we avail seeds on the market to farmers. The information we have is that while we have opened up large arable land for agriculture, and the productivity is going down. In other words, output per unit of land is going down and this is because of poor soil management techniques. We are going out through NAADS and extension services to encourage our farmers to make sure that they manage their soils. 

Government has also put in place - and we are in the final stages of having a phosphate plant in Eastern Uganda - to make sure that we use fertilizers on our soils. It must be noted that Uganda in this region is the only country using the least fertilizers; almost in Africa. We are trying all possible means to ensure that agricultural production is increased.

There was also a concern by Members that what are we doing to stop people who are buying food from the countryside and leaving our farmers with no food to eat? We have bilateral agreements of the East African Community and we are also members of COMESA. We want to make sure that we retain food for our people without compromising these bilateral agreements. What we have done is to sensitise the farmers and the local governments to encourage people to preserve food for consumption and also to grow more staples. 

There was another broad question on how we are going to ensure that there are planting materials. We have experienced shortage of seed for planting because while we liberalised the seed industry and while our research is most advanced in agriculture in this region, we find ourselves supplying not only to the farmers in Uganda but in the region and it has been very difficult to regulate them. We have been supplying southern Sudan, Kenya, Rwanda and our other neighbours. We have now talked to the seed companies and we are working together with NARO to make sure that we provide enough seeds so that we can have enough for ourselves and supply for exports. As we talk now, my senior colleague has been meeting with the seed companies to map the way forward. I would, however, like to encourage colleagues to sensitise our farmers to get seeds in time because these private suppliers always go where the money is.

Hon. Santos Piro wondered why agriculture was receiving less money unlike the 10 percent recommendation by NEPAD; and asked what we are going to do with our sector especially with the problem of cash constraints? Hon. Members, you must appreciate that Uganda’s economy has been improving. Much of our budget was financed by donors but now we are financing almost 70 percent of our budget. Last year, the priority was energy and this time it has been roads. Possibly agriculture because we have also - NAADS was in only about 700 sub-counties in the country but now it is spreading throughout the country. I think that there is an increase and hopefully next year, we shall have more funds.

Hon. Kabonesa and a few others wondered why we don’t stop people who are indiscriminately buying and consequently denying them food. I think that this is similar to the issue of seeds. We are trying to make sure that we regulate, where necessary so as not to deplete our food reserves.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that NAADS was one of the white elephant projects that have little impact on the lives of our rural people in spite of huge chunks of money sunk in there. While it is true that in some areas NAADS did not make any impact, it is also very true that in some areas NAADS made significant impact and made meaning to our farmers. In the Teso sub-region, NAADS did very well. The same applies to big parts of the Western region and some parts of West Nile. 

It must also be noted that one of the reasons why NAADS was restructured was to fill in these deficiencies. There is now more participation of leaders and you will appreciate that we have run workshops for leaders, including Members of Parliament, in all the regions in this country and we have captured all their concerns, which we have incorporated to ensure that we panel beat NAADS and own it for meaningful farming.

Madam Speaker, he went on to mention the tractor mechanisation. What I must agree with is the issue of ownership. However, it is not true that we are going to give these tractors to groups. They are going to be owned privately by these groups because the first failed project of tractors was because they were put at sub-counties and they were being hired out. Most of them were also politicised so that the one who knew the sub-county chairman or the chief would use the tractor. As such, maintenance became a problem. We have looked at all this and the ministry is only giving them to either organised groups privately or individuals who can afford them. Very soon when government puts up a loan product for these medium and potentially large commercial farmers, we want them to own these tractors privately but with affirmative action.

There were also issues raised about the animal sub-sector -(Interruption)

MR LULUME: Thank you very much. Before you move from the crop sector, you talked about the improvement of productivity, mechanisation; the walking tractors and so on. You also talked about seeds and fertilizers. What do I go home with in respect of improvement of soil fertility using fertilisers so that my people no longer have to come to Kampala to get fertilisers? Are there some mechanisms that we can have in place so that fertilisers are moved nearer to the people more than ever before? 

Also, are you prioritising certain areas and not others in respect of the walking tractors? How long are people going to wait for this in order to improve productivity? 

As regards post harvest handling, let us imagine that people have improved their productivity and they have over produced, are you planning any mechanisms for storage?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did that arise from his answer or are you bringing new issues?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister was responding to a concern about the meager resources in the agricultural sector and I want him to clarify something. The concern was that the budget for agriculture has continuously been incongruous with the activities and tasks ahead. For instance, this year it was allocated 3.8 percent of the budget yet agriculture is the main stay of 90 percent of our population. Since he is near the Minister of Finance, the question Members are raising is: is there a way that he could assure this House that gradually there is going to be parity between the mainstay of our people and the budget allocation? It doesn’t help to have a minute component of our budget yet it is the main stay of the majority of our people. That is the question that Members want to hear the minister answer. Since they are both here, they could give us an answer and assurance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether that would not come at the end -

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, you mentioned the food that is being exported. One big problem that we have realised is that most of the food that is being exported to Kenya and Sudan is going without value addition. Our President is always telling us that there must be value addition to our products. We feel that if these products are first processed, we would gain a lot more for instance as regards maize. If it were processed here, I know our farmers would still benefit from the byproducts such as maize brand, most especially for the farmers rearing chicken. 

Hon. Minister, how are you going to ensure that? Because even in the President’s speech he mentioned that we are going to try and do value addition on our products. How are you going to control this? Much as you are going to control the food in the country to ensure food security, but still, how are you going to ensure that the products that are getting out of this country go with value added to them? Thank you. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank honourable members for raising those clarifications. I will start with the honourable member who asked about fertilisers. We are not stopping fertilizers, which are on the market, but we know that they are very expensive because we do not make them here; and what the government is doing is to ensure that we make fertilisers here so that the farmers can get them cheaply. We have also been training farmers through NAADS on crop protection and production, use of organic fertilisers and also making sure that those who have some sizeable land keep animals so that they can use composite and animal manure. 

As for the walking tractors, I did explain that in our wisdom we thought that the first batch should go to the North and East - those weak areas, which were affected by the war, because we think this is where we should increase production. But we are rolling out to other areas, and they are not free, except that we are availing them to farmers at a cost and with improved technologies to suit our conditions. When we launched them we did invite Members of Parliament and those who came saw that these can work on small and medium scale farms, and that farmers can do a lot of things. 

Hon. Ssekikubo, I will answer you partially and I will leave the rest maybe to the Prime Minister or to the Minister of Finance. But also, you must appreciate that roads are very relevant to agriculture, because if we produce and we cannot access the markets, then we have a problem. So to me, increasing the Road Fund at the time and increasing NAADS to that proportion is fair because we are moving from down upwards. 

Hon. Tubwita from Nakasongola, value addition has been incorporated into the NAADS programme. I do appreciate your concern and it has been our concern in the Ministry of Agriculture for a long time. It does not only fetch us little money but also denies us employment. We have exported live cows because we do not have a factory or an abattoir that can really process meat and separate hides and other items that can be processed as by-products. I want to inform the honourable members that we are in the advanced stages of putting up the first ever modern abattoir in zone I, which is Central Uganda, and we shall spread to zone II in the West and zone III in the East. So, the issue of value addition to crops and animals is a concern. 

If you look at the cotton, the problems we have had with our farmers is that while we have for a long time invested in production, the money we get from what we produce continues to go down and we are risking because if we do not move towards value addition, the multi-nationals will not only control processing but they will also control production and we shall only be workers. [Mr Akena: “Clarification”.] Just a minute; so, that is why government, in its wisdom, has put value addition as part of NAADS so that NAADS can support groups of farmers to own something that adds value to what they produce. We see there are a lot of advantages in having value addition. 

The other important advantage that should be known is that when you add value, you increase the shelf life of the products. When you add value, you access distant markets and you earn more money. So, we are actually supportive of value addition and government has capitalised UDB for value addition and I think soon or later, the Minister of Finance will come here to seek support from Members of Parliament so that we can have money for farmers to get meaningful loans that are less stringent so that they can add value. I will take your clarification. 

MR AKENA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I was trying to understand; you mentioned about the first modern abattoir. I seem to recall that there was a time when we had Soroti Meat Packers, which was for value addition. That was a time when the majority of cattle were actually found in Teso. 

Further to that, there was also the Lira Spinning Mill, which was for adding value to cotton being produced and that spinning mill actually could process 3,400 tonnes per annum. That particular project, despite equipment arriving for the rehabilitation of that Lira Spinning Mill, that equipment was never installed until the whole factory was sold off at less value than even the equipment which was imported and that was another loan, which Uganda had taken. So, I am seeking clarification. You are saying this is the first ever modern abattoir, but there were value addition proposals in the past! Thank you. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Member, for seeking that clarification. You see, there is a difference between an abattoir and a slaughter place. If you want to know the difference, it is that when you go to abattoirs, you separate the skin and meat but we are really talking of real processing. We still have an abattoir that actually is sub-standard that is located on Port Bell road. The abattoir or the slaughter place in Soroti was really vandalised, it was never completed to be what we would call an abattoir and, therefore, even rehabilitating it is very costly to put it to the level of a modern abattoir. The modern abattoir we are talking of is for parking and exporting, not for local consumption.

As for the spinning mill, it is not only that one. There are things, which went wrong because of our history. But when you produce a child and he dies, you do not stop producing -(Interjection)- yes. Please, let us face the reality. The mill is gone but what do we do? We have the farmers. We need to invest in value addition. 

There were only two issues that were raised on the animal sub-sector. One was disease control and the disease status, especially in Karamoja. Hon. Members, we had an outbreak of FMD in 2006 and this Parliament supported the Executive and we passed a supplementary budget and we vaccinated all our herds in risky and affected areas. This translated into the whole country being FMD free for 15 months, without any outbreak at all. We thought this was a very big achievement because during that time the farmers were able to sell and transact in animal products. We, however, maintained a partial quarantine where we allowed animal slaughter and people could only move animals from one place to another with the permission of the Commissioner for Animal Health and Entomology to ensure that we do not transport disease from one area to other areas.

I have good news that this year Uganda was declared Rinder Pest free in the region. This is a very big achievement on our part. (Applause) We got the certificate, and I think next week I will bring it and lay the certificate on the Table. We have however been having problems with the timeliness of vaccines because we do not make vaccines ourselves but we have managed to supply vaccines to the affected and risky districts mainly, Isingiro, Kiboga, Masaka, Rakai, Buliisa, Kibaale, Mityana, Ssembabule, Hoima, Jinja, Wakiso, Bugiri, Oyam, Mbarara, Mukono, Kiruhura, Kamuli and Luwero. 

On the issue of Karamoja, we had a problem of PPR. This outbreak occurred last year and it was reported to the International Organisation for Animal Health. The vaccine is very expensive. We have however partnered with the World Food Organisation and they have given us 500,000 dozes. It must be appreciated that the disease does not know borders so we had to work together with Kenya, Tanzania and Sudan to make sure that what we do on this side of the border is also done on the other side. We have accordingly covered the entire Karamoja and we have given 100 dozes to Nakapiripirit, 120 to Moroto, 120 to Kabong, 150 to Kotido and 10,000 to Abim.

Madam Speaker, we had a threat from Rift Valley Fever which was very prevalent at that time in Kenya. It killed an unspecified number of animals and people because it attacks both animals and human beings. We, however, managed to survive it because we used high level surveillance and using crude methods that are very effective. We made sure that our herdsmen and people who are involved in livestock use a pesticide that contains the chemical which kills the insects that spread this disease. So we were free. We also survived Avian Influenza although we are very prepared. 

In the Karamoja area also we had CBPP and we have also responded and covered the entire Karamoja and parts of the Teso sub-region. 

Madam Speaker, there were issues to do with improved breeds and I am happy to inform the House that Cabinet lifted the ban on importation of semen because science has proved that Mad Cow Disease does not spread through semen. We allow importation of hybrid animals from selected countries that organically feed the animals the way we feed them to avoid problems that we may not handle. 

There are so many comments and observations that were made by Members, some of which were very resourceful. Our ministry has captured all of them and we have taken seriously some of those concerns. I am now inviting my colleague, hon. Mukisa, to come and respond to issues raised on Fisheries. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister maybe before you go, this ban, when did you lift it? Have you informed the country? I am hearing it for the first time.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: The what?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The lifting of the ban on the importation of semen.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes, we issued a press release in the newspapers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When was that?

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I think a month ago? Last month. Yes. We did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mukisa. (Mr Akena rose_) You have a problem, hon. Akena?

MR AKENA: When the honourable minister was referring to the spinning mill he referred to it as, “If your child has died, does it mean you stop producing?” The guidance I seek is that if your child has been murdered do you not seek justice? The spinning mill went under receivership about three months ago. The spinning mill was abandoned as an orphan and handed over to some unscrupulous business people who decided to rip out all that was there, making a profit even before taking possession. And just within three months it went under receivership. And now from the Minister of Agriculture I am being told that I should just forget about a dead child; not mourn my child; not seek justice; not bring to justice those who neglected to take care of this institution? So, Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the National Resistance Movement restored law and order -(Interjections)- yes, and if somebody bought something, and we liberalised and privatised some of these assets we had.

If somebody runs it down, is it really proper for us, without using the court procedure to pronounce ourselves, to go and capture these assets? I think what we are saying - in the first place that spinning mill is no longer under the Ministry of Agriculture; it was under the Privatisation Unit and I think the minister can clarify about the receivership.

Anyway, what I am saying and what is the thrust of the Ministry of Agriculture, is that we want farmers to own – if we can have a group of farmers owning it themselves, this is the way to go. If we can have Ugandan entrepreneurs who can be helped to own these facilities, this is the way to go. Madam Speaker, what belongs to everybody, sometimes, has problems. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the Minister of State for Fisheries.

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Mr Fred Mukisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will try to be brief on the issues that came up regarding the fisheries sector.

First and foremost, I would like to admit that the delay in the implementation of the ADB loan for the Fisheries Development Project has caused concern to everybody. And I think whoever caused this concern should have apologised. But I would like to assure you, hon. Members, that it is now on course and there will be no looking back.

It is true there were delays caused especially by the conditionalities of the African Development Bank. One of them was that there was a requirement for proof of ownership of the land on which the infrastructure was to be built. It took very long for the districts to produce this evidence. In fact at that time most of the district land boards were either non-functional or had been disbanded because of the new requirement that each board member had to have the senior six academic qualification or its equivalent. In fact towards the end we had to go ahead to implement this project, in some cases, without even land titles. After getting offers, the districts had to show that they were the owners of the land because we really had to start. But by that time the designing of the infrastructure had been done. I remember you approved 30 and I can assure you that the designs for 30 were actually done.

What has been done is that we now have ten under construction. The Committee of Agriculture toured these ten. The members of that committee have made their opinion and I would be very interested to know their opinion of the sites that they toured.

We have four, which are on board and starting in November and these are: Kagwala in Soroti, Namasale in Amolator, Ntoroko in Bundibugyo and Rwenshama in Rukungiri. The list is long because it starts with Majanji down to – I do not have the list here but I thought the Members of Parliament know since they toured –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. I want to seek clarification from the minister in charge of fisheries more especially on the fisheries project that was funded by a loan, which I talked about last time when I was contributing to the Budget Speech. We passed this loan as soon as we entered the Seventh Parliament in 2002; when we were fresh. This loan was supposed to run for five years from 2003 to June 2008. And it was supposed to have over 30 landing sites. Can we get a justification as to why they were turned to 14 landing sites?

Last year, the Sessional Committee of Agriculture, of which I was a Member, visited about six landing sites in Kalangala, Mukono, Mayuge and Busia. Our findings were that they were just launching the construction of those landing sites. All that is okay, but is the minister satisfied with the process, which has taken too long to be implemented? What about the quality of workmanship and the type of company that has been contracted to construct more or less all the ten landing sites? Has it got the capacity? When we went to Kalangala, we discovered that the very company that constructed the pier of Bukakata, which collapsed after a year, is the company that has been provided with the construction of the landing sites. Is it fair and are you in charge and satisfied that the work that is being done in the fisheries sector is real and will benefit the entire country as far as the fisheries improvement is concerned?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe what we should be asking the minister is whether he still intends to construct the 30 landing sites with that same money and if not, where is the money going to come from? If it is not there; what about us who have seen the landing sites?

MS OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was one of the Members who raised issues on this ADB loan for the fisheries sector. If I am not mistaken, I remember that you guided the House that a comprehensive report be brought here by the sector minister to inform the House. And I remember that the Prime Minister made an undertaking, but now I am seeing the sector minister responding just from the hard disc.

I think this is not a very simple issue because it involves a lot of funds yet we are running out of time. I remember we were asking about the strategy of implementing all those activities within the remaining time and I am being told that it was supposed to have ended in June. I think we must insist that a comprehensive report be brought to this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KABUUSU: Madam Speaker, I also would like to seek some clarification from the minister in respect to the issue of landing sites funded by that loan. In Kalangala we got two landing sites, grade one and two. The problem with the construction was that the local governments that were the beneficiaries had to provide land before the construction started. The local government of Kalangala did not provide land. Even now the land upon which construction is on going, there are homes of settlers who had been there before. 

Now SPENCON, the contractor encircled them and there are now wrangles in Kitobo landing site where the local government did not provide land for that project. The problems are due to the fact that land was just confiscated from the people.  Much as people need development, is the minister now happier that the construction is being disorganised by the non-provision of land by the local governments yet the time that was given to the contractors to do it is about to lapse? I want to understand this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we have attacked the minister too early. Let him complete his answer and if there are things missing we shall -

MR MUKISA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think my colleague there has really showed you the problem because acquisition of land was a problem. We could not start and even where we got assurance from the district local administration that we might as well go ahead because they were going to sort out land issues, they still have not.  Every time we tell the district administration, they tell us they are handling the land issues. I am particularly interested in seeing the landing sites in place. That is why we are going ahead with the construction.   Can you please assist the district administrations to sort out the land issue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is something from the chairperson of the committee. Okay, hon. Wonekha.

MS WONEKHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. I think the way hon. Rebecca put it about the way forward is the way the minister should go. I am saying this because even the current committee is recommending that we get an audit of the project, value for money and all those issues that are being raised here.

So, for the minister, Madam Speaker, to say that the Committee of Agriculture went around and that he is waiting for the report, I think is not correct.  What does the minister think? What does he have to tell Parliament as the minister in charge? That is important because the committee will make its report out of our contributions. So, I am saying, the way to go is for the minister to make a comprehensive report to Parliament because even our report, when it comes, that is what it will be demanding. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you are suggesting that he shelves the matter and comes up with a comprehensive statement? Okay, let us first hear from hon. Kaddunabbi. Maybe, he has information about the money.

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find the submission by the minister that districts did not provide land disturbing because one of the requirements for a place to qualify would be that, such a place shows its land title. Now, which comes first? Before you get the loan you must make sure that the places where you are going to utilise that loan is secured.  But now we went ahead in 2002 to get a loan and in 2008 he is talking of failing to get land when we have been paying interest on this loan! I think the minister really needs to help us know, which should come first.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  For a long time I have been following up this matter with kin interest because as I stated earlier, Kasilo County was supposed to be a beneficiary. I even did participate in acquiring land for the three landing sites of Bugondo, Kagwara and Mulondo in Kasilo. I did it in 2003. I was among the first few to submit this. We evicted people and secured land. It even almost cost some of us our constituencies in the 2006 elections. I am surprised that the answer given by the minister cannot cater for my side because I did this much earlier. 

But going back, Madam Speaker, when the minister said that some people should have apologized, I want to agree with him. This is so because I remember - by that time he was not in - bringing up this matter in this House that there was a problem and I liaised with Ministry of Public Service on where a commissioner in charge of this project had his wife as the implementing person. I asked the Minister of Public Service whether it was in order for a husband and wife to manage such a fund. I remember him saying it was wrong.  This is the man who failed the project and I think this is what the minister is referring to if I am not wrong.  

But I am again more perturbed, Madam Speaker, that the very gentleman, Mr Nyeko, is the one who has been elevated and made the Commissioner of Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation and the person who was more qualified, who acted for more than two year if not five, was denied that position. Last week he fired people within that organisation.  

Madam Speaker, this loan had a credit component. That money was moved from Finance to a ministry but up to date we are not seeing anything this money has done. So, hon. Minister, you should save your neck otherwise, we shall come for you. Tell us the truth of what has happened because this is a crack of the matter. Tell us whether you are going to construct all the 30 landing sites or not as Madam Speaker has asked. Are we going to have all the 30 landing sites or not? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is, when this loan was approved, the ministry went ahead to move in the districts where they were proposing to construct the modern landing sites, including my district.  Rwampanga was proposed for a modern landing site; they even went up to the site, but up to today people have been asking me about the construction of a modern landing site. 

Surprisingly, today, if the minister comes with a list of 10 districts, which are going to be catered for, it shocks me –(Interruption)

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I have just received information from Mpigi that the Ministry of Fisheries was given a land title for Katebo landing site, which was supposed to be constructed in Mpigi but up to now nothing has come up.

MS TUBWITA: Madam Speaker, my concern is, if the minister comes up with a list of 10 landing sites, I really wonder the criteria they used in selecting these landing sites of which some even do not have approved land titles yet some of the districts, which were really well organised are there waiting. The people are willing with no query about the implementation of the project. 

We want a comprehensive report to this House which will stipulate how they came to zero on the ten landing sites that were approved and we need to know the criterion they used and why some were sidelined, most especially my Rwampanga landing site which is a famous landing site in this country. 

MR MUKISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think you can see my problems. As one honourable member has said, this loan was conceived at a time when the sector was orphaned and it went without political supervision for all that time. I have been there for two years and you can see what problems I am grappling with to put right what went wrong. I would like to assure you honourable members that I am fighting hard. 

But I will still take responsibility and I would rather that I am allowed to explain and then later on when time allows, I come with a comprehensive report here which will help the House to move. But for now, I would like to respond to what has come up during the debate. I appreciate your concern and it is equally my concern as a sector minister. Please, I request that you bear with me to explain what is on the ground. You note down your concerns and let me get more of these questions then I will come here with a comprehensive report. 

On the number of landing sites, I would like to say that actually we approved 30, and Wakawaka was the 31. I have mentioned the other ten and the four; EU is going to do another six and those are: Kasensero, Katosi, Namoni, Dimo, Gaba and Ssenyi. That will give us 20. And since the designing of the other ten has also been done, it will be necessary to look for money to make sure that they are done. 

But the question is, “Where did the money go?” The answer is that given all that time, the costs of everything went up and most of the money was swallowed into inflation. So, the money cannot do all those landing sites. Therefore, even the money that was meant to go into the loan component ended up doing civil works. 

I am telling you what I have. For instance, I am also currently trying to look at what work is being done, and if I find anything, I will come out. But the reason I say that I am waiting for an investigation or the report from the Committee of Agriculture is because I was also interested in the committee looking at the work being done and having their own opinion apart from mine. 

When it comes to who is doing the work, it is true almost one company was given – but this is a situation where the procurement process could not allow a political person to go there. It was a politician eyes on but hands off. So the people were given contracts, but we had no say in it as the political leaders of this ministry. This company is actually known, it is SPENCON. So, we need an audit of it all to see whether it is doing a good job and I am also interested in it. 

The other question that came up was about the too many security agencies operating on the lake. Honourable members, I am in charge of the sector, but I found when contracts of co-operation had been signed with the technical officer with many agencies and they were all operating on the lake. Now, since then, I am now removing them. I have called back all the equipment; I am getting out all these forces so that fisheries department is in charge. And two months from now, you will not see those organisations on the lake doing fisheries work. But this was done by the technical officer on the ground and at that time he was in charge.

The problem that was also mentioned was that of the stocks. It is true that the stocks on the lakes have diminished; it is a very big problem. Our stocks have diminished and our fishermen are going out of business despite the fact that we are anxious to build landing sites. 

Now, here we are taking a number of steps to try to make sure that the fish stocks in the lakes survive. And the steps I am taking is de-monetizing of the licensing function. What has happened is that, most districts have been looking at licensing of boats as income generation whereas to us at the ministry, licensing is a control measure. So, we are re-centralising that so that we can control the situation.

We are also re-centralising the fisheries regulation and enforcement. That means the people at the district over whom we have had virtually no power over, and the districts have been running them, are going to be recentralised so that we can have direction in the sector. As I said, we are recalling the licensing function from the local councils to the department of fisheries. 

Another step that we are taking is, we are limiting fishing capacity on all water bodies. We are going to do this by what we call closed access. What has been operating on our lakes is what we call open access. Open access means that anybody and anytime, provided he has a boat and nets, has access to our lakes. And because of this anybody who gets out of employment in any sector has been ending up on our lakes. This in itself has created excessive capacity on our lakes. This we have to look at. We must find a formula of handling it. 

We are also going to introduce what they call closed seasons. Closed seasons used to exist but for some reason there has not been any closed season. This is practiced everywhere in the world but in Uganda fishing is from 1st January to 31st December without any control whatsoever. I am going to introduce fishing seasons in various places at various times so as to control the effect on the lakes. 

Also the numbers of licenses have to match the available resources. This is going to be done in consultation with the researchers so that we know what stocks we have where; how many boats we can have and how many nets we can have.

There is also a measure of curbing illegalities. Illegal fishing is almost – even some of the forces that we put on the lakes actually assist in illegalities. We are moving in this direction and that is why we are recalling most of the functions to the centre. 

We are also going to do some restocking of the water bodies of Kyoga, George, Lake Wamala and the minor bodies so that we can increase on our stocks. But the other alternative is that we are going to promote aquaculture. Aquaculture is the way to go because even if we restock our lakes, still there will be a problem of stocks because of the demand. So, we think aquaculture is going to help us increase on our stocks. 

The last question –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him close. We shall have a full debate at a later stage.

MR MUKISA: If I can finish and then I take questions later. There was a question about the money which was meant as a loan component to the farmers as opposed to the other money that was given as assistance. The money that was given as assistance was distributed, I think two months ago, and all the beneficiaries received their money in form of inputs. With the loan component however, there was no agreement between us and the bank because at that time there was no policy on microfinance. And as you can see, even now, we are still grappling with it. And also most of those funds were channelled into infrastructure. (Interruption) 

PROF. LATIGO: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, I just wanted to give information to correct what the honourable minister said because again we were in the same committee with the government chief whip. When we were considering that loan, we specifically recommended at that time that the credit component of the loan be moved to the main microfinance body that was handling credit. So, it was not a question that there was no policy. Actually the problem is that, like we were saying earlier, once you agree on something with those institutions, they do not work like us, they work by the letter of what you have agreed; and that is where we shall have problems with other things.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. I hope you are winding up.

MR MUKISA: I thank you very much for that information. All I knew and what I found out on the ground was that, we were supposed to implement it. We actually tried to work with the Minister in charge of Microfinance but eventually the bank gave us permission to put that money on infrastructure and that is where it is being used. That is my contribution but I promise to come with a comprehensive document which will be looked at and debated so that you also assist me in making sure that things move the way they should move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know this ADB touches, I think, three quarters of the country. It is a matter which Members feel very strongly about. Can you bring it together with the report of the committee? Can you bring it during this debate so that we debate your committee report and finish? You know, a loan of seven years! It is really too long.

MR MUKISA: I will do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, you can get ready. When we are debating the Agriculture Committee report, his statement should form part of the – 

MR MUKISA: But, Madam Speaker, I would be very glad if I would be assisted by the honourable members to slot in areas that they would like me to touch so that when I come here, I have everything together. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, before the ministers of agriculture leave the Floor, I just thought it important that I would ask this question because it seems very insensitive that we are discussing things about fish, etcetera and yet many of us have been reading in the papers that one of the colleagues of the ministers had been taken ill. The first story was that he was in South Africa and then he went to Germany. 

I thought that the matter would be raised at an appropriate time like this so that we not seem to be totally insensitive. It would be important if the ministers could just let us know the condition of our colleague.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, our colleague fell sick and he was first hospitalised here in Mulago and it necessitated him to get more specialised treatment in South Africa, Cape Town. He was facilitated to go through the medical board and the Prime Minister’s Office. He went, received treatment and came back last week. It is not true that he went to Germany. He came back but the doctors advised him that he should rest and he has also written to the Prime Minister and some of his colleagues that he needs to rest. While he is away, we are taking care of his schedules. He is back and we hope he will be better.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Prof Latigo for raising that question. Some colleagues do not want to reveal when they are sick because when they do so, The Red Pepper and some other papers show that they are on the brink of dying. For example, when I was also sick and I was treated abroad, they printed a lot of rubbish. But in my case, I do not mind it, although as I said some colleagues would rather keep these matters private. So it is tricky. First of all, we cannot reveal the nature of the problem and secondly some simply do not want us to discuss these matters. That is why we have not been informing you. So, it will depend upon the individual.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe on behalf of the House, I would like to send our best wishes to hon. Dr Sebunya for a speedy recovery. We welcome him back from wherever he was and also to tell him that – you know, he is a bit of a comedian in this House. That is what we miss mostly about him. So, we would like him back as quickly as possible. Tell him that we are looking forward to seeing him again.

Concerning the fisheries sector, I think if the Members could write questions briefly and send them to the minister by Monday, what you want him to address especially on the ADB loan so that he can complete it when we are discussing the committee report for MAAIF. So, I would like to adjourn the House. I thank you very much for today’s work. The House is adjourned to Monday 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 18 August 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)


