Thursday, 15 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.30 P.M. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you remember that two days ago we had visitors from Kagoma Constituency. At this time, in the gallery we have our children from St. Andrew’s Primary School in Butembe County, Jinja. You are most welcome - (Applause). 

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I greatly appreciate that we must heed the dictates of the Budget Act, but this being a Thursday, I assumed that there would be a provision for a Private Members’ Bill. Because I have a standing motion, I thought I would be given time on the Order Paper to move it. And I am ready to do so.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, if you have a standing motion and it is not on the Order Paper, then definitely it will not be entertained. It will be brought up some other time. 

Honourable Members, as you are aware, the first item on our Order Paper is to constitute the Members to the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS. It is a new committee and an important one, so the procedure will be as follows: 

The ballot box will be demonstrated to be empty, inside the Chamber. Then it will be locked and thereafter placed on one of the tables in the Central Lobby near your mailboxes. This is where the voting takes place. Members whose names begin with letters A to L shall proceed and pick ballot papers from the desk manned by the clerks in the Western Lobby, on my right. Those whose names begin with M to Z shall proceed to pick ballot papers from the Eastern Lobby, on my left. 

You are all reminded that the required number to fully constitute the committee is 15. You should therefore tick only 15 names of your choice in order not to invalidate the ballot. If you tick 16 members, we shall not be able to deal with that particular ballot paper. This exercise should not take more than 30 minutes. I shall then suspend the proceedings for the House now. When we resume, we shall proceed with the business set on the Order Paper, and the results will be announced as soon as I get them from those who will be tabulating them. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, this is a committee that has attracted the largest number of candidates in this House, and so it should because it is a very important committee. We have just finished our seminar on the issue, and HIV is really of importance to the nation and for human survival. 

Because of that very reason, we should not miss what we want to do with this committee. We should seriously consider how to constitute it. I know there are 45 people standing, and I may just go and tick whatever 15 people I would like. I would however wish that members bore three principles in mind as they vote. One of them is gender balance. 

Of course this is a very important point because today you are not going to fight AIDS unless you have enough women on the committee. That is a fact. We should vote for 15 members and if you get two or three names reflecting gender imbalance, then you can as well talk about the committee not existing. 

The second point I would like to raise is the question of the committee being as broad-based as possible, in the national sense. That way, when this committee gets to deal with national issues, each area should have a representative. Mr Speaker, I am not contesting, and I am not even campaigning. I am only asking Members to bear in mind some of the above principles, otherwise we may lose sight of the targets we have set. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well honourable Members, as you have heard we are not campaigning for anybody. One thing that you should bear in mind is that although this is a committee for parliamentarians, it should also be technical. It should have people who have some knowledge about this matter. If you really can include them, then you can also consider the other matters raised by hon. Omara Atubo. But let me hear some more views on the issue.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. This House has been voting for some time and it has proved beyond reasonable doubt that it can vote well. I have a feeling that they know how to balance and they know what sort of people should be on this committee. I think that we should not waste time over that. We should go ahead and vote. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have heard the two views.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What hon. Babu has said can be considered as a general fact. When hon. Omara Atubo brought this issue up, however, I think he was more concerned with the nature of this committee than the competence of Parliament merely to do this. I say this because there is a tendency in this House for people to vote - and I am being very straight about this - for example, they can tick five names instead of 15 simply because to tick other names will mean boosting the chances of others to be voted in. Well, it is your choice; there is nothing wrong in choosing five but if the intention were merely to promote the five rather than putting in place a competent committee, then you would have undermined the process of voting.

If 15 people were to be voted for by everybody, I think the average would come out that the 15 best would be voted.  But where voting is done such that you cannot only pick two names, the caution and the advice given by hon. Omara Atubo would be worthwhile.  

I would also like to concur with him and say that let us consider the fact that this problem cuts across the country. As we vote, we should bear in mind representation of the whole country in this committee in your individual vote.

MR SEBALU: Mr Speaker, we have already constituted standing committees in this House, and to the best of my knowledge, no one is complaining about the competence and the way they are functioning because the Standing Committees do serve the broad interest of this country and Parliament in particular. For instance, we had a Budget Committee, which I consider to be technical and it has other considerations that are not far from this very committee we are constituting. In the wisdom of Members, they were able to elect competent Members, putting other considerations as people are raising. So, why are we changing the procedure we have used before?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think let us proceed with the exercise, but before we do so, as I introduced our children from Betembe, we have also in the Gallery, our children from Shimoni Teachers College, Kampala. You are welcome!  

Maybe I have to explain to you, our visitors, that this is a democratic institution. It was introduced by democracy and we practice democracy. We are now about to constitute a committee to deal with HIV/AIDS, and we are discussing the procedure to use. The procedure should be democratic and we have agreed that it is going to be democratic.

When you hear me say, ‘Proceedings suspended for 30 minutes’, it will mean that I will move from this Chair and go away for 30 minutes so that the Members can decide on the committee. But I will come back and maybe you should stay around and follow the other proceedings that will follow.

I think the matter is settled. To enable you carry out the exercise, proceedings are suspended for 30 minutes. That means we shall be here at 3.00 p.m. to commence with the Committee of Supply.

(Proceedings were suspended at 2.29p.m. and the House resumed at 3.09p.m.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I must thank you for having carried out this exercise successfully in the sense that there are no reports of violence or rigging. I think we are going to start counting these votes, and I do not think candidates should have agents to be present when this is done. I will get some four Members to supervise this exercise. I nominate hon. Katuntu to be one of them. I also nominate the Member for Ntungamo district, hon. Rwakimari and honourable Member for Kitgum district, hon. Akwero Odwong. I nominate the Member for UPDF and I nominate hon. Maate, and hon. Pataki Amasi from Obongi.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I wish to register my concern and complaint regarding this electoral exercise. The other day I told you I had sought nomination for membership to the Committee on Equal Opportunities, where I wish to serve with commitment and vigour. I explained to you that the office of the Clerk to Parliament had erred in including my name on the list of those who sought nomination for the Committee on HIV.

I expressed my wish to remain on the Committee on Equal Opportunities, and when you put the question, the House pronounced itself in favour of my wish but today, I was surprised to see the ballot paper with my name as No.42. This had the effect of confusing voters –(Laughter)- and I think the effect of rigging the entire exercise.  May I seek clarification?

THE SPEAKER: I thought your name was crossed. I think they put a mark on it to indicate that you are no longer a candidate in this. I do not think that has confused anybody.  I am sure there is nobody - of course when I announce the results we shall have three standing committees. Those who will have been elected on this and those who were elected on the other two will sit tomorrow very early in the morning to elect the leadership of those respective committees.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, yesterday some Members showed some intentions of leaving the Committee on HIV/AIDS, and today they were again on the list. This must have interfered with the voting, and therefore the results.  Those names should not have been included in today’s list for the candidates. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, according to the sample list that was given to me, those names were crossed out to indicate that they are no longer candidates – (Interjection)- Well, they may be here but you see, they put a mark on them to indicate that they are no longer valid candidates. We shall address the issue if it causes a problem.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members. I present the report of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for this Financial Year. 

In accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution and Rules 124 and 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Sessional Committee on Works, Housing and Communications received, examined and discussed the Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Ministry for this Financial Year. The committee hereby makes its findings, observations and recommendations to the august House for its consideration and guidance.  

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, the committee adopted a number of strategies to study the statement. These included studying last year’s financial policy statement, the budget framework, papers of the sector, the statement for this financial year, and had discourse with the ministry officials, among others. 

Most importantly, the committee also studied submissions of the honourable Members on the state of the road networks in their constituencies, and their reactions to the ministry’s performance on fiscal performance, district by district. 

Although very few Members responded to the committees’ request, the committee is very grateful to those who showed a lot of interest in the projects in their constituencies. These briefed the committee on the level of performance in their areas. Other Members are also urged to be more vigilant, particularly with regard to road projects in their constituencies. 

The committee also made a spot-on visit to the Busega-Mityana-Mubende-Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road.  

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the Ministry has got two directorates namely; the Directorate of Engineering and the one for Transport and Communications, through which it carries out its functions of planning, implementation, maintenance and monitoring. The committee observed that this structure tends to overshadow the important aspects of housing and communications. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry be restructured to have three directorates namely, that of Transport, Housing and one for Communications. We hope this will give prominence to the important sub-sectors in the Ministry for proper planning, resource allocation and effective accountability.

We begin with the transport sub-sector, particularly the road infrastructure. The committee notes that the government attaches great importance to road infrastructure. A good road network underpins Uganda’s overall road strategy and reduction of poverty. Indeed, the committee would like to applaud the Movement Government for considering investment in roads; the roads have been increasing year after year. Even in the allocation of donor funds, the transport sector comes up as the third largest consumer of donor funds to the tune of US $386 million in loans and US $181 million in project grants. 

Uganda as a country has a total road network of about 67,000 kilometres. Of these, only 2,850 kilometres are tarmac and the rest is earth and gravel. At present the cost of constructing one kilometre of road with bitumen is between Shs 300 million and Shs 500 million. 

There is no doubt, Mr Speaker, that feeder roads and community access roads are the nerve centres of community development. They provide the necessary inter-connectivity for development. The Ministry is responsible for macro planning, co-ordination, monitoring and setting standards and capacity building for districts (feeder), urban and community access roads maintenance.  

The district urban and community access roads have benefited significantly from PAF resources. District road allocation has increased from Shs 13 billion in the 1996/1997 Financial Year, to Shs 37 billion in the last Financial Year. 

Under the updated 10-year Road Strategy Development Plan (RSDP II), the District Urban Community Access Roads (DUCAR) Programme is included, which started last Financial Year. The committee would like to commend the Ministry and Government for bringing on board DUCAR to cater for even the urban centres in our country. 

While the committee is satisfied with the ministry’s strategic objectives with regard to roads, there are a number of issues that need to be addressed urgently. One issue identified was the high cost of road works. 

The cost of road construction and road maintenance in Uganda has been rated to be the highest in Eastern and Southern Africa region, yet the cost of road construction we have here does not correspond with their life span. We request that a study be carried out to find out why this is so, and if it is due to corruption, the culprits should be brought to book. 

The second point is poor supervision of road works. The committee observed that supervision of road works by the ministry is poor, and this has led to diversion and misuse of funds. For example, the committee learned that some field staffs report the completion of a project when actually the project was not handled at all, or was partially done. The committee would like to thank the honourable Members of Parliament who brought this anomaly to our attention. 

The committee would like to urge the ministry to undertake monitoring and supervision of the projects to ensure value for money. The ministry should improve on its quality assurance in order to justify continued funding of its quality management department.  

Mr Speaker, it is further recommended that whenever a project is to be carried out in any particular area, the local political leadership and the area Member of Parliament should be informed about the scope of work to be executed - (Applause). This will enhance social acceptance and local monitoring of the projects being executed. Mr Speaker and honourable Members, some road contracts have been done in as secret a manner as you could ever imagine, yet Members of Parliament and local leaders are supposed to be monitors of the project.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker is the issue of presidential pledges. The President has promised people of various districts that government will construct or upgrade roads in their areas.  For example, in the last election, the President promised to upgrade 19 roads in different areas of Uganda. The approximate cost is above one trillion shillings, almost equivalent to our Budget for the whole year yet this financial year’s Budget does not reflect these pledges at all.  The Committee, therefore, is concerned that failure by government to fulfil the Presidential Manifesto may create political problems in future.  

The Policy on Road Equipment and Government Policy of Contracting out Road Works:  

The Committee observed that the ministry is steadily moving towards divesting the maintenance, rehabilitation and development of national roads from the ministry to an autonomous road agency. The purpose of the institutional reforms is to facilitate the separation of the procurement and the implementation functions from those of planning and co-ordination. Indeed today, most of the major works are being co-ordinated by the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU), which tenders out the work to private contractors who do most of the work. In spite of this, government continues to procure road equipment for the national roads. For instance, last financial year, about 3.5 billion was spent on the equipment. 

Although the minister informed the committee that it would take a bit of time for the road authority to take up all the road works, the committee regards this as a serious contradiction in policy. The committee further noted that RAFU, which was supposed to be a transitional agency to the road authority has been in existence for too long and its maintenance is very costly to government.

Promotion of the Local Construction Industry:

Parliament has consistently recommended that local consultants and contractors should be given capacity and affirmative action on road projects. Even the donors have supported this position. A statement of the donor community presented during the road conference by Mr Guy Rijcken reads: 

“An increased percentage of works and service contracts carried out by domestic contractors and consultants will result in cost savings and an improved balance of payments. It will therefore be in the interest of government to implement policies supporting the development of an enhanced national private sector capability for road construction and maintenance.”   

The committee therefore calls for demonstrated commitment by government to empower the local construction industry.  

Upgrading of Roads from Feeder Status to National Roads:  

One of the points considered by the ministry when upgrading a feeder road to a national road is whether that road connects one district headquarter to another.  However, the committee noted that a number of districts have very few national roads while others have none at all. 

The committee also learnt that there has been a programme in the ministry as far back as 1998 to upgrade 300kms of feeder roads to national roads and will rehabilitate 1000kms of feeder roads. The committee is of the view that the implementation of this programme has taken far too long. The committee was informed that the study to identify the roads that require upgrading would commence in December this year and end in October next year.

The committee recommends that the exercise be expedited and Parliament be brought on board in the determination of roads to be upgraded in order to ensure that the programme reflects a national profile.  

District Road Equipment:

It is government policy to procure road maintenance equipment for each district, however, a number of problems have hampered its implementation. For instance: 

1. The budget for road equipment is limited and cannot cater for all the new districts that are being created.

2. Some districts, especially the old ones, were allocated very old equipment whose maintenance costs is beyond the capacity of these districts.  

3. Distribution of the equipment is not responsive to the geographical terrain and the length of the district road network.

4. Most districts do not have the capacity to maintain the equipment, and fuel and repair costs are a big strain on the resources of the districts.

5. The cost of transporting road equipment for repair to Bugembe and other mechanical workshops, which are even ill equipped, is exorbitant. Ultimately, the country is going to have a lot of idle capacity in various yards across the country.

The committee recommends that the policy be reviewed and districts be provided with more resources to contract the works to the private sector. However, the districts should maintain emergencies road repairs.  

Bridges and Drainage:

The Committee appreciated the attention the ministry gives to bridges and drainage, particularly the creation of a specific division under the Roads Department to address bridges and drainage. However, while the division has compiled an inventory of all the bridges and swamp crossings and identified those that are in critical condition and require urgent replacement and funding, the committee is concerned that no construction has started.

Mr Speaker, the Committee attaches great importance to the bridges on road networks that service the communities.  It recommends a special budget for culverts to service community access roads. The committee is grateful to the Budget Committee and the Minister of Finance for accepting to re-allocate Shs 442, 000,000 to culvert and emergency repairs on community access roads.
But this is very little money compared to the requirement of the culverts, and especially when you are expecting El Nino rains soon. 

Busega – Mityana and Kyegegwa – Kyenjojo Projects:

The committee made an on spot assessment of this road and the findings are as follows - Mr Speaker and honourable Members, this is an important part of the project that needs all your attention: 

• Busega–Mityana is in a dilapidated state, although some pothole patching is being carried out. 

• There are no funds in this Year’s Budget to rehabilitate the road.  

• Kyegegwa–Kyenjojo part of the Mubende–Kyenjojo Project that was contracted to Hoffman & Murray Roberts, a South African firm, is gravel yet the road design was meant for tarmacking. 

• That particular section requires bitumen. The road is well prepared waiting for bitumen but we do not have the money and the heavy traffic that has shifted to this route, especially trailers destined for Kigali and Congo, and the number of coaches have already caused serious damage to the road. In a short time the section of Kyegegwa–Kyenjojo will be a waste and yet we have put in a lot of money. 

• About seven million dollars was required at the beginning of the year to put a single layer on this road and, all that the contractor needed was commitment from government.  But after waiting in vain for the government’s response, the contractor, after finishing the job which he was supposed to have done, had to pack up his bags and go back to South Africa after selling even the equipment. We are told that it would require about one million dollars to mobilise the site again, which I think is very expensive on our part.

Mr Speaker, the committee would like to state that this is a waste of national resources arising out of poor planning and lack of proper privatisation. Government ought to handle projects in a systematic manner rather than spreading thinly all over the country. The committee, therefore, strongly requests that government sources funds, even from the divestiture account, in order to complete this very important national and regional project -(Applause).  

I have informally discussed with the Minister of State for Privatisation and he said that they have Shs78 billion on that divestiture account. Therefore, I think this Parliament should help to get that money so that that project can be completed. 

TRANSPORT SERVICES

The National Transport Master Plan:   

The committee regrets to report that to date the National Transport Master Plan has not yet been formulated in spite of consistent assurances from the minister that his ministry would meet the deadline for its formulation. In the absence of the plan, the country lacks a comprehensive, well-researched and co-ordinated policy on all modes and aspects of transport, including car parking in Kampala and other towns.  The master plan is long overdue. Every effort must be made to produce this plan immediately.

City Traffic Jams: 

One of the policy targets of the road sub-sector is to improve on traffic flow and passenger speed movement in Kampala and in other inner urban areas. The committee observes that the city is congested with a lot of traffic.  While the committee appreciates efforts by the ministry to de-congest the city through interventions like traffic lights and the proposed Northern By-pass, it is the considered opinion of the committee that many commuter taxis in the city aggravate congestion.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that investment in bigger buses be encouraged for city commuting and commuter taxis, the “Kamunyes”, be restricted to the periphery parks in the suburbs -(Applause).

Road Accidents:

The carnage on our roads has been rampant. The committee has learnt with appreciation that the ministry has devised a three-year Road Safety Action Plan that will address road safety in a comprehensive manner by focussing on the road user, the road and the vehicle.  Under the plan, a road safety conscious society is to be nurtured and only dependable drivers will be allowed to drive PSV vehicles. The inspection of vehicles will be privatised and enhanced to stop the use of junk vehicles on the road, and the black spots on the road will be cleared.  

The committee urges Parliament to support the plan and the government to expedite its implementation.  

Inland Water Transport:

The committee is not satisfied with the speed with which government is handling water transport. Whereas the ministry states that the strategic objectives under water transport are to ensure safety, prepare a comprehensive water transport legislation, promote private sector participation and promote integration with rail and road infrastructure, the committee is sceptical about the flowery objectives embedded in the policy statements year in and year out. People continue to perish on the waters because of using rudimentary vessels and many communities around the water bodies are in need of ferry services, for instance, the people of Nakasongola. Even the Kalangala ship may arrive when the beneficiaries are no more. You know how many deaths we have had on our waters, but we tend to drag our feet in getting the ship in place. The money was approved by the 6th Parliament but up to now we do not have a ship in place. 

The committee is also sceptical about government’s policy of promoting private sector development and maintenance of major landing infrastructure such as piers. The committee urges government to accord water transport serious priority and not to abdicate from its duty of providing and maintaining landing infrastructure the way it does with the roads.  

Rail Transport:

The committee observed that the government is committed to privatising URC by next year. The committee would like to draw government’s attention to the strategic importance of URC and rail transport to our economy, especially since Uganda is a land-locked country. This should be considered seriously during the process of privatising URC. In the view of the emerging global economic opportunities like AGOA, All But Arms Initiative and many others, rail transport as a prime long distance carrier of heavy and bulky goods to the seaports should be promoted. Moreover, the ever-increasing costs of road maintenance and repair due to heavy traffic on the roads would be mitigated since the heavy and bulky goods would be transported by rail.  

The committee recommends that rail transport and URC be considered as a priority and as a strategic asset that should be promoted as a centre of excellence in the East African community.


Air Transport:

The committee noted with appreciation that the National Civil Aviation policy was finalised. The committee is confident that the policy will properly guide the air transport industry in the country. The committee further noted with appreciation the patriotic efforts of some nationals who launched flights at the Entebbe Airport like Africa One and many others.

House Sub-Sector:

The committee was informed that the policy of the ministry with regard to the housing sector is to create an enabling environment for overall improvement and development of decent and affordable shelter for all.  

The committee observed as follows:  

1. The Ministry has no agents at the local level to create awareness about the housing development plans, which are supposed to be in place. The housing sector appears to be least felt and known government department in the countryside.  

2. The few national shelters like Maluku in Mbale, Oli in Arua, Masese in Jinja, and Namuwongo in Kampala cannot be easily replicated in other deserving areas because they were poorly managed and recoveries are very low. 

3. The country eventually has no national housing policy as yet.  

Therefore, the committee is a bit sceptical about the enabling environment policy since the cost of building materials remains high. For example, a bag of cement in Uganda is approximately US$10 while in Kenya the same bag is US$5. Building materials on the market like cement, iron sheets are adulterated. We have people who tamper with the cement and we cannot get the correct sample of the cement.  

In this regard, the committee recommends that the ministry’s management division liases with all other relevant departments of government to clear the market of adulterated building materials to avert a looming disaster.  The committee, therefore, urges the government to expedite a national housing policy in order to address the housing needs of Ugandans in a holistic manner.

Proceeds from the Sale of Pool Houses (Estimated to be 16.5 billion as at 30th June 2002):

The committee noted that the government had decided to retain the proceeds from the sale of public servants pool houses into the housing sector with a view of increasing housing stock. While the committee appreciates this policy, the modalities of availing the money to the beneficiaries are not yet clearly known and publicised. The committee would like to advise government not to deploy these funds into housing projects similar to those of Oli, Masese, and Namuwongo, whose performance has not been satisfactory.

Construction of Government Offices:

The Committee observed that the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications is to construct its headquarters on Jinja road at a cost of US$9.6 million, although in the last financial year the Ministry had indicated the cost of US$8.5 million. The Committee observed that other Government ministries were also in the process of putting up their headquarters. 

While the committee is not against the principle of constructing Government offices, it was concerned at the piecemeal manner in which Government was addressing its office accommodation, which would ultimately make the exercise very expensive for the country.  Moreover, in the financial year 2000/2001, Parliament was informed that there was an overall plan to build enough offices for Government on build-operate-transfer arrangement over a period of 10 to 15 years. This Government-private investor relationship seems to be receding to the periphery.

The Committee therefore recommends that Government address office accommodation as a priority to mitigate the high cost of rent, and Government office accommodation should be handled in a holistic manner. Mr Speaker, if you take an example of Ministry of Gender, they are renting a very expensive building, and up to now there are no partitions; the Minister with the Permanent Secretary and the messenger are all in a classroom. 

The Building Control Bill:

Mr Speaker, the Committee is happy to report that the Ministry is processing the Building Control Bill, which will, among other things, consolidate, harmonize and amend the law relating to the erection of buildings and monitor and supervise closely all building works to ensure standards and safety of occupants. The proposed law should also provide for mandatory maintenance of property by owners.

The committee encouraged the Ministry to expedite this law.  The Committee would also like to applaud the Ministry for making affordable plans.  We would like to encourage the honourable members of Parliament to inform the voters about the plans, whose cost ranges between Shs 100,000 to 200,000.

Implementation of the Condominium Property Law:

The Committee learnt that due to difficulties in logistics relating to documentation, there were delays in the implementation of the law, particularly the demarcations and selling of the existing flats. At the same time, the Committee observed that there is a lot of anxiety among the beneficiaries of existing blocks of flats that are to be turned into condominium property, and NHCC is also eager to untie its capital in the flats. The Committee urges the respective Government departments, namely, Ministry of Works, Ministry of Lands and Kampala City Council to give the implementation of the law a priority.

Mr Speaker, I turn to the Communications Sub Sector: Provision Of communications services.

The Committee would like to applaud the Government policy of liberalization in the communications sector that has enabled both private and public sectors to provide communication services. Indeed, the increase in the total telephone density is clearly noticeable. However, the Committee would like to raise concern on a number of issues:

•The geographical coverage of telecommunications services throughout the country is not in line with the license obligations of the national operators, that is MTN and UTL.

• The roll out obligations of fixed lines is seriously below schedule.

• The operators have gone in for mobile telephony, which unfortunately is more expensive than fixed phones.

• The tariffs of mobile phone companies are still expensive.

• The geographical and network coverage is still very small, even in the so-called protected or served areas. In some places that are classified as covered, the network is only picked on top of anthills, trees and rocks.

Mr Speaker, we are aware that UTL and MTN are supposed to cover the whole country; they are supposed to cover all the sub-counties except 154 sub-counties. The 154 sub-counties are the ones that are not supposed to be covered, but we are saying they are not yet anywhere; they have rushed to mobiles. The Committee recommends that the regulator, who is the Uganda Communications Commission, step up its enforcement zeal of the license obligations. 

Mr Speaker, we come to the sensitisation of the public on the use of mobile phones. The Committee has observed that there is a crave for mobile phones.  However, the public seems not to appreciate that a phone should be a business facility, a facility with which to make money. Instead, people are spending their meagre income on greetings and gossip. The Committee recommends that Government should sensitise the public on the rational use of mobile phones through campaigns like those of immunization and reproductive health.

Information Communication Technology (ICT):

Mr Speaker, the Committee learnt with appreciation that the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications has brought on board information and communication technology. The Committee recognizes that ICT is a tool for all development processes, and would like Parliament to support the Ministry in this endeavour; however, the Committee notes that different bodies claim to be spearheading the initiative. The Committee recommends that Government place ICT under one roof to ensure effective guidance and accountability.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee of Works, Housing and Communication wishes to recommend to the House for approval, the recurrent and development estimates of the Ministry for this financial year. The recurrent expenditure is Shs 23, 366,000,000 and development expenditure is Shs 281, 976,541,000. 

Mr Speaker, I am sorry for the error; we had to get the figures from the Ministry of Finance at the latest hour. There have been some adjustments, and this figure does not even include the taxes. So the correct figure is Shs 281, 976,541,000; that is for development expenditure.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and the Committee for the report and for your presentation. Honourable members, as we observed yesterday, this debate followed a general debate for both the presidential address on the state of the nation and the general debate on the budget. This report has been made on our behalf. We all participated in making it because any member who was interested in the affairs of the ministry was free to go and attend and help the Committee to make this report. So, we do not really have to have a wide debate as if we are having a general debate. But apparently, you may have some points for clarification, which I think you can competently make. And since all the ministers are here and the Chairperson is here, I think they will be able to assist us to answer those quarries so that we can proceed with the Committee of Supply, that is namely to deal with the budget.

MRS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee of Works for this good report, and I would particularly want to thank them for having made an on-spot assessment of the Busega-Mityana road. I would also want to thank the Ministry of Works because they have paid heed to our cry and have started patching up the road. But I would like to point out that the work, which is being done on that road, leaves a lot to be desired. 

The patches, which are put to fill the potholes, are already coming off and I am worried that with the coming rains, which we have been informed that they are going to be El Nino, I am worried that by the end of two months, the entire road patches would have come off.  So I am calling upon the ministry to ensure that the work that is done is standard and not sub-standard work.

I would like to support the recommendation of the Committee on page 10 that Government should source funds even from the divestiture account - and we have been reliably told that this goes up to Shs78 billion - to work on that road.  We are told that that money is redundant on the account and when I make simple calculations -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But is the money meant to pay certain obligations of the divested enterprise?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCCE (PRIVATISATION)(Mr Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a clarification about the divestiture funds.  Whereas it is true that we have Shs78 billion on the divestiture account, the PERD Statute governs the use this money can be put to. And according to the PERD Statute, this money will be used for non-divestiture objectives after the closure of the divestiture process.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS SSINABULYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the information. But Government can borrow that money because this is a very big project, and since the money is lying redundant right now, Government can borrow that money and return it once they get money from elsewhere. So, I still support the recommendation of the Committee that Government should borrow that money and then return it later on.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want first to place on record the gratitude of the people of Bukooli North to the Minister of Works for personally and physically visiting the constituency to inspect the bridges some time last month.

I think the districts should be given capacity to make their own culverts. It would be easier to make the culverts on site in the districts other than making them somewhere else and transporting them.  Swamps, especially in the plains like my constituency, are permanently a menace, and unless the capacity is enhanced for the districts to make the culverts, it is going to be very difficult.

Also, I would not go with the Committee when they say that more money should be given to the districts so that they can contract out these services. Both can be done, and I would ask the Committee to look at a proposal whereby rather than each district having road equipment, the districts can be grouped together and set-up a larger road equipment unit to save on the idle time of the machinery, something like 10 units throughout the country or even 15 throughout the country, you will then know that Bugiri, Iganga, Mayuge have a unit and if a grader is in one district, the tipper can also go and - so that the utilisation of the machinery is optimum.

I would like also to say that in the case of road works - you see, mobilising equipment is very expensive, but you have a road say being constructed and passing through various towns. There should be a systematic way of enabling the towns to use some of that equipment while the contractors are still within the towns. I am talking about, say, a road like Malaba-Jinja road, passing through the different towns of Bugiri, Busesa, and Iganga. The various urban authorities could be facilitated to be able to access that equipment while the contractors are on the way. I think this can be arranged even at the time of signing the contracts so that we do not have again to say Bugiri can source for a new contract; a new equipment. That increases the cost.  With those few remarks, I would like to thank the Committee for the good work done!

MR AMON KABAREEBE MUZOORA (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the chairperson and his Committee for having done substantially a very good piece of work, and I have only one comment to make, especially on the presidential pledges on page 5. 

The President promised 19 roads during the campaigns, and it is only unfortunate that none of those is appearing here! The Committee has only made an alarm and left it.  I quote: “The Committee is concerned that failure by Government to fulfil the presidential manifesto may create political problems in future.”  This is definite; it will cause a problem! Could they not recommend that at least they put in place some two or three roads so that the President, next time when he is talking, he can defend himself? So, Mr Chairperson, please I request through the Speaker that you throw your eye behind the policy statement because it is betraying our leader.  Thank you very much.

MS ANNETTE MUKABERA (Women Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is in supplement to what hon. Muzoora has said concerning the presidential pledges. It is not fair for the Committee to leave such a thing hanging and yet in some cases - I will be specific on that, having been hanging for a long time for as long as 16 years -(Mr Gagawala rose_)

MR GAGAWALA: It is a pity that I have interrupted hon. Mukabera because she is actually a Member of this Committee, and to stand here and castigate a report, which has been presented on this Floor –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Oh sorry, I did not know.  

MR SIMON D’UJANGA (Okoro County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very good report, however, I think there is one big omission. 

We the people of West Nile, I have stated many times on this Floor, have complained about the road from Pakwach to Arua. We think that road will not be completed by the current contractor, especially the portion between Pakwach and Nebbi.  Can the Minister please assure us? Otherwise, I agree with the recommendation on page 10, especially on the car parking in Kampala. 

It appears to us, who park in Kampala - there is a company called Green Boat - to us it appears that nobody is supervising them. I therefore agree with the recommendation of the committee, and I hope those concerned will take the necessary steps.  Thank you.

MS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also wish to thank the committee for the good work done but all the same, I would like to add my voice on a few points where I felt there was an oversight on the committee’s part. This is especially with transport on the islands. 

Buvuma Islands has no ferry, and I have been emphasizing this point every time we talk about roads. We have been promised time and again that Buvuma Islands and Koome Islands would be looked into when budgeting for waterways transport. So, I hope the committee will reconsider the waterways transport.  

Another issue is on the highways. I would have wished to see the committee recommending road signposts. At the highways, especially Kampala to Mbale, the road lacks a lot of signposts. There are many points where we would have wished to see road signs. Take for example the junction to Tirinyi Road from Nakalama. That spot is very dangerous, but there are no road signs. And of late, taxis have started stopping at the junction, making it very difficult for commuters on the main road to see the other vehicles joining the Jinja – Tororo Road from the Pallisa Road.  

I also thought the committee should recommend road humps in some places. There are so many town centres along the Tirinyi Road, and the drivers tend speed a lot, thereby causing a lot of road accidents and killing these people who keep on crossing the road in those trading centres. 

So, I wish to suggest to the committee that they should look into the issue of road humps on the highways, not forgetting the Njeru highway, where the road humps are bad. Whenever they put them, they last less than a month or two. This is because of the shoddy work that is normally done after having fixed the road.

I also wish to see the committee look into the problems we have with the road from Kampala to Jinja and beyond. This is the road that goes through Mabira Forest. As we are all aware, I am quite appreciative that they have cut down the trees along the road, but as we are anticipating El Nino soon, this road might become impassable in one way or another. 

Some of the parts on this road flood and sometimes we have severe accidents that make it very difficult for other road users. That is why I have always been recommending another access road via Buikwe to Jinja, so that we could have two access roads from Kampala to Jinja and beyond. With that, I wish to thank the committee for the work done.

MRS NVUMETTA KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for actually pointing out one important point that by the time the Kalangala steamer comes, there will be no beneficiaries because all of us would have already perished in the water.  

What worries me is the fact that when we get these fatal accidents on the water, not even one single commissioner or anybody in the ministry bothers to come on site to, say, look at the fatal boat and the fatal engine and to actually make an on-spot assessment. When we had that accident near Kasese somewhere, I saw a whole troop of people going there just to assess what the cause of the accident was. The people of Kalangala are part of Uganda, and I really feel something needs to be done about it!   

About the steamer, I wonder whether we have had an assessment of the situation, to actually conclude that it is the steamer that is going to be the solution to all these problems We may end up in a situation like the city buses that failed because of the small commuter buses.  Have we made an assessment of the situation to see that the smaller boats will not fail the work of the steamer? And also, have we tried to make the people aware of the fact that it is better to use the steamer than the boat, that is, if you find any people there?

My other point is actually on the fact that we would like, as local people who are going to use this steamer, to follow it up as it is being built. I have already heard that the steamer that failed is being bought back by the so called person who is building the new one, so that they can paint it and bring it back to us. The Ministry of Works says it is in good working condition and it can run. They have qualified that it is in order and in working condition, it can run and it is being bought. So, we need to be given an opportunity to follow up and even appreciate it as it is being worked on as regularly as possible.  

I am saying this because I felt so disappointed when one engineer rang me in the morning to tell me that “we are opening the pier in Kalangala, please be around”. Really, is that fair? Is that the only thing I have got to do as a Member of Parliament? I definitely would like to be there, but I have not even been given a chance to inspect the pier with the workers so that we can appreciate what is going on in these works.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the work done by the committee. I would like to add my voice to the point that over 300 kilometres of feeder roads are supposed to be upgraded to central Government roads. 

I would like to say that there are some other districts, like Mayuge, which only have 25 kilometres of Government roads, and yet this is a place that has a high potential for fishing. So, there is no major road that is leading to the Lake Victoria area. 

I would like to urge the Minister of Transport and Communications to ensure that we have a major road from the highway, leading us to Lake Victoria. Since we are thinking of modernizing agriculture and fishing, I think this would be very okay, other than just having only 25 kilometres of central Government road.

Two, I would like to disagree with the committee, where they said that we should have central places for these road equipment units. For the new districts, which are about 11, I think we are in for a raw deal. When you say we should have combined road equipment unit, we are going to lag behind, and I think we may not have the services. Maybe you will let us join or secede from the major districts.  

So, I would like to urge the Ministry of Transport and Communications, since the Ministry of Finance has released some money for four road equipment units for this financial year, the 11 as per July last year, should first of all get the road equipment units before we begin thinking of central places. We should be going back to the original arrangement where some other districts will not remain lagging behind.

The other issue is about Musita road. Musita road is, I think, a grade three murrum road, and this is the only road that we have in our new district, Mayuge. I would like to urge the Ministry of Transport and Communications to promote or upgrade that road to first class murram up to Busia. Even with the work being done, I think after just a few months, we are likely to have that road in bad shape. There is not much work being done. So, I would like to urge the Ministry of Transport and Communications to ensure that this road is upgraded to first class murram.  Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I will be very brief.  I would like the Minister to explain why Uganda has got the most expensive roads in Eastern and Southern Africa and yet they last for a short time.  This is on page 4 of the report. Some of the roads that have been worked on recently, when you are travelling, you will see the potholes developing on them; like Tirinyi and Ibanda and some other areas.  On the same issue, I would want the Minister to really give an explanation as to why the roads do not last long, and yet we spend 300 to 500 million shillings per kilometre.

On the same page, it says action should be taken on some field staff who come and tell lies that projects have been done. What has been done?  

On page 14 of the report, the chairman of the committee mentions adulteration of building materials. You remember, opposite National Insurance, Kasozi’s building collapsed and hit some people and they died. I do not know whether it was bad architecture and so on. When you look at the buildings Ugandans are constructing today and the buildings constructed during the colonial times, especially the floors, the cement is different.  So, there is a problem. Even very beautiful buildings, you give them five to ten years, they start cracking. So, there must be a problem with some of our building materials.

On page 15, hon. Byanyima talked about Government getting accommodation. I request the Prime Minister really to explain how Government fails to put up buildings for some Government offices and yet they have money which they give to property owners in advance of two years and so on. The DPP is across Constitutional Square in Sudhir’s building and it is always an upfront payment.

Lastly, I would want the Minister of Transport to explain something about the MTN communication company. Our economy is 80 per cent subsistence, and the contribution of communication is 20 per cent. Most of the cultivators do not need communication in the countryside to produce maize, sorghum and so on. 

Most of these companies externalise the funds they get here. We buy airtime, they amass Ugandan shillings to purchase dollars and they externalise the resources. Why can’t the contract oblige most of these communication companies to invest in economic projects that have got direct relevance to the economy? They could invest in projects where there would be mass employment of university graduates and other Ugandans who have no jobs! What MTN is doing is that they are buying foreign exchange from forex bureaus and taking money back! 

So, I would want the Minister to really explain why we cannot have a contract that would urge the communication companies to invest some of these resources in projects which we know have a direct bearing on the overall economic policies of the country.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for this wonderful report. 

On page 11, they have talked about road accidents and the plan to reduce these road accidents. Many Ugandans are dying day after day because of road accidents. One of the major causes of accidents recently is the boda boda industry. We do support the boda boda industry, including our beloved President.  I would like to learn from the minister whether in the three-year road safety action plan they have a plan to manage and administer boda boda.  

The second point is on the water industry. I concur with the committee when they say that the Government speed on this type of transport is slow.  I would like to get clarification from the Ministry whether the water ferries that have been promised for a long time now, particularly connecting the central to northern Uganda through Apac, Galilaya and then Kayunga to Kamuli - how far are they moving?  Thank you.

MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Committee for this elaborate report.  I want to bring up this issue of the life span of roads in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, a lot of money has been invested in road construction but these roads within three months become impassable. A good example is in Pallisa. There is a road between Kadama and Kibuku; 34 million shillings was used and accountability is already sent to the Ministry of Works, but as we talk now, no vehicle can pass through that road.  

We have identified a situation where we say the workmanship is poor but we have professional engineers who certify the work and recommend these contractors to be paid!  This House, honourable Members, should put strict measures and ensure that the engineers who certify sub-standard work are disciplined accordingly so that we protect the Government from using a lot of money on shoddy work.  

On presidential pledges, Mr Speaker, Pallisa is always on pledges but we do not see those pledges.  In 1996, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda pledged to tarmac Tirinyi–Pallisa and Kumi road.  But, I am surprised. Despite a lot of follow-up from Members of Parliament from Pallisa and Teso, nothing is in the plan.  In 2001, the same road was in the pledge - I do not know whether it is a vote catching process.  

Then there is again the Kasodo–Kamuli water ferry.  This is a short distance from Pallisa to Kamuli; it would reduce costs for people travelling from Pallisa to Iganga and then to Kamuli.  So we request the minister to see that that ferry is put there to benefit people from Pallisa and Kamuli.  

As far as the road equipments are concerned, honourable Minister, the districts are hiring out these equipments to generate revenue, but it is unfortunate that in this Report, these district leaders have not disclosed the revenue they are generating from these equipments.

Accidents in Uganda are a problem.  I remember, in the 1970s and 1980s there was the Inspection Department. Vehicles were first inspected and registered before a license was granted.  But now people import vehicles, and so long as they are in the yard here in Uganda, you just move to Revenue Authority and you have the vehicle registered without even certifying whether that vehicle is worthy to be on the road!  

Mr Speaker, you have heard that the drainage pattern in our roads - I am not a professional on road works, but you find that the so-called professionals are making the road very narrow. The drainage pattern is coming in the middle of the road instead of going to the side of the road, and the culverts they are using are weak. Within a week the culverts are broken. There were strong culverts on the roads in the 1960s, and up to today they are still strong, but unfortunately, what the attendants are doing is that they remove these culverts and take them to unknown destinations, and they replace them with the weak ones; within a few days, you find that the road is breaking.

Finally, on the city traffic, Mr Speaker, in the 1970s and 1980s the heavy vehicles were not allowed to pass through the city centre.  The by-pass roads were there, and these heavy vehicles were passing through those by-pass roads to their destination, like Rwanda.  But these days you find that the city is congested with heavy vehicles and the accidents are rampant because even vehicles without headlamps and break lights are moving at night!  Honourable Members, this House should come out openly and pass a law to stop these heavy vehicles from moving at night.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked the Committee for a well-presented report.  I have a few observations that I would like the Committee and the Minister to make me appreciate.  

It is true, like the Committee has stated, that some of the districts do not have the capacity to maintain the road equipment units, but it is also true that there are those districts that do have the capacity.  So when you make a recommendation like this one, and you are stating that money should not be given to the districts, I do not quite appreciate the scientific rationale behind that reasoning.  

Some of these districts in terms of size, utilisation and in terms of cost of maintenance actually can maintain some of these road units.  Wakiso can manage; you give it to us and you will see.  We can manage because we have the road network.  At least if you put Kampala with Wakiso, maybe that makes the honourable minister happy, we can handle it but the question of just hiring out – because some of these private road construction companies put in the element of profit.  So when you hire private constructors, it turns out to be very expensive; it can even bring in problems like corruption from these people who are lining up to be paid to do the road works.  

So, my view is that where a district is found to be having the capacity to do the work, it should be given a chance to do it.  Those that may not have the capacity can be put together so that the utilisation is adequately handled.  Some of these machines depend on the hours you use it and the mileage it covers.  Some of these districts actually can do a good job with these units available.  

This is against the principle, because elsewhere in the Committee of Budget, the minister did accept in principle that in every financial year they will be making provisions for two road units, especially to cater for the newly created districts. So, when you bring in this kind of recommendation, you are rolling back the commitment that was made by the Minister of Finance, and that disadvantages the new districts that have been created.

The second issue that I would like the minister to help me with is where someone has talked about road humps on the highways.  The ministry has also opened up good roads in some of our rural areas, and an example is the Natete and Nakawa roads, which were handled by the Ministry of Works.  It was properly done but along the way in the trading centres there are no humps, and the local governments do not have any powers to fix those road humps.  It is said that the Ministry of Works has the preserve of doing that, but they are turning out to be a source of road carnage.  These big trucks ferrying sand are killing young children day in, day out.  So, even when we deal with the countryside, let provisions be made to safeguard the road users in those areas. 

Something I have also not heard about in this report- I am in the Committee of Presidential, and we were interacting with the members from the President’s Office/ State House, and they were talking about the issue of State House Entebbe and its construction.  But this report has not come up with any statement to give us the progress of the works on that, and yet a lot of money in principle was passed.  So we need to be abreast of that.

Lastly, I want to talk about the rehabilitation of Airfields under the Civil Aviation Authority.  You remember one Member was contributing, and he told us that a plane got stuck somewhere in Arua and they had to call for the efforts of a honourable Minister to push the plane.  So, you can see the kind of problems we are having at that level.  But nothing has been mentioned along those lines in order to update us with what is going on.  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to say bravo to the Committee of Works for the comprehensive report.  I would like also to thank the Minister of Works for the good job they have done on the roads within the central government.  

Also, I seek clarification from the Minister whether there are strict measures put in place for those districts that have failed to maintain their roads; for instance, revenue collection. We are all aware that it is very low and some districts cannot meet their obligations.  

There are some non-government organisations in some districts whose contracts are ending and they have not maintained these roads, and yet these roads are very important.  For instance, in my constituency, Rakai District, we have got a road connecting Mutukula-Sembabule-Nyabushozi, which is in a sorry state, and the district does not have funds to maintain it. And to tell you this, this year, Rakai district was not allocated LGDP, which has a component of some road maintenance.  So, I seek clarification from the Minister whether there are some immediate measures that can be taken to help the districts facing this problem.  Thank you.

MR HOOD KATURAMU (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee and his group for the comprehensive and elaborate report they have presented to this House, and at the same time, commend the Minister of Works and his team for the job well done in the area of road infrastructure. 

Mr Speaker, road infrastructure and its improvement should be related to economic development.  A lot of road network has been extended in many parts of the country. I believe the Ministry has been doing that in order to stimulate economic development for the population.  A lot of programmes that Government has instituted are to fight poverty. I believe Government has been aware that lack of accessibility to markets of the produce of the local population has been an eye sore in the improvement of our economy. I wish to request the Minister of Works and to know from him whether he has been having a comprehensive strategy to work hand in hand, for instance, with the Ministry of Agriculture, in the improvement of agricultural produce so that these roads can be fully utilised.  In other words, the internal rate of returns from these roads could be realised.  

My other area of concern is the Building Control Bill, and the Committee has noted that the Ministry has not yet put in place this bill.  But, Mr Speaker, this is a very significant bill to the people with disabilities whom I represent. Because of the prevailing peace in this country, a lot of construction is taking place, and I am sorry to report that many constructions are not mindful of putting accessible venues for persons with disabilities.  

I recall vividly, Mr Speaker, that even if this Building Control Bill had not been put in place, the Ministry of Education in its national widespread construction of UPE classrooms, hon. Bitamazire made an instruction to all districts and in writing that all constructions must have ramps, and it must be accessible in all the infrastructure thereon for persons with disabilities.  I therefore request the Minister of Works that even if this bill has not been brought on board, he could make a stopgap regulation to prevail upon all people who are putting up new buildings, both in public and the private sector, to ensure that provision for persons with disabilities is catered for.  I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

MR TOMSON KYAHURWENDA (Buhaguzi County, Hoima District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to say the report has been very good.    I want to start by thanking the Chairman of this Committee of Works and all the Members for their spirit of continuously consulting all Members of Parliament, and I am happy you also acknowledge our contribution.  But the in report, Mr Speaker, I have two things to talk about.

On page 4, the Chairman talks of lack of supervision by the Ministry of Works.  We have an office of Works in Hoima; we have roads being made but I think the supervision, as he says, is really poor.  But even then, when I look at the luxury departments in Hoima district, I think the luxurious workers are from Ministry of Works and Ministry of Health - from the regional hospital - who are not directly supervised by the district leadership.  

I wanted to request that if the powers of supervising the Works department would be partially delegated to the district councils, maybe there would be an improvement -(Interjections)- at least for Hoima.  Mr Speaker, I am talking for Buhaguzi and Hoima districts because I normally see many vehicles, especially from Kitgum and other parts in Hoima for a week or two. When do they work in their own districts if they are staying in Hoima district? 

Hoima district borders Lake Albert on the western side, which is not accessible by anybody from Hoima district by vehicles. We are requesting that since the committee says they will be allocating more kilometres of road network to the centre and since the minister has been to Hoima and has visited Lake Albert - I am sure he has been able to cross the river on foot, which is very risky, to Kibaale - that he gives us some 40 kilometres to reach Lake Albert by road. Other than that, I want to thank the committee for the work done, and I promise contribution in future when they ask me to. Thank you.

MR WESONGA KAMANA (Bubulo County West, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish also to thank the chairperson and his committee for the wonderful report made. I will also add my voice to those who thanked the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication. I have taken heart to thank the minister because the constituency I represent is one of the biggest constituencies in this country, and you should not be surprised to hear that for the first time in about 13 years, my people have managed to see a tractor, and there is now a wonderful road in place. Mr Minister, thank you so much - (Applause).

Having thanked the Minister and the committee and members of the Ministry technical staff, I wish to add that much as the constituency is one of the biggest in this country, it has the most complicated bridge network. I know the minister visited the area and made commitments, I am only saying that they requested me to remind you that commit yourself please. Since the constituency is big, whatever network is there is therefore the biggest. I am requesting the ministry, in its provisions for this particular financial year, to provide for the road from Tororo to Nyangule to Butiru to Bukaweka. 

I am saying this because while other roads can be maintained by the districts, but for one simple reason that there are no bridges on such a road network, and given the terrain of my constituency, the district has virtually failed. The road was properly graded, but because of having no bridges such murram road and a job well done is put to waste; the road is not being used. I am also proposing to the ministry that there is a road from Magodesi to Bugobero. It is a short portion, but because of the nature of its bridge network, Mr Minister, please include it also on your provisions.

I also want to say something on the contractors. While I appreciate that the roads in my constituency are wonderful, in some places, perhaps because of your budgetary controls, I think the amount of money you allocate to the contractors regarding murram should be stepped up. The technical staff should visit the areas because one of them told me he was given only 9 million to cover quite a long distance. He may not perform, not because he does not know how to perform, but because he will run short of funds. So when you are funding these contractors, there are certain factors you should look at.

My last request is that the road network is now very good but we have trading centres. Our drivers, because they are below 28 years, misbehave with vehicles. I have a worry for my constituents. I wish the ministry itself and the public could put in place some humps in those small centres.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for the work done. Mine is a point of clarification. I remember during the general debate on the presidential speech I raised these questions but I did not get a feedback. I am so surprised that the same issues that I raised have not appeared in this report. 

I am seeking clarification from the minister; in last session we passed a resolution authorising the government to borrow money to tarmac the Kafu–Masindi road, and this road did not appear anywhere in the budget. Some roads have been mentioned in this report like the Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road. The committee is recommending that the government should look for money to at least tarmac this road but the Kafu-Masindi road is worth something. I am seeking clarification on the status of this road.

Two, the committee talks about road accidents and my constituency’s biggest percentage border is along Lake Albert. We always have accidents on this lake –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not want to interrupt you, but as we agreed yesterday, this report has been made on our behalf. We had opportunity to go to the committee and make comments about various issues of our interest. I am not cutting you, you will complete, but I think we should be brief. Just ask for clarification so that the minister can answer. Otherwise, if we make full speeches, we are opening the general debate again, which should not be the purpose. We are here for the Committee of Supply and the report is just making recommendation that during this financial year, please take care about this and the other. So, to give opportunity to as many people to make brief observations, I think you should cut down the length of your speech.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That was the first clarification that I was seeking from the honourable minister.  

Secondly, I am seeking clarification on what measures the ministry has put in place in order to try and remove the pillars that were left along Butiaba harbour by the Uganda Railways, because they are causing a lot of accidents. My people in Masindi will be happy to get clarification on this. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was not here yesterday but I was informed that many people supported my stand on the Sudanese refugees. 

I would like to welcome the report as presented by the chairperson, except that it has been unfair in regard to road construction in cities, notably Kampala - towns inclusive. There is need for government to invest a great deal in road construction because this country is landlocked. We do a lot of movement in terms of raw materials towards industries from time to time. 

The centre of industries is Kampala; the centres of industries are the cities and towns. If you do not invest in Kampala, for example, in regard to road construction, where else will you invest? (Laughter) If you do not invest in towns like Jinja, Masaka, Hoima, et cetera, where else will you invest? This question of saying that let the local governments do it is wishful thinking. Government in its own wisdom and responsibility must invest in all sectors of the country in terms of construction. So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for giving way.  I would like to bring to the attention of the hon. Member on the Floor and the House at large that in Kampala, for instance, there are many self-help based projects taking place.  For instance, my colleague from Kawempe North, hon. Latif Ssebagala and I have embarked on a self-help project on Bukoto-Kisasi road. Ntinda-Kisasi is almost completed; Katalima road in Naguru and Mutungo-Butabika is also underway. I want to know whether there are some means of supporting these self-help based projects, let alone of course the local councils, which give their part. But the honourable Member has said that in the near future we want to see the central government fully participating in the development of Kampala city - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: You see, Kampala is nearly completed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it remains to be seen whether the informer was doing service to me. 

The report talks about the Mityana-Busega road, but how do you reach Busega from Kampala? There is concern for Wakaliga road, which is a leeway to Busega-Mbarara-Masaka-Kabale.  Mr Speaker, you are the third highest person in this country and you pass on that road everyday -(Laughter). There is need for us to pass a resolution that something is done now. How can our Speaker pass in an impassable road? (Laughter) I feel like going for another hunger strike -(Laughter). 

Most of the Members of Parliament - because Kampala is the centre - stay in and around Kampala. They go to their respective constituencies on weekends. But most of the roads in and around Kampala are very bad. Worst of all are the roads in Lubaga South. Most of the biggest taxpayers are found in my area. How do you balance it up? How do those industries benefit if their roads are impassable? I am speaking about Kobil –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean you are talking about BAT?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Inclusive -(Laughter). I am speaking about Kobil Uganda Limited, Sembule, Petro Uganda Limited, World Food Program, so many of them! So, if you do not invest in areas like that, where else can you invest? So, I urge government - and I will be reluctant to support this report if the Minister of Works does not explain why my area is totally ignored. Is it because I am what I am? (Laughter)

Lastly - I will make only two points; I have already made one. The last point is about road accidents. Recently we lost Toure Awori, a son of one of our colleagues, hon. Aggrey Awori. We buried him yesterday. He died after a road accident. It is unfortunate that the government of Uganda, using the Police, is carrying out an exercise, which is not complete. They examine drivers before they are issued with licenses. If you are able to examine, you can also train. Let us form a sample of modern driving using the Police stations in each district so that we create institutes of motor vehicle driving. Why do we issue the certificates when we have no universities where students go?   

In the Education sector, we have sampled the magnitude of education by putting up Makerere University, Kyambogo, Mbarara, Gulu et cetera. In the sector of tourism, we have sampled the magnitude of that sector using the Institute of Catering and Hotel Management in Jinja. So why don’t we do the same? I would like to appeal to the government that the rate at which accidents are occurring is alarming. People are dying day after day; we cannot simply keep quiet! We must take action; sample up models! Thank you very much indeed - (Laughter).

MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the wonderful report, but I want to add on a few things briefly. 

My constituency is half water, half land, and I will talk about the water part of it and later on say a few things on the land.  The issue of water -(Interjection)  

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, as I said, let these be just brief observations and clarifications instead of starting a new debate, please.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will outline them as follows:  

Landing sites: 
We have about three landing sites in my constituency, but the issue is very complicated, people who come from the islands have to go off the boats almost 100 metres away from the shore. They are carried on shoulders of other people. Just imagine a situation of a woman coming to a landing site, which in most cases is likely to be a market and carried two legs spread on the shoulders of someone. I will not talk more about that since we do not have the time. 

I would like to comment briefly on the contractors of our feeder roads. Very many feeder roads are constructed after some community roads have been constructed. The contractors do their part and leave the connection between the road they have constructed and the community roads undone. What are we talking about - the culverts. In many cases they make the roads and leave them hanging to the extent that a person cannot branch off easily. We sometimes improvise with logs and timber, but this is disturbing. You cannot reach your constituency when you try to. Sometimes when they excavate murrum, they leave the place hanging. Most of them do not pay because leaders do not know when these contracts are over.  

The other aspect is the issue of regional workshops. It is very, very disturbing to have districts with road equipment and then you have to ferry faulty equipment to the workshop. Let us take a case of my district: Faulty equipment will be taken from as far as the lakeshores around Lugala to Jinja, taking a lot of money. I propose that if possible, these districts be given an opportunity to make small workshops that can help the engineers who come from the regional bases, to come and do the inspection and repair the equipment when need arises.  Otherwise, it costs a lot of money. 

Sometimes they come, you go for a grader and when the grader comes you have to put in the fuel. You do everything; you pay whoever is working on it and before even a kilometre, the grader is taken back. When it comes back, there is no fuel, a part is spoilt and in most cases they take the sub-county to task again to do the refuelling and to do part of these repairs. 

I beg that, if possible, we have these workshops at the district and then the engineers can make periodic visits to these workshops and do whatever they are supposed to do from there. This is because it is easier to carry an engineer from Jinja to Bugiri than to ferry a whole tractor from Bugiri to Jinja for repairs. I will not talk much since we do not have the time. I will stop there and I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I am being selective in a sense. For instance, hon. Lukyamuzi is from Kampala and the Member for Nakawa made a contribution. I think it is in view of the time constraint that, that is representative of the district of Kampala. So, that is how I am selecting. That is why I started with district representatives so that the district is represented. 

MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief, but I want to start with thanking the Ministry of Works. I want this to be registered because the committee mentioned the reports and thanked honourable Members for reporting the anomalies. But I want also to include thanks to the ministry because we report and they react; for instance, the Kayunga case. I reported to the honourable Minister, Werikhe, on Thursday and the work was done by Saturday. So that is really worth complimenting.

Mention was made about people of Nakasongola and Kalangala. I want also to include in the report people between Kayunga and Kamuli, who are perishing on the waters. I went with the Minister of State for Transport and he saw the area. People are using canoes on the waters of River Nile, which flow very fast. People are in danger.  Hon. Minister, how many ferries are being procured this financial year, and when are the people of Kayunga benefiting? That is, connecting Nabuganyi to Bulambuti, because people are perishing and Kayunga district is underdeveloped just because we are locked-up; we do not have a way through.  So, hon. Minister I will be grateful if that is considered. 

Finally, about the technical people of Ministry of Works and road accidents, I think some accidents occur just because the workers are not supervised. For example, there are repairs on the Mukono-Kayunga road, but we do not have any sign showing ‘men at work’. Big stones are put on the road because of the road works and the cars will run over those big stones and cause accidents. I want the ministry to know and ensure that there are appropriate road signs showing that there are men at work for such and such kilometres. That will reduce accidents. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently we met the President at State House and I thanked him for having begun the long-awaited tarmacking of the Arua-Pakwach-Karuma road. I therefore want to go on record here and thank the Minister, hon. John Nasasira, who despite disappointing us in the last Parliament has made up for it. He has done some good for the West Nile region. 

Not only that, we also want to thank government for giving us brand new machines for the Arua portion of the road. I say this because I have heard some people complaining that they were given very old machines. This shows you that we should value our votes and make the best use of them, especially when we get to the presidential elections.

Mr Speaker, it was said, especially during the last parliamentary elections when the President went out to campaign for some candidates, that he needed people who will come here and support him in the implementation of his manifesto, but I have been here for many years, with colleagues of the UPC from Lango, and I have never seen any of them trying to antagonise any effort by government to take development to their areas. They have never done that! I have never heard of any Member of Parliament of the Acholi sub-region who, because they did not vote for President Museveni in the elections, antagonised government’s efforts to take development to Acholi. So, the President, as the fountain of honour, should be sending the right message to the voters out there. 

In fact, our purpose is to come here to make noise so that government can do good work for our people, and that good work will bring a good name for the very government that does the work. So there is no logic in going out there and saying, “do not vote for so and so because he is a Reformist, and do not vote for so and so because he is a UPC or DP member, and if he comes here he is going to antagonise government’s efforts to take development to the area”! It does not work that way. We only come here to tell government to do the right thing. 

Now we Arua people are benefiting, and it is because we voted wisely - (Laughter). Arua is doing very well in the road sector, and I hear that power is on the way. And we are well represented in Cabinet. So when we come here, let us really be positive critics. Where government does good things we praise it, and where it fails we will constructively say, “here you are wrong.” That is constructive politics. I tell you Members, if you do not do that you will not be known. Nobody will bother with you. You will even go away from here without the President knowing you. But when you constructively say the right things, you will be on top in the politics of Uganda. Thanks very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, so far 20 Members of Parliament have made their observations on this report. Do you not think that we shall benefit by getting a response from the minister concerned? 

Okay, let us do this. Let us get an input from Kyenjojo, Kabarole and Kamwenge, then Jinja. But then again, I think we better leave it at that really. Let the minister answer now. I will give you an opportunity tomorrow. I think he will address the issues of Tororo first.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to clarify and comment on some issues raised in the committee’s report, and those that have been raised by honourable members. First of all, as I tackle some of the issues that were raised in the committee’s report, I will be at the same time answering some of the issues raised by honourable Members. 

I wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee and the Members for their report. More importantly, however, I thank them for the co-operation that was rendered to the ministry as we tackled the problems of infrastructure, transport and communications and other problems of this country concerning my sector.

The report recommends the development of a third directorate for Housing. My ministry has been considering this too. At the same time, as you saw in the report, we will soon form a Road Agency Information Unit. This will take away a lot of the work that the ministry has been doing on the roads. So, as we finalise the formation of the unit, we are also studying the new structure of the Ministry. It will now mainly be policy formulation, monitoring, regulation and a few others. When the road works are transferred out of the ministry, we will reflect on the actual functioning and mandate of the ministry. That is when we will consider that structure.

With regard to the high cost of road maintenance, the report says we should find out if it is because of corruption and if so, we punish the culprits. We have no objection to that. We have started a study of why road maintenance and construction in Uganda costs slightly higher than in other East African countries. I do not know about the whole region. 

One reason why we however have high costs of maintenance is partly our history. During the days of turmoil, the local construction industry never developed. So if we are to repair our roads, it is either STERLING or SPENCON to do it. There are hardly any local contractors that developed. So first and foremost, we need to develop our local contractors. The contractors who come from abroad are definitely more expensive. That is the first reason. 

The second reason is the high cost of fuel. We are a landlocked country and so fuel here is relatively more expensive than in Tanzania or Kenya, for example. And fuel is a big component for road construction.

Lastly, as you heard from the report, our cement industry collapsed. It is now coming up again but cement and things like lime are still very expensive. At the moment we do not have a serious lime factory in Uganda. We have tried to organize the small lime producers in Hima and in Tororo, but their lime has not yet reached the standard it is required for mixing with murram to do roads. So, the lime we use comes from somewhere in Western Kenya. That alone is a high cost in itself because lime costs as much as cement.

We are addressing all the above issues, and other areas that could cause high costs. And of course if there are any areas where we suspect corruption, we will deal with it. We have records of those cases that have been dealt with accordingly.

I move on to poor supervision. I welcome the proposal by the committee that the ministry should inform leaders about what we are doing everywhere in Uganda - (Applause). We started this campaign a long time ago. In fact, if the chairman recalls, about four years ago we established what we call “road committees” at sub-county level. The concerned committee in the 6th Parliament was actually reluctant about implementing the idea, but we started road committees.

Our district engineers are supposed to inform road committees, which are chaired by LC III Chairpersons, about the work that is going on in their areas, and Members of Parliament will also be given this information. I would however like to separate “being informed” from “being in charge”. We must separate responsibilities. If we all become supervisors of roads, there will be chaos. If I say, “you go and work here,” and the Member of Parliament says, “no, no, you take the grader this way,” and the LC V Chairman comes and says, “take it that way,” we shall have roads full of curves. So let us get the information that will help you monitor what is happening. 

It will also help us because sometimes when you say that we are doing sub-standard or shoddy work, it is because people are not aware of the type of intervention that we are putting in place. If we fill in potholes, we could for example expect them to last for six months. If they last for six months, then that is not shoddy work as far as we are concerned.  

While making a contribution, an honourable Member talked about roads lasting for only three months, but by the time he was completing his contribution he said the road lasted for seconds. This is not possible. There are some interventions that are supposed to last for a short time and others that last for a long time. Some are supposed to last for two years and others are supposed to last for ten years. If the honourable Members are well informed about that, then it will also help us. It is in the interest of the ministry for the political leadership to know what is happening. They should monitor what is happening, but we shall separate monitoring from supervision. That will help us greatly.

The Road Agency Promotion Unit (RAPU) is taking long to take off because we are waiting for a law to justify it to be passed in this Parliament. It has to be established by Parliament. RAPU is going to be formed as an agency, but we need an enabling law, and there are still a few studies to be done about this.  Because this is going to be a fundamental change from the way we have been working on roads, we have also been seriously discussing how to finance it. You can form institutions but without adequate resources, both human and financial, there will be no change. It is going to need resources to be able to do better work than before. And as the chairman said, RAPU is a bit expensive. This is because the people who are there are paid far more money than the Permanent Secretary, myself or even Members of Parliament. They are highly paid and that is the only way we could attract more qualified engineers to it.

Honourable Members, we have tried to do our best to empower the local construction industry. We do favor local construction industries, and they do most of the mechanized maintenance. Almost all our consulting supervision work is a joint venture between the local consultancy and foreign consultancy firms Mark you, this is working with money most of which is borrowed with conditionality. For example, if you get money from the EU, they will maintain that the contractor must be from the European Union, and Uganda is not a member of the European Union. So we have to convince them to have a sub-contractor who is from here. 

If you borrow from the World Bank they say, “you should tender internationally.” They also say that the contractors should have a turnover of US $20 million for example, if the job is for the same amount. Contractors are also required to have done such work before. And as I said, if the contractors have not done any bitumen road before, they do not qualify for such a contract. If Mukalazi or Mulowooza - I am talking about the local ones - have done only tarmac work, they will not qualify for this.  

So we are doing it through joint partnership and we now have got registered contractors with us. We have got over 50 contractors in different classes. The tally is as follows: We have got 25 contractors in class A, which are mainly Ugandan, class B has 30, class C has 45 and class D has got 95. We are hoping that out of these nearly 200 contractors, we should have a few who will be able to compete with these in about ten years. That is the only way we can build capacity.

I want to state for the record, since the chairman also mentioned it in his report that we cannot add onto the Shs 442 million that was recommended for community roads. It was not possible, within the resource envelope, to add onto this money. I just want to put it on record that we have not got it yet.

The upgrading of district roads is a major demand. It is true we have taken some time studying it, but the main reason districts want roads to go to the centre is because they know they have no capacity to maintain them. If we build capacity at districts for them to be able to maintain their roads, then there will be no need to hand over these roads to the central government. So we are looking at both options.

Under the project to upgrade 300 kilometres of feeder roads, we will also reconstruct 1,000 kilometres as we build the capacity at the districts. Therefore, the study says that 300 kilometres will be upgraded, but we might end up with 500 kilometres or so worked on.

Let me broadly talk about road accidents. Of course when we have an accident and people die, there is pain and, therefore, many people tend to be sentimental. We are all concerned but the question is, “how can we reduce these accidents?” What concerns us more is that most of the bad accidents take place on the roads that we have constructed well. Some of the worst accidents have happened on our best roads. So it is not a question of bad roads causing accidents anymore. So, as we briefed the committee, we are addressing this. I will circulate the details of the approach to road accidents to all members through their pigeonholes. That way you can see the way we are tackling this. 

We are going to tackle this issue of road accidents politically, and it is taking time. I personally do not believe that every time an accident happens is when we should appear and brief you. It is like we only wake up to work then. Nevertheless, we have put in place a comprehensive programme, which starts with the road users.  There will be a curriculum in primary schools so that our children learn how to use roads as they grow up. 

We have taken over all the driving schools, and there is a curriculum for them. The syllabus for these schools is being completed. The driving schools will be under the ministry directly. The system has been such that as you learn to drive, you are given a temporary driving permit and eventually when you learn you go to the Police Inspection at Naguru and get a license. That is going to change. Now the driving schools are going to be like colleges; they will have a curriculum by which to conduct the training, and there will be an inspector from the ministry who will be monitoring these driving schools. Secondly, in dealing with the drivers – (Interruption) 

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Nasasira for giving way.  There is suspicion that some of the drivers consume drugs, especially the kamunye drivers.  The drivers have been chewing mairungi publicly.  I do not know whether mairungi is a drug or not, but would Government look into this problem and, in fact if necessary test drivers from time to time for drugs?

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Hon. Mwandha.  I was now coming to the PSV vehicles. What I was talking about driving schools was general and the driving license. You can get your driving licenses but for public service vehicles like buses, kamunye, first you have to have another license. There will be specialised driving schools for that. You will have to have a second license after the first license. I think that is why the issue of 28 years came in, but the actual years are 25.  As long as you are 25 – people might have added on training to be three years. Driving licenses for drivers on public service vehicles will have medical checkups, which includes drug checkups, they will have to know English because you must be able to read signs. I would like Mr Speaker and honourable members to support the ministry when it comes to that. 

We want to curb accidents; we must be tough on it! But we must be thorough. You can put the laws there, if you put the laws that people should not ease themselves on the roads in Kampala and you do not build public latrines, people will just find a way to go on the streets. So, we are looking at the law enforcement together with other enabling interventions.  Now, that is as far as the driver is concerned.

The next issue we have to tackle is the vehicle itself.  At the moment there is no serious vehicle inspection. As you have seen, we have advertised, we are going to get two private companies that are going to establish inspection centres in Gulu, Kampala, Mbale, Mbarara and Fort Portal for a start. There will be two companies competing. 

Now, the inspection we are talking about is not just to go in the pit and they look under the car. They will have electronic equipment that a vehicle goes through like you are taken through an x-ray, and they will have to provide a proper report to the vehicle inspector before your vehicle is given a road license. So, in brief, we are looking seriously at how to deal with the carnage on our roads, but we want to tackle it from the road user to the driver and to the vehicle itself. I will be giving you these details, as I promised you, in due course when we finish this. 

MR TIBARIMBASA: The Minister has not mentioned anything about foreign drivers from the neighbouring countries that keep right, and here we are supposed to keep left.  Accidents which have happened - actually in the western region this week we read in the papers about 17 people who perished, last month a priest was coming from Rukungiri going to Kabale and he was hit by a trailer.  Drivers from Rwanda caused those two cases of accidents. These drivers from neighbouring countries use different road signs.  I think you should say something about how they will be covered in the plan you have in the Ministry regarding drivers.  

MR NASASIRA: Transit traffic vehicles are supposed to be driven by drivers with international driving permits.  That is what we insist on.  Even with our regional agreements like COMESA and the East African Community, you have to qualify for the standards of the countries that you are going to transit through.  I have yet to know whether accidents happened because people forget and drive on the right or whether it is just an accident of a faulty vehicle. But transit vehicles are supposed to have drivers with international driving permits.

Now let me quickly, because of time, tackle issues raised by honourable members.  First of all, I want to thank the honourable members for the interest in our sector shown by the issues you have raised, some of them are advisory and others are demands. But as you demand for what the Ministry should do, we are also like any other sector and like the country itself, constrained by the resources that are available for the work. We would wish to do more and we would be happier to do more but the resources constrain us. I think what we should target is to see whether we optimally, efficiently use those resources that are there for whatever we can do.  That should be our target.

Now patching on the Busenga-Mityana road, hon. Sylvia Sinabulya, let me state that actually for our technical records the Busenga-Mityana road has collapsed, it is not there.  So, there is no road. We are trying just to keep it on some dribble patching and those patches will not last because as you patch this hole, another hole is developing. So, it is not shoddy work, we are trying a rather difficult journey between Busenga and Mityana, slightly less difficult until a major intervention.  But we are working out a major intervention until - as I told you earlier in the House, that road had got a friendly donor. We were just going to tender to start the tarmacking, and the money was withdrawn at the last minute. So it sent us back in shock. That is why you see the Busenga-Mityana road is one of the worst tarmac roads we have in the country, so bear with us.

With respect to hon. Patrick Mwondha’s building district capacity to make culverts, some districts already make culverts and all districts are encouraged to have their units to make small culverts for their drainage works.  

Using contractors yes, soon I will be bringing a new proposed arrangement to combine districts with respect to how their work is supervised with our engineers and consultants, and also how we can pool the equipment together with the districts for use. That proposal will come soon as a measure and we are intending to start that one next financial year.

Hon. Muzoora said that he was surprised that we have done zero on the presidential pledges. That is not exactly true. As you heard, the pledges are many; they are in trillions.  But even the roads we are working on were part of the presidential pledges. Busunju-Hoima road, Arua-Pakwach road were part of it. Karuma–Arua–Pakwach is going on tender - I think the tenders went out on the 9th of this month. I can go to the West up to Mpondwe, Katunguru, and Fort Portal - the road that we are finishing between Kyotera and Mutukula. All these were part of the presidential pledges and we have tackled some.  

Secondly, when the President pledges tarmacking a road, then the next thing is to look for the source for funds and then to start the feasibility study. Even when the feasibility study has started, then the implementation of the President’s pledge has started. I can read you a list or you can see through your copies of the policy statement that there are many roads that are under study now, which were part of the presidential pledge.  The circle of starting on the road study and eventually doing the construction takes between 5 and 7 years.  So, for us for any road for which a study has started, design is on, construction has started, is all implementing the President’s pledge.

Hon. D’Ujanga, I want to inform Parliament, Mr Speaker, that the Ministry is having problems with the contractor of Nebbi-Pakwach road.  The contractor has been very slow to start with very few equipment, but we have been pushing the contractor to improve on his resources and capacity, and there is hope that he has increased on the capacity. Keeping the contractor there and giving him opportunity to improve is the best of the worst options. Cancelling without contract now might take another five years or so to restart. Let us join hands to ensure that the contractor increases resources and speed rather than think of terminating that contract at this stage. If that situation arises and we have to terminate it, then we will have no choice. We will do it but we are giving the contractor up to the end of September to fulfil all the commitments that he gave. So, this is the information that you can give the people of Pakwach, and we shall also be informing them.  

We do not yet have ferries for Buvuma Islands and I have taken note of lack of road signs from hon. Lydia Balemezi. But I was surprised by the example hon. Lydia Balemezi used of Nagalama because there are signs there. At the junction to Tirinyi, for those who travel there, there are road signs saying “50kms, Stop” unfortunately our drivers do not read those signs.  

On road humps, we provide road humps when the local authorities ask for them. In theory we would not want road humps on our highways but when the local authorities ask for them, we provide them.  Sincerely, we would not want humps on our highways. We would want there to be road signs, people to read them and traffic Police to check on those who are over speeding, but that is not yet there. So, we use these road humps, which are called “sleeping policemen” for the time being. I am hoping that some time later there will not be road humps on our highways but in residential estates and so on you find road humps. I am sure, for those who have toured a lot in developed countries, you do not find road humps on highways.  They are not supposed to be there but we are just using them.  

Hon. Kavuma, Kalangala ship – (Mr Wadri rose_)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from you as the Minister responsible for Transport and Communication, as to whether you are aware that there are humps on the bridge at Jinja. There are humps at the bridge over the dam. I do not know whether that is the policy of the Ministry or the local authorities?

MR NASASIRA: Yes, I am aware that humps are on the bridge, and they are there for a purpose. The Jinja Bridge had deteriorated to an extent where we were about to close it.  If we had closed it, the next bridge between the North and East is Karuma. So, we are doing major repairs under there to at least keep the bridge safe. What had happened was that some of the slabs on the bridge had split, and when the vehicles were going very fast, they were cracking more, and eventually you would have no bridge and that would be a national disaster. So, we have put the humps there to reduce the speed to less than 20km/h so that the repairs are completed. As soon as the repairs are completed, we shall have humps just at the beginning of the bridge, but now they are there for that purpose.  

Hon. Ruth Kavuma complained about the Kalangala ship. The procurement of the Kalangala ship has taken a bit longer than we expected because there were fights of the suppliers. In every contract in Uganda, people fight. So, the fighting and the investigations took long but now it is on course.  We have solved that. It is going to be built at Port Bell. You will be free and we shall invite you to inspect the construction stages as you wish from time to time. The procurement of a ship and painting it has nothing at all to do with the construction of a new Kalangala ship, but the ship will take slightly over one year – may be one year and half - to construct and it is on course now.

In the meantime, you were asking whether it is better to have that ship or a smaller boat, but people who want to start smaller boats for business are free to have their own boats, but we want to have a ship that can carry trucks, that can carry about 150 tonnes of cargo, that can move from one island to another and it serves the lake area for that.  

Now, let me at this stage also mention something to do with water transport. Of course our water transport is the same thing. I was talking about accidents; we are having many problems on water transport. First, there are no adequate landing sites there. Secondly, there are no navigational aides. You know you must have navigational aides – you know beacons and so on - in different islands of the lake to guide people. Those landmarks are not there.

Thirdly, there are no reliable transport equipments but even the boats that we licence, when they are licensed on the lake, they overload. Some of the worst accidents that have happened on the lake, those boats were not even registered with us and they were cleared by the local authorities from the area. So, the issue of accidents is actually partly because of the lack of appreciation of the dangers by our people. But I have called a stakeholders’ meeting to start embarking on amending the laws on water transport - in fact it is next week - from all fishing landing sites. We want to have a situation even at this stage where before you leave the landing site you have to have – you know, we are going to establish a manifesto, so before you leave, we are going to introduce registration of boats like we register vehicles with number plates and so on, and we shall find a way of how to train both riders in future - (Applause).

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Minister. In regard to facilities for water transport, I am aware that only a short while ago, we authorised Government to borrow money to construct fishing landing sites. To what extent has the Ministry of Works actually been involved in their designing so that the facilities that would be constructed serve not just in the context of fish but also people?

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Minister. The ferry between Panyimur and Wanseko takes between two and half to three hours to cross. Is that normal that people should be in that water for that long, a very small distance?  Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Yes! First, our ministry has been consulted by the Ministry of Agriculture, and we have sent there technical people to work as a team for the design and construction of those landing sites. On top of that, with the Kalangala ferry, I think we are going to construct six more landing sites in different places.  

Now, with respect to the ferry from Wanseko to Panyimur, it is slightly abnormal to take two and half hours. I personally was on that ferry, and it took me a very long time to cross. But the problem was that the direct route from Wanseko to Panyimur has rocks, and the ferry would be damaged and we would have disasters. So, the ferry has to first go north along River Nile a bit, and then come back to Panyimur. And that is why it takes long. But given what was happening, especially because of the Kony insurgency in the park, we thought it would be better to take an extra one and half hours and arrive safely rather than never arrive at all. So, it is slightly abnormal, but it is definitely providing very essential services between the people of this side and the other. In fact, a lot of traders, even from Panyimur and parts of Nebbi, use it to come to Kampala and avoid the other route through Karuma.  

I have noted hon. Kubeketerya’s comment about the 25 kilometres in Mayuge. Mayuge is a new district, but very soon also, as we update the network, you will have your share of national roads in the district.

Hon. Guma, yes, roads are expensive. In fact, our roads are relatively cheaper. In richer and developed countries, they use what we call rigid pavement roads in which they use concrete and reinforcements, and they last for 50 years. But these flexible pavements we use here because of lack of money, even at that cost, are not good. A rigid pavement road is between 1 million and 1.5 million dollars a kilometre, and you have heard the cost for these ones. So, they are expected to last about 10 years. They last sometimes, and sometimes there are deficiencies. 

He quoted the two roads, but I still insist that the Iganga-Tirinyi road was done well. It was opened in 1996, but even if you checked it now, even if a pothole develops, it is still good. Even sometimes you can develop a pimple on your face, does it mean your face is bad? The road from Tirinyi up to Iganga is a good road, and it has now served for seven years. It is designed to last 15 years and it is supposed to get periodic maintenance after eight years.    

As for the road from Mbarara to Ibanda, there were a few problems with the consultant. We sacked the consultant half way through the project. In fact, he went to the World Bank and accused us and claimed for money, but we sacked him. Part of the problem is that there have been some faults in a few areas but on the whole, the Mbarara to Ibanda road is good. Maybe 90 per cent of it is good. The consultant caused a few problems but we sacked him. Those are some of the problems of construction, but it is not the intention of the ministry to encourage sub-standard work. 

Renting of offices: 

Yes it is the intention of Government to build offices for all ministries. In fact, some have been built. For example, the Ministry of Health is complete and you heard that the Ministry of Works is going to build offices. 

The problem is that we have been trying to build, operate and own or transfer later, but because of our financing agreements now with our development partners, that route cannot be taken. What we can afford as a Government is rent, and the rent may be 10 per cent of what you would want for a full construction. So, until we have enough money, you are better off renting. I am sure, even as we experience, until you are able to build your own, you rent. A lot of people stay in rented houses until they are able to build houses or until you are able to get a mortgage. So, that is what Government is going through.

Hon. Guma talked about communication companies externalising their income, and he said that we should put a law that that money should stay here. I do not agree with hon. Guma; not that I am trying to defend companies. If you bring an investor here with a known investment code of conduct, you cannot turn around and say, “you have made money, and so you leave it here.” What about the money he brought in? 

We never provided dollars for these people to come and install equipment here therefore they must pay back the dollars they earn. What you can do is to attract them to invest here if they want, but you cannot have a law to say, “investor, you have earned 10 million dollars now, do not externalise it”, and yet when he was bringing his 50 million to invest, you did not say anything. I do not personally agree.

We are trying to work out to how regulate boda boda, hon. Madada, but this is a young industry that has come up, which we have to guide carefully.  It took me one and half years to convince the taxi owners to mark their cars - one and half years! Eventually, they have found that it is useful. The boda boda is giving a lot of service to our poor people in the rural areas, but as we want to regulate them, let us go with them. They should understand exactly what regulation is or what the law is because I think they are providing far more good than the little harm that they are causing. We must build them up, but we are looking at ways to regulate them but it is not easy. 

For example, suppose you said every boda boda must have a helmet, which means the passenger must have helmet also. This means that everybody will put on the helmet - from one head to another and then to another, and we have different types of hair, hairstyles and even different shapes of heads! So, it is something you must think about. So, if you have a helmet, it becomes difficult to implement. Let us not disrupt the industry and let us think about how to work with them. 

I think I have discussed what hon. Patrick talked about the quality of roads. I have also talked about the presidential pledges. I am sorry; I hope you will help us deal with the district that is hiring out road equipment for private work. I have also discussed the accident problem.

This issue of banning vehicles travelling at night has to be thought about seriously. If you want to develop your economy here, you know the world works 24 hours, if you want people to sleep 12 hours and work 12, then we shall never get there. So, let us see how we can regulate them, how they can drive safely, but let people work. 

This issue of banning is not a problem solving arrangement, if I may express my views, honourable members. You think somebody has gone wrong, you say “ban”. You remember the days of banning minis and banning other things? (Laughter)

I have finished with the issue of hon. Ssebalu on the humps. If the trading centres apply for humps through their local authorities, then we shall consider them –(Interruption)  

MR OMACH: Thank you, honourable Minister. I am seeking clarification on the issue of a road that has been blocked by you, that is Parliamentary Avenue. You have blocked Parliamentary Avenue for over two years now. Would you explain to us why half of that road is blocked? 

There is also another road in Nakasero, Lumumba Avenue, which is also halfway blocked, and once in a while in the night it is totally blocked. Could you clarify why you are doing that to the people of Uganda. Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Well, Parliamentary Avenue was blocked by the Security Council under a legal framework they have. It was blocked for security reasons, but it is open, it is not permanently blocked. It is open, and when there is need to block it, it is blocked.  Sometimes it is necessary. 

If you recall, that place was supposed to be bombed together with Dar-Salaam and Kenya, but the bombers were nipped in time. So, because of security reasons, and until adequate arrangements are made, it is not as smooth or as fast to move through Parliamentary Avenue. You have to bear with us for some time until –(Interruption)

MRS ALISEMERA BABIIHA: Thank you for giving way. I want to be clarified on the roads of Kampala.   The Ministry may have worked on a road very well, but you find the water people coming to dig it up, and then when they come to repair they leave a dent. You find that the road is no longer smooth, and it becomes a problem and a cause of accidents. Is it because we are not co-ordinating with different ministries when we are trying to plan the town? Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Where it is possible, when we are doing the road and providing the utilities, we do them at the same time. But sometimes you find the programme for installing utilities like telephones or water pipes is different from when the road is done. But the law says that if you dig up a road and you pass a pipe, you should re-instate the road as it was. The problem you are talking about is purely weakness in the supervision; that is all. 

Hon. Kakooza wanted more district roads to be taken over. I think I have made a comment on that. In the meantime, districts should continue maintaining some of the roads that were done under those programmes.  

Hon. Katuramu, we work together with the Ministry of Agriculture. Under PMA, for example, there is a component for funding feeder roads or district roads as part of implementing PMA. 

Facilities for people with disabilities in buildings are taken care of. The Building Control Bill will take care of that. In the meantime, we are encouraging new designs to provide facilities for people with disabilities before construction.  

Hon. Kyahurwenda said that districts should take over the supervision of roads. At the moment we are co-operating with districts for supervision of manual maintenance. In fact, manual maintenance contracts are given by CAOs and our district engineers, but not with this other supervision. The districts themselves are having problems supervising our own roads and then you want to add central Government roads! I do not think that one will work. 

I have taken note of your bridges. I have also taken note of the requests and the pledges made from hon. Wesonga.  

Hon. Bintu, tarmacking of the Kafu-Masindi road is on course. The final bidding documents are almost being prepared and tarmacking of the road is expected to start next year. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi, work will also start on the Wakaliga road in May next year, and that is from Bakuli to Busega. And definitely, roads in Lubaga South, which are roads under the city council, cannot be left out because of what you are - whatever that meant. I thought this city council is well catered for. This city council, from all records in the press and even from hon. Lukyamuzi, is run by what they are –(Laughter).  

Hon. Ochieng, the districts are supposed to do the main maintenance on their equipment and only take it to the regional base when it is a major overhaul. The district should change oil, repair and service their vehicles rather than calling the regional people. 

Hon. Sarah Nyombi, it seems there weren’t adequate funds within the national budget to provide for ferries, so we might have to wait for another year. I take the point where you say stones are used to warn people where there is construction. We shall rectify that. 

Finally, I would like to thank hon. Onzima, and also to note that for the first time since the Sixth Parliament, he has come out to thank the President, the Minister, the Government, and I think the Movement –(Laughter). And since he said good work brings a good name, I hope it also brings good votes –(Laughter). Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion to adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs23,366,000,000 under vote 016, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs281,976,541,000 under Head 116, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa):  Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved Votes 016 and 116 for both recurrent and development expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/2003.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Rukutana):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable Members, before we conclude today’s proceedings, I want to remind members from the Western Region of Uganda that they will be having a meeting with census officials, on census 2002, at Hotel Africana.  I think you are aware that you will have your lunch there.  So, please, remind others who are not here about this crucial meeting on the census.

Now, honourable Members, this afternoon we had democratic elections in respect of the Standing Committee on HIV AIDS, and I requested honourable members headed by hon. Abdu Katuntu; they included hon. Fred Bogere, hon. Rwakimari Beatrice, hon. Amasi Pataki, hon. Maate Rogers and hon. Akwero Odwong Jane to supervise the counting and tabulating of the votes cast.  I am happy to say that I have received a report from them. 

However, it appears something wrong was done. Maybe it was done without the people concerned knowing the right procedure that a number of candidates who submitted their names for this Standing Committee were Members of other Standing Committees, and apparently they were interested to change from one Committee to another. But I think the procedure should have been different in doing that because I see those who purport to have resigned have not been elected where they wanted to go -(Laughter). Now what we do?  Do I say they have missed where they wanted to go and they have also burnt the house where they have been living?  So that becomes a problem, but I think we shall find a solution.  

However, those honourable members who supervised the exercise have reported to me that we had 162 Members of Parliament who voted during this exercise. Good enough there were no invalid votes, so I think there was no need for election education; and they are 14 clear winners but we have the problem with the 15th position, because three members have a tie, and one of them is a member of another appointment’s board. 

I think I should only read those who have been successful, I may not need to read the votes scored, it is not necessary. I trust that this is what has happened and we have the following honourable Members elected: Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda, hon. Byatike Matovu, hon. Capt. Matovu David, hon. Okot Santa, hon. Kasule Lumumba, hon. Dr Richard Bulamu, hon. Mukabera Annette, hon. Hood Katuramu, hon. Victoria Sebagereka, hon. Anifa Kawoya, hon. Dr Steven Chebrot, hon. Jessica Eriyo, hon. Rainer Kafire and hon. Alisemera Babiiha.  These are clear 14 members, congratulations!  

Now, we have three honourable Members who stood but they take the 15th position, and you have to get one of them.  One of them is hon. Hyuha Dorothy and others are hon. Idah Mehangye and hon. Wesonga Kamana- (Laughter).  So, what happens is that one of those three, hon. Dorothy Hyuha, I think, resigned but that would be abscondment from - because the procedure was not correct for one to resign from one Committee and go to another. So you have these three Members; what do we do?  Should we vote now? (Interruption)- okay, is it by secret ballot or we can -(Interruption)- use show of hands -(Interruption)- or we leave this matter until sometime tomorrow?  Because you see we will be accused of being unfair. I mean, this was a tie; we had followed certain rules, if there is a tie we have to repeat it in accordance to the rules. You know, we should now be an example to others in as far as elections are concerned, and I think it is better to be consistent with procedures rather than bending them, because if we do that at this level, why not at the district, village or even national level?  So, you think about this, we shall find a solution so that we really do it properly.  

Now, honourable members, I thank you for really dealing with the budget diligently. We have now completed the estimates for three ministries so far, and tomorrow we are dealing with the Ministry of Finance. I therefore appeal to you to be on time so that we deal with this one.  There is no way we can change these dates.  

Honourable Members, as I told you, the Act requires us to have passed the budget by the 31st of August.  The last working day of August will be 30th, and it is Friday. So there is no way we can avoid working on Friday. What I have done is that we have left out Mondays because I have asked you to be here on Friday.  So I thank you very much for your understanding. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(Parliament rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 16 August 2002 at 10.00 a.m.)



