Thursday, 19 August 2010

Parliament met at 10.31 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I thank you very much for turning up. The record will show that you turned up today. As I said today, we will be sitting in the morning and then later I will make an announcement. But I think what we can do in the circumstances is to suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes. I hope by that time, other colleagues would have joined us. 

We resume at 10.45 a.m. The House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 10.34 a.m.)

(On Resumption at 10.54 a.m. the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

STATUTORY REPORT TO PARLIAMENT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISE REFORM AND DIVESTITURE ACT, CAP 98

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed, hon. Okello-Okello has something to say.

10.55
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and this is the problem of borders between Lamwor District and Southern Sudan.

Last week when I was at home, I received reports that the situation along our Northern border was getting tense and this matter has appeared in the New Vision of Monday, August 16, 2010 on page 38, attributed to the acting RDC of Lamwor.

What is going on is that the Southern Sudanese have stopped any work on the Ugandan side, even road works. They come with their guns and chase our people away. The problems are mainly along three borders; between Madiope and Teretenya, Warigo and Owiny Kibul, and then lastly Ngomuromu and Pajok.

I have been informed that last year the Southern Sudanese abducted our road maintenance engineer and took him to Sudan, and it took UPDF a bit of time before they could recover the engineer. This engineer has now resigned because of the risk.

I am also informed that in April this year, a memorandum on this matter was given to His Excellency the President, but up to now nothing has been done by our government. I am also informed that the authorities in Lamwor District informed our Ministry of Foreign Affairs to take up this matter, but there is no response from the minister.

The matter is very urgent. There is an offer by some NGOs to build Police posts along the border of Lamwor and Southern Sudan, but because of this situation, the construction work cannot go ahead. This morning I talked to the acting LC V Chairman of Lamwor. He told me that they have been given only three weeks to settle the matter or the offer to build the Police posts will be withdrawn.

Unfortunately, I don’t see the Leader of Government Business in the House. I don’t know -

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Leader of Government Business has been here, but he left his documents and went back. Currently, hon. Nankabirwa -

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I can see his bag there anyway.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nankabirwa is standing in, but he was here. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, hon. Colleague for giving way. I wanted to inform my colleague and the House at large that the issue of hostility by the Southern Sudanese is not only limited to Lamwor. As we speak, there are thousands of Sudanese even within Kampala and Mukono districts.

I would like to inform you, dear colleagues that our neighbours, the Southern Sudanese, seem to have overzealous tempers. They are extremely unsocial; in fact, these days if you go to any social place and find some Southern Sudanese there, rest assured that there can be problems.

Recently, I even witnessed a Southern Sudanese young lady in a market in Seeta trying to pick a panga and threaten somebody, and they do it with impunity.

So, the hostility of our neighbours from Southern Sudan is something of concern and I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs ought to explain to us why these Sudanese are in thousands. I don’t know whether they have come with work permits; I really can’t explain how the influx has happened all of a sudden. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, hon. Okello Okello for giving way. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, as you will appreciate, the issue relating to the border between Sudan and Uganda is not new in this House. Last year there was a conflict between the Southern Sudanese and Ugandans in Moyo, and this reached levels that required the attention of the two national governments to resolve.

So, my conclusion is that there is something happening between Uganda and Southern Sudan. The hostility that hon. Epetait has just alluded to is not limited to Uganda alone. Our people living in Southern Sudan live under fear. I travelled to the Western part of Southern Sudan - in fact I have visited five states of Southern Sudan and I had the opportunity to interact with a number of Ugandans who expressed a lot of fear, and that was sometime last year. 

They were intimidated by the Southern Sudanese; they are actually physically assaulted by Southern Sudanese and they are increasingly beginning to believe that the government does not care for them. So, I think Government needs to step up its efforts in not only protecting our people living outside the territorial borders of Uganda in Southern Sudan, but also resolving once and for all the issue of the boundary between Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the honourable colleagues for their information. Mr Speaker, the entire border - it was not only Moyo, but also between Koboko and Sudan, there was some skirmish and some people lost their lives. What I am saying is that Government does not have to wait until lives are lost and then we take up the matter. So, Madam Leader of Government Business, our people are anxiously waiting for steps to be taken by Government on this matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The issue of border disputes in this country has been on, not only with regard to Southern Sudan and Uganda, but also Kenya-Uganda. We also have DRC and Uganda in the issues of Lukwanzi. Government established a committee comprising of the ministries of lands, internal affairs and that of the Presidency, together with relevant ministries. The information that I want to give to my colleagues is that Government is not ignoring this problem. It is a problem that we must settle, but there are steps which have been taken and I promise to inform the Leader of Government Business to cause the minister to inform this august House how far he has gone on this issue of settling such disputes.

We have internal boarder disputes and I have participated in solving some of them, such as the one in Katakwi. I was with hon. Epetait and the rest trying to settle this dispute. 

Regarding our brothers from Southern Sudan; we are in a post-conflict era, and as such, there must be tolerance of certain behaviours that come with a long period of violence. But this does not mean that we are not doing anything. I was with hon. Musumba and other ministers; we met our colleagues in the Government of Southern Sudan. We expressed what was expressed here and the President promised us good neighbourliness. I hope the minister of foreign affairs is working on this.

Our geographical position on the map of Africa sometimes puts us in challenges of refugee influx.

Uganda is a destination for everybody who loves peace. We are yet to see Ugandans who live in the neighbourhood. I must say that those who come here must behave in an acceptable manner.

I think the minister of internal affairs has something to say about the influx of people from other countries.

I have noted this and I will tell the Leader of Government Business to inform the relevant ministries. 

THE SPEAKER: They will do everything to inform the public about what hon. Okello-Okello has stated.

PRESENTATION OF STATUTORY REPORTS TO PARLIAMENT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISE REFORM AND DIVESTITURE (PERD) ACT, CAP 98

MS NANKABIRWA: I beg to lay on table reports on the, Implementation of Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, (PERD) Cap 98.

THE SPEAKER: Let the relevant committee take up the document study it and then subsequently make a report to Parliament.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010 AND

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011

11.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE GENERAL DUTIES (Fred Omach): I would like to thank colleagues for the enthusiasm with which they have debated the Budget Speech for the financial year 2010/2011. I will respond to some of the issues that they have raised. We have noted all the contributions from Members of Parliament. 

I will respond to the response from the Opposition, which was presented to the House by the shadow minister of finance, hon. Oduman Okello. 

I would like to start with the notion that for one to get NAADS funds, they must have an NRM card. This is not true, because we use the yellow card for primary elections, and that is why our side is thinner than it has ever been before. Access to NAADS does not have any colour or religion.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: I would like to inform the minister that in today’s paper, there is a picture on the distribution of oxen and ox-ploughs in Apac. I can produce the photograph where one woman is pulling a young bull; another is clearly thumbing the NRM symbol. If you are not convinced, I will leave the chamber and go and produce the photograph that demonstrates that.

MR OMACH: I want to put it on record that access is not restricted to NRM membership. What you are referring to Leader of the Opposition, neglects those in the picture that did not put their thumps up.

In the introduction of my response, I thanked my colleague, that is the shadow minister of finance, for his response to the budget statement, which clearly shows the whole world the progress made by the NRM Government in developing democracy.

Mr Speaker, notwithstanding the foregoing, I note that my colleague proposes the theme to be, and I quote, “Improving Household Incomes of the Poor through Increased Expenditure on Agriculture.” I was a bit stunned by the choice of this theme, because all over the world, empirical evidence suggests that there is no country in the world that has grown out of poverty through agriculture alone.  The trends have been that though at initial stages of growth, agriculture significantly contributed to GDP, the share of this sector to GDP gradually declines as the economy grows, and in its place, industrialisation and the services sector play a prominent role. 

Economic development trends in the Far East and the developed world bear me out on this. (Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just had a quick look at the ministry’s reply to the debate and the Opposition response to the government budget statement. Now, this to me looks a very formal statement, and I am not aware of any provisions on the rule where in concluding a debate, there is a formal reply. If we allow the Minister to make this presentation, do we have a right of response so that we debate his response?

THE SPEAKER: He is winding up the debate. As I said yesterday, according to our rules, when we start this kind of motion – the motion started by the Minister - the next person that is allowed to make a contribution is the Shadow Spokesperson, which was done, and then after that one, if the Chairman of the Committee on Budget wants to make a reply or contribution, he makes it and then the debate is open to all Members of Parliament to make their contribution. Obviously, as the owner of the motion, he winds up and we conclude. That is what I am expecting. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Yes, but this one has a very clear title. He is still replying instead of concluding.

THE SPEAKER: I think what he should do is to make his reply. He can say, “Before I even – the document – is that I have given other details,” other than maybe going through the details. But you are now concluding your motion.

MR OMACH: I thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. So, we have given this formal response, but we as a country – 

THE SPEAKER: What we can do is to table it so that it becomes our document, and then briefly make your points, and we see how we proceed. We shall accept it as your document.

MR OMACH: So, I would like to just lay this on Table as response to the Opposition response speech which was read on June 10, 2010. In particular, we highlight the fact that the policies that the government of the National Resistance Movement is taking are in the right direction, and particularly, we are referring to those that the Opposition had used for their submission. We look at the issues concerning prosperity, structural transformation in agriculture – 

THE SPEAKER: You can pick one or two points and then – 

MR OMACH: Yes, we look at the issue of external public debt, which as a country, Government continues to mortgage the future of – the Opposition had claimed that we are mortgaging the future of generations undeterred. The figure of US$ 4.1 billion includes total commitments of which US$ 2.4 billion has been disbursed; loans committed but not yet disbursed of US$ 1.4 billion, and guarantees of US$ 0.3 billion. So, the figures quoted as the debt level of US$ 1.1 billion after debt relief refers to just the debt outstanding and disbursed, which at June 2010 stood at US$ 2.4 billion.

We also looked at Government financing of health and we give the details. The poverty trends – the latest information indicates that the trends are actually coming down and not as stated by the Shadow Minister of Finance. Northern Uganda’s poverty had declined from 67.5 percent in 2004 to 57.5 percent in 2008, and we expect this census done this financial year. 

Income inequality has been addressed by our government, and that is why we have Northern Uganda having specific issues to ensure that they catch up with the rest of Uganda as far as those living below poverty are concerned.

Balance of Payments has been addressed. Inflation - the oil revenue management has been addressed. The response to the sector issues about the Abuja Declaration was indicated. 

On education, we give the figures that have been given to ensure that education is effectively implemented in Uganda. We give issues on environment and natural resources, infrastructure development, which is one of the priorities.

Under the energy sector, we also give the trends that are on-going and how we intend to move from the current output. The institutional issues on corruption were also addressed.

In conclusion, I thank my colleagues, the Shadow Minister of Finance and all the members of the Opposition for their inputs to the Financial 2010/2011 Budget Speech. I commend the budget to this August House and seek expeditious approval of the proposed allocation to the sectors for the development of this country. 

I urge all honourable colleagues to enhance efforts in monitoring the use of these resources to avoid leakages, as is our oversight function. 

Together, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we shall continue to move this Nation, given the proven track record of the NRM government.  

I thank you, and beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Very good. I thank you very much honourable. Hon. Members, once again I thank you for your time and contributions on this motion, which was moved in June by the Minister of Finance on the Budget Day. I think your contributions will enrich policies that we have to follow during the financial year, and during the allocation of money to various sectors.

So, what I have to do is to put the question on the motion of the Minister.

(Question put, and agreed to.)
 
THE SPEAKER: It now means that we could start the supply, but hon. Members, I have looked at the Budget Act which governs the process and I have found problems in that.

According to Section 6(7) of the Budget Act, the sessional committees are supposed to submit their reports on the estimates of their sectors to Parliament by 31 August – that is the date which is in the Act. 

But unfortunately, the reports which I receive from the Clerk’s office which services the committees – a number of reports and in fact all of them have not been signed, and these are the materials I will be using to read out the figure for your approval. 
No committee has signed and most of the chairpersons are not here to ask them the position. I know under Section 22 of the Budget Act, the Speaker has powers to extend the time, that is only if we fail. But I think 31st is not very far from today and reports have not been signed yet. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I need your guidance. I know my Chairperson, Finance is not around, but our report was ready and we even signed it. But we faced a difficulty when Finance submitted corrigendum. Then yesterday, we got corrigendum II. So, we were sent back. So, we need more time; in fact, all sessional committees require more time to go back and start the work afresh. So, the problem is with the Ministry of Finance, which distorted the work.

THE SPEAKER: But I think this will only affect the figures because the corrigendum was to increase the figures; that we shall do. But if the Finance Committee has signed, I want through you to thank the members of the committee for that wonderful performance of having been able to finish and sign the report. So, I only have one report, but I need all the reports to be able to go through the supply exercise. 

I am also aware that this is a multiparty Parliament and we need to see this Parliament passing over this system to another Parliament. It appears that most of the Members are not here because they are in their party activities to cement their multiparty system within their parties. I have seen in the papers; all the parties - DP, UPC – they are also in primaries. And definitely, the institution of Parliament should support the nurturing of our multiparty system. 

Now, if I go on with you, they will say, “You were trying to prevent us from doing our work, to cement the activities of our parties”. I have made consultations on both sides on what to do, and now I have found that we may not proceed with the supply aspect – we may not go in the committee of supply. I have to ideally face the reality that Members are not here. You can see even the ministers are not here; I only have three. Most of them I think are engaged in party activities, particularly the primaries. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I realise your dilemma and that of the House, but I do not know when this will end. Whereas our colleagues on the other side of the House are now involved in political battles in their constituencies, sometime next month, the Opposition Forum for Democratic Change will also be going through a similar exercise – 

THE SPEAKER: When?

MR AMURIAT: The beginning of – in fact they are on it at the moment with the grassroots elections, and we shall then proceed with our primaries. Therefore, as we consider when to resume, we need to take into consideration our concerns. 

THE SPEAKER: If you could indicate to me when, then I would consider it.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think the point you brought is clear that you will give space. Because what will happen is that when we will be holding our primaries, the other side will not be available. So, we will indicate to you the specific dates because we do not have them right now.

THE SPEAKER: Tentatively, what I can do is to give you a recess, which is subject to changes depending on when you fix the date, so that I put this recess to go up to 13th September, and hopefully the members of the committee would have appended their signatures on the reports, so that on 13th we start the supply. 

So, with this, I think let us adjourn and have that recess up to 13th September. I appeal to all the chairpersons to cause their members to find time to come and sign the reports so that the reports are submitted to the Clerk, so that we can prepare. When we get the reports, there are forms which we fill to put the recommended figures. So, the recommended figures will be used to fill in those forms. You can take off a day or two to finish the exercise. 

With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. House is adjourned to 13th September.

(The House rose at 11.31 a.m. and adjourned until Monday, 13 September 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
