Tuesday, 18 August 2009

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Thank you for finding time to come. I think it is my duty to advise honourable members that people are watching you; Hon. Pulkol is watching you. Do not give him evidence of making adverse reports about you. You have to attend Parliament on time, unless you have a good excuse. I think it is my duty to say so.

2.37
MR RICHARD MUTUMBA SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to bring up a matter of national importance, which I think needs urgent attention of Government, particularly the ministries concerned. This concerns the Dental School at Mulago Hospital.

There is a problem now at the Dental School. The Principal of the Paramedics is trying to turn the hostel of the students into offices without consulting all the stakeholders. Everybody is up in arms and that has resulted in him using a high hand to terminate some of the services of the tutors; expel some of the students; and even push the beginning of the term forward.

I have already written to the Minister of Health under which docket this problem falls, and I understand she is yet to receive my communication. I even carbon copied to the Ministry of Health and other relevant bodies concerned. I seek the indulgence of this Parliament, especially the Minister and the Government, particularly, to come in and we stem this problem.

Students are already trying to raise their momentum to riot. The permanent secretary of the Ministry of Education recently wrote to the concerned officer, the Director, but he has not heeded to the advice. He was telling him to halt his developments until all the stakeholders are brought on board. 

As we talk, the demolitions are taking place; the students have nowhere to go and they are planning a massive strike. This is the Dental School which was built by the Danish, particularly to bring dentistry services to the country, and it is already bringing on board universities like Makerere. I, therefore, urge Government to expeditiously solve this problem before it gets out of hand.

2.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mutumba Sebuliba for raising that matter. We have taken note of the matter and we are going to bring it to the attention of the ministers concerned, because there is both Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health. We shall be in touch with them. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSOLVENCY BILL, 2009

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: the Insolvency Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. 

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, the Bill is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications as required under the relevant law and our Rules of Procedure. It is hereby laid on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequent report to the House.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I) REPORTS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEES FOR THE YEAR 2008/2009

2.41
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, under Section 88(8) of the Local Governments Act, Chapter 243 requires the minister responsible for local governments to lay before this honourable House, the reports of Local Governments Public Accounts Committees. 

I now wish to lay before this Parliament, some reports of the Public Accounts Committees of the following local governments as required by the provisions of the Local Government Act, referred to above: Mbarara District, Kumi District, Kasese District, Tororo District, Tororo Municipal Council, Malaba Town Council, Kasese Town Council, Hima Town Council in Kasese District, Hoima District, Hoima Town Council, Kigolobya Town Council, Nakapiripirit District, Ibanda District, Bugiri District, Isingiro District, Kumi Town Council, Mbarara Municipal Council, Wakiso District, Mukono District, Kampala City Council, Lyantonde District, Lyantonde Town Council, Kalangala District, Kalangala Town Council, Butaleja District, Budaka District, Budaka Town Council, Kapchorwa District, Pallisa District, Kanungu District, Rukungiri District, Rakai District, Kyotera Town Council, Amuria District, Amuria Town Council, Mbale District, Gulu District, Mpigi District, Mpigi Town Council, Ngando Sub-county, Kibibi Sub-county, Bbulo Sub-county, Kabulasoke Sub-county, Maddu Sub-county, Kyegonza Sub-county, Buwama Sub-county, Kalamba Sub-county, Budde Sub-county, Kamengo Sub-county, Kiringete Sub-county, Kituntu Sub-county, Muduma Sub-county, Mpenja Sub-county, Nkozi Sub-county.

Mr Speaker, the reports are contained in the envelopes on the Table here. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee scrutinise the reports and subsequently report to the House. 

II) REQUEST FOR GOVERNMNET TO BORROW SDR 17.6 MILLION (US$ 27,000,000) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCINIG PHASE II OF THE LAKE VICTORIA ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PROJECT (LVEMP)

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I have just been speaking to my colleague who is supposed to lay these papers on the Table. She is on the way coming, but as soon as she comes, she will be able to Table them. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/09
II) BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/10

THE SPEAKER: Do I put the question? Honourable members, the motion is that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval – that is the motion. Would the Minister of Finance like to respond to the debates so far made?

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, we moved this motion and we are very grateful to the honourable members who have contributed to this motion. We wish to thank all the members of Parliament who have given us their unreserved support and we have just a few issues to respond to, but unfortunately we are not ready to respond now. (Laughter) 

I say we are not ready to respond because this debate has been too short and we were trying to prepare the responses to the issues that were raised. We did not know that this debate would take this short. So, I seek that we close debate, but we will be able to respond to the House tomorrow. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, when the hon. Minister of State for Finance came here and said that the debate on this motion has been too short - all I know is that yesterday, the Shadow Minister for Finance made an official response to the Budget Speech as delivered to the country by the Minister of Finance. I thought today would have been the time for both sides to engage into debates now that we have heard from them. Where members are not prepared to debate, I seek your indulgence as to whether Government will not respond to some of the salient and key issues which were raised by my shadow minister yesterday. 

THE SPEAKER: What I gather from the minister is that they are preparing their response to what was said yesterday. I think he is asking for more time to prepare. But in this debate, I would even have expected the committees to make their contributions. 

When you look at our Rules, there is no given time for the committee – you should be using what you have gathered through the committee proceedings to make meaningful contributions. Otherwise, we do not have time for your reports. Use your reports to make a contribution to the debate on the motion.

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the Shadow Minister of Finance presented a report and it was in response to the Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance. According to what I know, the two reports should now inform the general debate on the reports as well, which are going to be presented by the sessional committees, and I know that the committees are in final stages of presenting their reports here for debate. It will be on the basis of those presentations, the Budget Speech and the response of the Shadow Minister of Finance that we shall make conclusive remarks on the Appropriations Bill. 

Yesterday, I also made a statement that tomorrow I would make a response to that report. But after some consultations, I am now in position to say that all these responses by the House will be made by each one of us as we debate the Budget Speech. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But you see you are talking about committee reports. Under what item are you going to present those reports? The committees use this opportunity to make their contributions in respect of the sectors of which they are in charge. 

So, in effect, we are saying that we are not ready. You want me to adjourn so that tomorrow – but we are not maximally using the time.

MR YIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government is ready. I think it might be already be in Parliament, waiting for photocopying and circulation to members. Otherwise, I would be glad that you give us time to present it tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the status is that you are not ready. You want to contribute but you are not ready. I think what I do is to adjourn. 

2.54
MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I think this is one of the most strange times we have had in as far as I can recall in the past eight years I have been in this Parliament. I do not know whether this is because of the change in procedure. You know in the past, immediately after the general debate, without a break, we would straight away flow into the Budget debate; the committee reports would come thereafter. 

But this year there has been a change that after the general debate on the State of the Nation Address, time is given to members to go and conduct sessional committees’ work, which of course impacts onto the Budget process. Anyway, that aside, I know as a House we do not know where to go yet. I would have ordinarily expected that after the Shadow Minister of Finance has made his response to the Government budget – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you were given a break after the debate on the State of the Nation Address to go and scrutinise, as committees, the details of the estimates in respect of your sectors. This was intended to equip you with what to say during the general debate. You will have the potential to say the budget for such and such a ministry is not good. This is what we expect you to do after the committees have gone into the details of the estimates.

In spite of that, you seem to say that you need more time. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This response was not expected. We had hoped that by letting committees handle the policy statements and look at the ministries’ budgets that would be a much more efficient way of handling budget discussions. And indeed, members do agree that it is a much more efficient and thorough way of handling budget issues.

However, it is also true that what the members had expected was that the reports would be presented by chairpersons before they make contributions to avoid pre-empting the work that had been undertaken by the various committees.

My view is that with more pressure put on the chairpersons – because, for instance, we had expected the Committee on Presidential Affairs to be here with the report because the Prime Minister and President’s Offices had appeared before it a long time ago and assurance had been given that the reports would be ready.

Yesterday, the Committee on Public Service had also indicated that their report would be here today. My view on this is that these reports are going to be here, maybe before the close of the day, so that tomorrow we can formally receive them on the Floor. Thereafter the debate should be able to proceed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification and guidance from you.

My understanding is that, yes, we have received a response from the Opposition, but I do not know whether it is in our practice to debate responses. I am saying this because there are issues that were raised, particularly in respect of the agriculture sector. I thought I would address them at the time we will be debating the report on the policy statement for agriculture – 

THE SPEAKER: Under what item because before we do that, we have to constitute ourselves into a committee of supply? This debate is intended to let us agree to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply. Let me read to you the relevant provision. This is Rule 129 of our Rules of Procedure; it talks about the Committee of Supply and it reads: “Upon the motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply, and on resumption of the debate, the Speaker shall give the first opportunity to speak to the Opposition spokesperson on finance to respond to the motion, followed by the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, before recognising the rest of the embers for this debate.” 

Anyway, even if we do not go into the details, it seems you are not ready.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, this was a response from the Opposition to the National Budget. As Opposition, we are supposed to give alternatives – let the Government say they have accepted our alternative policies. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, the position is that your response was generally the view you have on the Budget as presented by the Minister of Finance. However, with that, we should continue with the debate as Members of Parliament. And at the end of the day, the question is put on whether we should dissolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply, because that is when we deal with the figures. 

Anyway, I think it is a consensus that I should give you time to go and prepare yourselves? Isn’t it better?

HON. MEMBERS: That is better.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; but before I do that, can we know how many committees are now done with their tasks? Yesterday there were some indications. Are there any new committees that have finished their work?

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, although I am no longer the chairperson of the committee, I understand the report is ready.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, any other committees? How about the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? Well, I think what I can do now in view of the situation is to adjourn the House to tomorrow at – Yes, Hon. Ndeezi.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I am not the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, but I am a very active member. I would like to let you know that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is not yet ready, but we shall let you know tomorrow when we will be ready. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, I think I will adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. to continue with the debate. And can I please meet the chairpersons of sessional committees in the South Committee Room. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 3.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 August 2009 at 2.30 p.m.) 
