Tuesday, 13 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Col Francis Okello.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have observed that in taking the new Member to his seat, somebody passed the Member behind the Speaker –(Laughter) 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: In the strangers’ gallery we have students from Laban Senior Secondary School in Kagoma County.  You are welcome! (Applause).  And then I see others, I do not know from where. Maybe they will inform me and I will inform you.

I want to welcome the new Member, Col. Francis Okello, to this House.  You are most welcome! (Applause).

Hon. Members, I think we start with the bad news.  I have received bad news that one of our Members, hon. Aggrey Awori, Member for Samia Bugwe North lost his beloved son Toure Sabiiti Awori in a road accident.  Burial will take place tomorrow in Bugiri area. Also, our Member, hon. Kapkwomu from Kapchorwa lost a mother; and again our hon. Member Jack Sabiiti lost a brother, Dr Kemigisha, who was working in Entebbe.  I think we should stand to observe a minute’s silence.

(Members stood to observe a minute’s silence.)

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  It is a pity that all the MPs from Acholi sub-region have just come back now from Gulu; we had a meeting with the President last night.  But also while we were there, we received sad news that hon. Norbert Mao’s mother passed away last night.  The body is still in Jinja, and we are arranging to go there.  We have just come back.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, maybe we also stand and observe a minute’s silence.
 
(Members stood to observe a minute’s silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since our last adjournment, we have been able to host the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (Africa Region) Conference.  It started on the 2nd and ended on 10th this month. This is an achievement for Uganda, and for the Constitution of Uganda.  As I told you before, Uganda has been a Member of the Commonwealth since we obtained independence in 1962, and immediately Uganda became a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 

After just three years of independence, Uganda was honoured when it hosted the CPA International meeting in Kampala.  But then, a few years after, there was a constitutional problem in the country and the country was taken up by the military and Uganda ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, although it continued to be a member of the Commonwealth. We only returned to constitutional rule in 1980 when we had elections and got a Parliament. But even that did not last long, for we had a military coup in 1985. Then our membership was put in abeyance.

In 1986, the present government under NRM took over, but under the CPA Constitution, a country’s legislature has to fulfill all the conditions of a Parliament before it can be a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. It is only after elections in 1996 that we resumed our seat in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. A few years after, we have been honoured to host the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (Africa Region) and perhaps soon we may host the international one. 

I want to take this opportunity, honourable Members, to thank everybody who has enabled Uganda to return to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I want to thank you, honourable Members of the 7th Parliament for doing whatever you did to enable us host this Conference. 

I also thank the members of staff, headed by the Clerk, and the other organisations that assisted us. In particular, I want to thank members of the Organising Committee chaired by the Deputy Speaker, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, and Members hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Adolf Mwesige, hon. Dora Byamukama, hon. Maj. Bright Rwamirama, hon. Patrick Mwondha, hon. Alice Alaso, hon. Okumu Reagan, hon. Jane Akwero Odwong, hon. Hood Katuramu, and as I have said, the staff of Parliament headed by the Clerk of Parliament. 

I also want to thank the Executive because, as you know, this was a conference, it was not within our budget but the Executive was able to find us funds that enabled us to host it. There are other organizations, which I should mention, that helped us. Of course to start with, the hotels that accommodated our guests and the International Conference Centre, which hosted the conference and the committee meetings. 

Other organizations also contributed funds. I want to mention BAT (Uganda) Limited, Caltex (Uganda) Limited, Uganda Electricity Regulatory Authority, and Nile Breweries Limited because it also looked after our throats. So, on your behalf, I thank these organizations and I think one resolution, which we must make now is that what happened to us in 1970 and in all those other years should never be repeated. We should continue to be constitutional, we should continue to ensure that the institution of Parliament thrives and should never be disturbed again. Thank you very much.

Yesterday I received visitors from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, an organization that is charged with carrying out the national housing and population census. As you know, we are supposed to have a census every ten years but because of the many activities we had, we were not able to have it last year. But now, everything is in place and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, under its mandate, will conduct a national census of people and many other things. 

They came to me to seek my support so that I could in turn seek yours so that the exercise can be supported by you and by the people you represent. We may have some detractors of this exercise who may say nasty things about it and who may discourage people from participating, but I think we should encourage people to participate in this exercise. 

The exercise is not meant to tax people. Because they will be asking many questions about what people have and what they do not have, people may fear that by giving this information the exercise is intended for taxation. The exercise is not intended for taxation. The exercise is intended for their good, it is intended for planning. Therefore, people should be friendly to the people who will be going to them to get information. 

I was told that the census night is 12th September, but the exercise will run from the 13th to 19th September 2002. And some people will be counted on 14th because we are many, but the operating night will be the 13th. So I appeal to you, honourable Members, to go and mobilize people to be prepared for this exercise.

Another matter I want to mention here is that in our rules we created three new Standing Committees and it is the function of this House to appoint the committees. The three Standing Committees are the Committee on Equal Opportunities, the second one is the Committee on Science and Technology and the third is the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters.  

The Committee on Equal opportunities should have 11 members, the Committee on Science and Technology should have 15 members, and the Committee on HIV/AIDS should have 15 members. As of now, people who have submitted their names for membership on these committees are as follows.

The Committee on Equal Opportunities already has 11 members and therefore there is no problem with it. These are hon. Akwero Odwong Jane, hon. Kidega John Fred, hon. Munyira Wabwire, hon. Basaliza Araali, hon. Wandera Martin, hon. Komuhangi Margaret, hon. Mukasa Anthony, Hon. Bazaana Kabwegyere, hon. Kasamba Mathias, hon. Nyeko Michael and hon. Bagalana Tom. These are the names of people who have registered. Since you are the ones to elect them, I now put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now we have the Committee on Science and Technology. There are 15 Members.  These are: Hon. Bernard Mulengani, hon. Nabeta Nathan Igeme, hon. Sauda Mugerwa, hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick, hon. Mallinga Jackson, hon. Dr Esele Peter, hon. Dr Nkuuhe Johnson, hon. Mugambe Joseph, hon. Maate Rogers, hon. Onek Hilary, hon. Amajo Mary, hon. Nvumetta Ruth Kavuma, hon. Namuyangu K.J, hon. Wagonda Muguli, hon. Byaruhanga Charles (Capt).  15 names, and the Committee must have 15 names. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, there is the Committee on HIV/AIDS and it comes on the day when we have a conference on this particular matter, and you appreciate the role Parliament has to play in fighting this problem. I am happy that very many Members willingly registered themselves to serve on this Standing Committee. We could even have constituted the three Committees out of the list. Now, I am going to read them - because we need 15, it will be necessary, I think tomorrow, to vote on the names. The list is as follows: hon. Hamlet Reverend Mbabazi -(Interruption)

MRS DORAH BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your clarification on whether at this point in time one may be free to move from the Committee on HIV/AIDS to that of Equal Opportunities in light of the numbers that are being reflected?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think this is okay because the first Committee we only have 11 when we should have had 15.  Let me read the names - or you want to make your decision now?  Hon. Members, I think it is okay.  Let us get those who want to pull out of this and then -(Interruption) 

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to cross over to Equal Opportunities because I have seen that my colleague Alex Ndeezi - we did not communicate well, we are both on HIV/AIDS. Therefore, I would like to be supported to cross over to Equal Opportunities. Thank you very much - (Laughter).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to cross from HIV/AIDS Committee to Equal Opportunities Committee if I have the support of the Members.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS DORAH BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to cross over from HIV/AIDS to Equal Opportunities in order to give a legal dimension to this Committee - (Laughter).  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NDEEZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I do not know what happened, may be with the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, but I duly filled nomination forms for membership to the Equal Opportunities committee. The forms were duly signed by more than 20 Members and handed over to the Office of the Clerk. But I am surprised my name is not reflected in what the Clerk has – (Interruption)

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That makes the number. (Interruption)- no, they are 11 plus 4, and then we get 15.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Mr Speaker, I have already been passed as a Member of the Science and Technology Committee, so technically I can be knocked off the list because I cannot belong to two Committees. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in our rules we changed the composition of the Appointments Committee. How are we going to handle this Committee?    

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, the Appointments Committee - a Standing committee other than these new ones, is constituted at the beginning of the life of Parliament. It is only an amendment that has brought in new Standing Committees that were never envisaged. It is true we passed the rules, but the question in line, what would happen, should we disband and then appoint a new one when actually it had been appointed? I think the best way to deal with that issue is to deal with it when a matter arises in future. But what had been done, a Committee had been constituted, the rules did not disband it; there is no way now we can disband those who have been elected before.

MR ALEX ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem with Members who are crossing from one Committee to another. The Members who are crossing came to us for our signatures for their nomination, for specific Committees. So, if a Member now changes his or her mind for my signature, which I gave her or him for a specific Committee and now wants to go to another Committee for which I did not endorse her or him, I mean, it becomes invalid! So, I think for those who are crossing, they should start the whole process again, and then we can proceed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I wish you had raised this matter before we pronounced ourselves on the matter. But now that we did resolve that, we agreed on it, there is no way now I can reopen this one because the record will show that we agreed that they become Members. Had you indicated it before, then I think we should have addressed the issue and decided on one way or the other.

So now, honourable members, the names I have are: Hon. Udongo Betty Pacutho -(Interruption)- no, I am just reading- (Laughter)-I think you will use secret ballot -(Interruption)- do I need to read because I understand you have the copies?  Okay, sorry. Then what we shall do tomorrow, you will be given the list and then vote and then we shall decide accordingly.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I do not know if it is procedurally correct that at this time we could put it to the Members who are on this committee to reconsider their positions? Some of them may wish to stand down and we may not have to go through a rigorous election exercise.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we leave that to them, but it is our duty to vote so we shall vote for them. 

Honourable Members, we have to make a small adjustment to the Order Paper to accommodate the Minister in charge of Labour, hon. Obbo. He has a small statement to make on an issue that is important to all of us. So please, adjust it accordingly so that we can proceed thus. It will become item number five, and the current number five will become six.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2002 be read a first time.

The Bills that I am requesting to be read a first time are part and parcel of our budget process.

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2002 be read a First Time. I beg to move.

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2002 be read a First Time. I beg to move.
 
THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of the House.
             
BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2002 be read a first time. I beg to move.

THE CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Obbo): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, as you may have heard already, there is an ongoing strike by workers at Kinyara Sugar Works in Masindi. The strike, involving about 2,000 workers, started on the morning of Friday 9th August 2002. The strike started and continued without violence until yesterday. Workers attempted to manhandle the management, who in turn called the Police. 

In the ensuing struggle between Police and workers, one worker – a man - was shot dead and two others, a woman and a man, were wounded. The dead worker was transported for burial to Kitgum, after a post-mortem. The injured workers were transported to Mulago Hospital for treatment, and they have been discharged. The strike is still on, but calm has been restored. 

The cause of the strike is a complaint by workers that they have been over assessed for graduated tax payment to Masindi District Administration yet, according to them, some of them had paid taxes in their home districts before coming to Kinyara Sugar Works for employment. The tax, which they have been assessed to pay to Masindi District Administration, is Shs 40,000 per annum, and this is deducted at the rate of Shs 10,000 per month for four months. They further complained that they all do not work on the same length of contract at the sugar plantation. 

Mr Speaker, at the sugar plantation there is a routine of some workers having three months’ contract, others six months, eight, and others ten. So the workers say that since they do not all work for the same duration, their total income at the end of their contract period is not the same; therefore they should not be assessed to pay the same rate of taxes.  

In particular, the workers who come from other districts such as Arua and Gulu are very much affected because they form the majority of the workers at Kinyara Sugar Works. There are, however, other workers from Masindi, Hoima and elsewhere, but these are not very badly affected. 

Mr Speaker, the workers have now, after discussions with management and with the Masindi District Administration staff, agreed to stop their action. Management and the district administration officials are in discussions, together with the representative of the workers. My ministry, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Industry and Technology and the Ministry of Defence are involved in different capacities; some to facilitate the discussions and others to maintain law and order.

At the moment, the workers are expecting that by tomorrow, management will give them a final decision. But if tomorrow there is no final decision positive to the workers’ conception of fairness, workers might continue with their strike action. Pointers indicate that by tomorrow, workers will actually resume working.  

There has also been destruction by fire. Three hundred acres of sugarcane have been burnt.  Masindi has 9000 acres under cane plantation, 300 of which have been burnt causing the economy loss of 3 billion shillings.  But you may be happy to know that the seed cane has not yet been affected. Seed cane is the cane that is put aside for planting in new fields after the old ones have been harvested. But should the seed canes be destroyed by fire or otherwise, then the economy will be affected in a much more serious manner. Mr Speaker, honourable members, I thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification from the honourable Minister. He made his statement on what transpired in Kinyara, but he has not given us what the ministry has done to address the problem that is there.

Secondly, I would like to know from the Minister the basis upon which the assessment of 40,000 was reached so as to know whether the framework within which the workers went on strike was rational or not. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also want to thank the Minister for his submission. It is very unfortunate to have this kind of situation continuing in our country, especially at a time when we are trying to bring up our economy.  

I want to seek clarification from the Minister as to when the labour laws will be repealed. When will you be able to bring the bills to the House?  I am saying this because we are now having a lot of strikes going on.  As we are talking here, there is already another strike going on by the teachers.  There are no guidelines that can help to guide the workers and the employers to perform their legitimate work!

Secondly, I remember in the 6th Parliament, the Workers’ Representatives of that time had asked Parliament to repeal the thresh-hold of the law regarding Pay-As-You-Earn.  Taxation of the workers is too high in this country. We have already got other complaints from the Railway Workers Union, whereby people who are being retrenched because of privatisation have their terminal benefits highly taxed. So, what can we do to this effect, Mr Minister? Thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification.  According to the Minister, following a scuffle, somebody was brutally murdered. But I have different information, and I would like to know what action is being taken to bring to justice the person who murdered that worker in Kinyara. I condemn, in the strongest terms, the murder of that worker. There could have been other ways of dispersing these rowdy workers. 

Also, I would like to know how competent management is. This was a very simple issue, which needed clarification, but apparently the issue was mishandled and we have ended up losing more than three billion shillings. You cannot compare the money that is going to graduated tax to the three billion that has been lost in burnt cane!

In the same vein, I would like to condemn the act of burning cane. Whatever the grievances were, I think the workers were not justified to burn the cane.

I would also like to know what arrangements are in place to compensate the person who died on duty.  Unless things have changed, I know that when this graduated tax is deducted at Kinyara, it is remitted to the mother-districts of these cane cutters and weeders. It is one of the conditions. Before you recruit these cane cutters, the districts put a condition that they remit the deducted graduated tax. 

I would be happy to know if the position has changed otherwise, the situation is not as calm as the Minister is putting it.  Actually, I am rushing to go there to intervene in some issues –(Laughter)- Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This problem of graduated tax is not only in Kinyara. I do not know whether the Government is aware, but there is a lot of confusion regarding graduated tax in our areas.   

Ever since His Excellency the President talked of Shs 3000, it seems all people in the villages are deliberately refusing to pay the statutory amount of tax on the grounds that they all want to pay Shs 3000 each. Ad to make matters worse, in Mpigi District, people deliberately printed only graduated tax tickets of Shs10,000 and above. And even those people who would normally be paying only Shs3,000 are being forced to pay Shs10,000, just because the tickets for 3,000 are not there. 

So, many people in the rural areas are threatening not to pay graduated tax. We request the Government to come out with a clear – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as I follow your contribution on the issue, I think this should be directed to the Minister of Local Government because it is generally about tax and tax assessment. Now we are discussing labour. Unless a matter is related to the issue, do not bring it up.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker. I raised the issue because the cause of that strike was graduated tax. So, I am trying to tell the Government that the problem is not only in Kinyara but it is going to happen everywhere because there is a lot of confusion surrounding graduated tax.  

I know it is the Minister of Local Government, who is concerned, but I am appealing to Government to take immediate steps, otherwise the situation will get out of hand. There is a lot of anxiety in the rural areas emanating from the way this issue of graduated tax is being handled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR NABWISO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since the sugar industry is so important to our economy –(Laughter)- is the Minister willing to make a special statement - not necessarily now but in the future - about the working conditions of the workers in these sugar factories in Kakira, Kinyara and Lugazi? It is extremely important because these people are suffering a lot. In fact, in Kakira, some people really work under conditions that would be normally described as conditions for slaves. Thank you.

MR NYEKO OCULA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to just get some few clarifications from the Minister. By the time a strike becomes violent, it is expected to have already gone through about three stages. It normally begins with a go-slow, then it becomes a sit-down and then later it becomes violent.  I would like to know from the honourable Minister; exactly when did the workers from this sugar plantation begin having these grievances, and what steps were taken from that time onwards until it turned violent?  

Secondly, I would like to know from the Minister whether the strike was such a violent one to the extent that the force that had to be used on the workers resulted into death! We always hear what we call, “reasonable force”. I would to know whether these people were also armed, or whether they were also attacking the Police so that the Police had to react in a manner that deserved death. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the Minister’s statement I get concerned about my constituency. It is the same thing; people are doubled-taxed, as the Minister said in the statement. People come from Kabale, Kisoro and other areas to work in the tea plantation. When they reach our area, they are double-taxed. So, we want to know from the Minster of Local Government if there is a formula of taxation. If this kind of taxation is going to continue, then strikes are bound to be there.  

Recently, also teachers were on strike. The problem was that they are being over-taxed. From headquarters they deduct 70,000 shillings and when it reaches the local government they also deduct some amount. This issue of graduated tax is a serious issue that we must address as Government and Parliament.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two points of clarification to make. One, the honourable Minister said that in order to address the problem of Kinyara Sugar Works, his ministry in liaison with the Ministry of Industry and Technology and the Ministry of Defence are networking together to handle the matter. I wanted to know when that matter became a Defence matter.  What is the Ministry of Defence doing there?  

The second issue may also be like a point of information. In today’s Monitor, it is reported that local occupants burned down five hectares of a Government forest reserve called Usi Forest Reserve in Atyak Sub County in Nebbi. The occupants were complaining about discriminatory recruitment procedures of the pit-sawyers there. So, I hope that the Ministry will also try to address the problem of labour recruitment in the future.  Thank you.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the report. My questions for clarification will be very short. 

The Minister has stated that the assessed tax is 40,000 shillings per person.  I would like to know from the Minister how much each worker earns at the sugarcane plantation.  

Secondly, the Minister stated that the assessment was done by the district administration, so why did the workers attack the factory management and not the district administration? Maybe this problem of the tax issue is just a sub-set of a bigger problem at the factory, which the Minister is hiding from us now. Could there be other problems at the factory? Those are the few observations.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, can you answer so that we dispose of this issue?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Obbo): Mr Speaker, I think it is hon. Ogenga who was asking what the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has done in regard to this strike. As I explained, the Ministry of Gender, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Industry, the Ministry of Local Government and management plus workers’ representatives have been in Masindi for some days now discussing the issues behind this strike to find solutions to them. And the Ministry is still pursuing means of bringing about permanent solutions. That is what we have done, and what we have done has now contributed to the peace that is now prevailing presently. That peace may be disrupted later, but presently, there is peace in the plantation. 

As for the basis of the assessment, the Ministry of Local Government circulated to all local authorities scales of assessing graduated taxes to taxpayers.  That, I believe, must be the scale, which the Masindi local administration follows.  But if they are not following the scale, it is up to the Ministry of Local Government to find out why and to bring them to order.  

The honourable lady representative for the workers asked about labour laws. Yes, we are working hard on labour laws. We have prepared Cabinet memoranda for Cabinet to discuss the principles behind the various labour laws we intend to amend, some of which we also intend to repeal. Until Cabinet pronounces itself on our Cabinet memoranda, this is the stage we remain at. But it is good that you raised that question because now, I can request the authorities. The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is fortunately here, I am now getting the opportunity to request him to allow our papers to come forward because our papers remain in the pending list for a very long time. Maybe in the next Cabinet meeting, our papers could be discussed as a matter of urgency.  It is good for all of us.  

Talking again about these laws, since I went to the ministry, I found the complaint about what they called ‘archaic laws’. They said they need to be repealed; they need to be amended but hardly anyone tells me exactly which part of the archaic laws needs to be repealed or amended.  This seems to be a statement. Whoever wants to talk about labour has to talk about it even without justification –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO NABULYA: Thank you very much, honourable Minister for giving way.  I think you vividly know that these labour laws have been amended by the tripartite committee, that is Government, employers and workers’ organisations over three years ago.  We have amended the whole lot because every section in those laws is dead!  They are all obsolete; they are archaic! They cannot now work with the current situation of globalisation, surely. They are there in place, and you have them in your Ministry, Mr Minister.  Thank you.

MR OBBO: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member. Yes, there had been work done by them about three years ago. What I found out was that the work could not pass here in Parliament –(Interjection)- yes, that is the word but I am a gentleman, and I do not like to use the word “substandard” because it is not parliamentary.  

What I did was to get my officers to re-study what they called bills. They called them bills before Cabinet looked at them. They just sat down and wrote what they called bills and Parliament would not have passed them even three years back.  Now, I am working on bringing the bills through the normal format, which you can accept and approve at once.  

The same honourable member said taxation for workers is too high. It might be so, but again I am not the authority that taxes workers. If taxation is too high, the normal procedure is for you to appeal to tax tribunals.  That is in the law.  I do not know whether workers appealed to tax tribunals. A strike is not a tribunal’s way of handling taxation issues.  

Hon. Masiko from Masindi talked about someone who was brutally murdered. I would not like to use the word “murdered”. Let me give you some background information, which I did not give here earlier on. 

Around the lines where the workers live are new people who have moved in there on their own and are sometimes living together with workers. Sometimes they live in the same vicinity with the workers, and it is suspected that it is these people who caused the agitation that brought about the strike.  

When the strike started, workers started on the violent side of it and they hit a foreman with some dangerous weapon on the head and the foreman was injured. Seeing that the workers were actually more violent than they had been in previous strikes in that same place, management had no alternative but to ask for help. The help was in the form of bringing in the Police. 

The Police, as usual - because they are well trained - tried to threaten the workers who were striking to go home by firing in the air. But some of these people who were on strike fell to the ground and rolled, I understand in the style of the military, and they were attacking some of the Police. It was in the process of doing that that the policeman felt his life was in danger and so he shot.  He did not mean to shoot at the person’s body, but somehow by accident the bullet got the person and he died. That is the background information I would like to let you know about.  

At this point I would like to suspect - I am not saying it is for sure - that the strike action at Kinyara Sugar Works must have been externally engineered and not internally engineered.  But I will leave it to the authorities to investigate, and if there should be new information, I shall come back here to give you the information.  

Hon. Ssengo’s question is actually not meant for me. Hon. Nabwiso talked about working conditions for sugarcane workers not being very attractive.  That I agree. I have visited some sugarcane plantations and I have talked to the management. I have told them of the areas where they could improve on the conditions of sugarcane workers, and I believe, although I have not gone back again to re-check, that what I told them is going to be implemented.

Hon. Nyeko talked about the process and whether there could have been a low work situation in the first place - a sit down strike - as a prelude to the violent strike. The answer is no. The thing came up all of a sudden and management was taken by surprise.  

There is one honourable Member who asked the question, but that again is for the Minister for Local Government.  

Then, hon. Epetait asked: “when did it become a Defence matter for the soldiers to go to Masindi?”  What is the function of our soldiers in the first place?  We must understand they are security officers, and when the matter goes beyond the capability of our civilian Police, then it is competent of this Government to call upon the army to help.  That is why they are there to maintain law and order, protecting human lives, protecting the properties of this country, protecting the factories, and giving hope to the expatriates that this Government is ready to protect their people and property. That is why the army is there doing a commendable job. 

I should also tell you that the army that is there is not there without coordination - I thank you for thanking me for making a good statement - but they are being supervised by higher authorities. Col. Jim, for example, is monitoring this matter, and captain Fred is in charge, together with the District Police Commander of Masindi.

Mr Speaker, the other questions asked of me have all been answered in the previous questions.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for granting me this opportunity to explain the circumstances under which I had a very embarrassing encounter with one of the senior officers of this nation.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to introduce myself once again. I am Doctor Epetait Francis, Ngora County.  

On the 9th of July 2002, hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi and I went to Windhoek to attend an international conference on desertification.  The two-day conference organized by GLOBE Southern Africa drew participants from about 12 African countries.  

On our way back from Windhoek on the 12th of July, we took Flight No.KQ414 Kenya Airways from Nairobi to Entebbe which landed at about 7.10 p.m.  

While checking out through the VIP Lounge at Entebbe Air Port, Mr Speaker, I was brutally assaulted by one, Brigadier Kashaka, at around 7.30 p.m., under very mysterious circumstances.  

The saga started when Brigadier Kashaka, who had been aboard the same plane with me, started quarreling with the staff at the VIP Lounge for having denied his driver access to park in front of the VIP Lounge while waiting for him.  

It was at that time that I happened to know who Brigadier Kashaka was, because he was quarreling while beating his chest.  He was saying that he is Brigadier Kashaka Mutungi who liberated Entebbe in 1986, and he wanted to know whether the staff at the VIP Lounge had the authority to chase his driver away from the VIP Lounge.  When the staff on duty at the VIP Lounge expressed her innocence on what had happened to the driver, Brigadier Kashaka went out of the VIP Lounge while quarreling. 

After a few minutes, I moved out of the VIP Lounge to meet the person who had come to pick me up from the Airport. I found Brigadier Kashaka again harassing two security personnel just at the entrance to the VIP Lounge. He was spiting the same fire as to why those people had chased his driver away from the VIP Lounge, and yet he is one who liberated Entebbe in 1986.  

So when I was bypassing them, one of the guards, a police lady putting on civilian clothes recognized me and called me by name. On a closer look the face was familiar but I could not exactly remember where I had seen her before.  But she happened to have worked in Kotido district where I was for about five years.  So, after greeting that police lady, I casually asked her what was happening. She replied that they were in trouble at that moment.  I then asked her whether the driver had clearly explained to them as to whom he had come to pick from the Airport. 

At this moment, Mr Speaker, Brigadier Kashaka turned on me arguing that my inquiry was meant to defend the staff at VIP Lounge.  He immediately ordered me to get out of the VIP Lounge and in fact he was asking, “after all, who are you? You get out of this VIP Lounge”.  Then I told him that, sorry I am not a member of staff at the Airport but I am a Member of Parliament. That even made him angrier, and he landed on me like a lion.  “Is it is because you are a Member of Parliament that you seem to be defending these guys?” he charged. He then ordered me to leave the VIP Lounge with immediate effect; after all I was a mere Member of Parliament.  

When I replied that I was not to get out of the VIP Lounge before Immigration Officers cleared me, he punched me twice on the lower abdomen with his fist. The punches were so painful that I instantly developed urinal incontinence at that moment to my further embarrassment.   

I had not seen anything wrong that I had done, so I immediately apologised to him in case my point of inquiry had offended him.  So after I had pleaded that way, he took me to have been arrogant, I suppose. He came to me and said, “either you leave here or you see a different story”.  

I kept pleading to him that he should respect his own personality and that of others; instead he sent another sweeping blow on my upper left abdomen, insisting that I must quit the VIP Lounge. 

At that moment after giving me the third blow on the upper abdomen, all I told him was that Brigadier Kashaka, I am so surprised that you are not even embarrassed for what you have done to me, because at that time, honourable Members, my pants were wet.  

When he realized that the security guards were busy communicating - apparently in a bid to get reinforcement to save the situation, he quickly jumped on his pick-up and drove off with his driver. By the time the Airport security agents arrived at the scene a few minutes later, the gallant Brigadier had driven off.  I immediately reported that matter to the Aviation Police station at Entebbe Airport, and I hope the Police force is doing the needful. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to report that following that beating, I experienced very sharp abdominal pains and sought medical attention on the 14th of July this year.  After further investigations by the surgeons at Mulago Hospital, it was detected that I had sustained injuries on my urinary bladder, the right kidney and the left lobe of the liver prompting an immediate admission at the hospital.  

Permit me, Mr Speaker, to thank you and all my honourable colleagues and friends for the collective encouragement and support given to me while ailing at the hospital.  I wish to register my sincere thanks to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for visiting me at the hospital, and for re-assuring me that all the relevant arms of the state had been instructed to ensure that justice be attained. I also wish to thank the medical staff of Mulago Hospital for the tender loving care and professional acuity in the management of the problem. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to deplore the horrendous embarrassment that Brigadier Kashaka has caused, not only to me as a person, but also to my constituency in Ngora County, and to the institution of Parliament.  To me, the institution of the army and the image of Uganda in the East African Community where Brigadier Kashaka serves as a Military Attaché have equally been put into disrepute by his wanton cruelty. 

I am afraid that there are many voiceless people out there who have suffered and continue to suffer this kind of brutality but yet they go unnoticed.  It is my sincere hope that all avenues are used to bring the likes of Brigadier Kashaka to order.  

Allow me to state here, Mr Speaker, that as of now, I am very worried about my life since I have not been fully discharged from the hospital. I am still undergoing treatment. Mr Speaker and honourable Members, this is a problem that may not stop here, and it is not a problem, which could have started yesterday. Today it is I; tomorrow it will be someone else.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry! 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, as honourable Members of Parliament are aware, the person who is accused now in the names of Brigadier Kashaka is not a Member of Parliament, so we cannot benefit from the other side of the story, however, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let her complete her statement.

MS NANKABIRWA: However, Mr Speaker, I stand up as a Minister of State for Defense, who is now here as a Minister for Defense. I thought I should inform colleagues what my Ministry has done ever since we heard the allegations, because we were not there.

Mr Speaker, I was shocked when I heard what my colleague has explained in his statement, and that a Brigadier was responsible. I was shocked and greatly concerned, and I went and visited him, maybe he has forgotten, but I went and visited him in hospital and I immediately went back and instructed the Chief of Staff to follow up the matter so that the Brigadier can be punished.  You have heard from the honourable colleague that he reported to Police and Police is also doing its work. As a Ministry, I personally instructed the Chief of Staff, and what comes out of that instruction, I will inform this august House what has happened –(Interjection)- yes!  So, Mr Speaker, I thought I should tell my colleagues how I reacted and how the Ministry reacted to the incident.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, according to our Rules, a statement of this nature does not attract a debate, and actually we are not to judge Brig. Kashaka, but what has happened is that we have got the information and the victim has given us the account, we expect the appropriate authority to investigate the matter and take appropriate action. It is good that the Minister of Defense has told us that she has taken action and we expect a report from her.  So, now the record is to the effect that you report back the action take.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you very much Mr Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure, page 48, Rule 36(2) reads: “ Any statement other than a personal explanation may be commented upon by other Members for a limited duration of time not exceeding thirty minutes”. Why don’t you allow us to comment? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Jie County, I thank you for referring me to the rules, but I think you have answered the question.

MR BAGALANA: Mr Speaker, I am not really commenting on the personal explanation, but as far as events have been taking place, and as you saw my position in the 6th Parliament, which took me to Kenya, I want to ask this question. Is the position of a Member of Parliament in Uganda honourable? Only that question.

THE SPEAKER: I think the question has been noted. I don’t know who is supposed to answer it. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I thank Dr Francis Epetait for his personal explanation and for the hon. Minister of State for Defense’s response or interjection. Hon. Epetait indicated that the Prime Minister in hospital visited him and the Prime Minister assured him that justice would take its course. I thought that because of the status of a Member of Parliament, and that of the suspect, the state would have moved very fast. This is a case of public interest; it is not an ordinary thing. And even if it was ordinary, I am sure Col. Kayanja would have moved very fast on the matter -(Laughter). 

Mr Speaker, it is now one month; the matter was reported to the Police and we are being told by the Minister of State for Defence that at an appropriate time, she will inform the House! The House is definitely permanently interested in the matter - permanently because unless it is exhausted satisfactorily, we cannot allow it to abate. And you, Mr Speaker, as our head, definitely you will pursue this matter because the honourable Member was assaulted officially. 

He was coming back from an official trip, he was in the VIP Lounge officially and when he said he was a Member of Parliament, he irritated the soldier more because he was a Member of Parliament.  It is definitely important for you and for this House to give the government a deadline. 

I wish to know how far the Police have gone with their investigation; whether Brig. Kashaka has been charged before a court of law - either before a magistrate or before a court martial, and whether Brig. Kashaka has been allowed to go back to Arusha, and so on and so on. These are things, which we cannot take for granted. Some of us gentlemen have been victims of assault. 

I was assaulted in 1990 with Olum. I and a few other Members of Parliament were beaten because in the course of our duties as Members of Parliament from the North, we were interested in issues of peace and rebel activities.  What happened? A whole brigadier, again - I think that rank is meant to be given to people to assault. A whole brigadier, again, assaulted us and the government did nothing! In fact that Brigadier now is a Lieutenant General. I would not be surprised if Brig. Kashaka is promoted tomorrow. I think it is important -(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I just want to inform you that not all brigadiers, because myself - maybe hon. Epetait was a bit lucky. A brigadier tortured him; a Sergeant tortured me. I thank you, Sir -(Laughter).

MS BYANYIMA WINNIE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also seeking clarification and giving supplementary information. I feel a level of personal injury too as a Member of this august House that our colleague could be treated like this. But we need to be clarified whether this is not really in our policy matter, because it seems it is not an incident, it is not a pattern, it is really a trend that is quite consistent. 

When we were in Kiboga as a Select Committee on election violence, one person from the community came and testified that he had been asked to lie down and was thoroughly whipped by the Minister of State for Defence herself -(Laughter) - and this person –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member for Mbarara Municipality, if you are a Member of a Committee set up by this House and that Committee has not made a report, I do not expect a report from a Member of that Committee.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry that a colleague suffered this embarrassment publicly and I am surprised that the executive arm of government has taken matters very lightly. The Minister of State for Defence really has said nothing. It would have been better for her not to say anything, but just to keep her seat and say nothing. 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister promised the hon. Member action. He is seated here, and he is saying nothing. Mr Speaker, where is our security? 

Since the Executive is doing nothing about it, and I am sure they are going to do nothing about it, because after all, the lady who was being abused at the airport was a policewoman, how do you expect the police to do anything?  The poor woman was helpless. Therefore, for purposes of record, can’t we actually institute our own inquiry in Parliament so that the entire House gets to know what happened and who was wrong? So that even if -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, what measure are you going to take by making an inquiry? The Minister has told us that they have taken action and I have directed that she make a report to Parliament. Now, by starting an inquiry, will you discipline this man? Do you have the powers to discipline him?  I expect a report from the Executive. I have said - and this is on record - I expect a report from her. They are capable of taking disciplinary action against him rather than Parliament, because if you institute an inquiry, you just make a report. So what?  This is the question. So let us know – when you say tomorrow, tomorrow will come, and I have said, leave it to me.

MR MWANDHA:  Am I learning from you, Sir that the Minister will report tomorrow? 

THE SPEAKER: Leave it to my best judgement.

MR MWANDHA: Isn’t it likely that they are going to delay so that the matter is forgotten?

THE SPEAKER: I have said leave it to me. Leave it to my good judgement. I have said so and I insist. Because as said, the Prime Minister promised - of course, the Prime Minister works as a team. The Minister of State for Defence is under the Prime Minister, and they were consulting before she stood up to make a statement. Leave it to me; I will get an answer from them.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, Government wishes to request Parliament for authority to borrow from the European Investment Bank, 40 Million Euro for the purpose of financing the Uganda Apex Private Enterprise Global Loan III. 

And in keeping with the rules of this House, I wish to lay on the Table this request, which seeks to get money for the development of long-term financing facilities to small and medium scale private sector enterprises in Uganda. I beg to lay on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The appropriate Committee of Parliament will handle the matter.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW STANDARD DRAWING RIGHTS, FOUR MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION FOR CAPACITY BUILDING FOR MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, this is a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow US$5 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for the Learning and Innovations loan.  

WHEREAS a credit agreement of the US$5 million is to be concluded between the IDA of the World Bank and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the learning and innovation loan; and 

WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; and 

WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; and 

WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the government is hereby authorised to secure the said credit from the International Development Association of the World Bank upon the terms and conditions stated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded?  It is seconded.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the purpose of this motion as set out in the motion for Government to borrow US$5 million (Standard Drawing Rights four million) is for the learning and innovations loan to build capacity at Makerere University.  

Mr Speaker, Government introduced the policy of decentralisation - it is in the Constitution, and it is part of our agreed mode of governance in this country.  This decentralisation meant that powers and responsibilities of the majority of service delivery would be devolved to the local governments, and that the centre would largely retain powers or the role of policy making and setting standards for service delivery.

We currently have 96 local governments and 56 district councils and 13 municipal councils. This makes it 69 and more than 1,000 lower level government, LC IIIs and so on, town councils and divisions. The creation of these local governments has not been matched with the required capacity to enable them to manage the mandated services.  

In 1993, 1994, to 1995 when we put into the Constitution, we said districts will be decentralised and we gave a whole schedule of services that they must attend to. We have done our budgeting and planning along the lines of ensuring that decentralisation takes route. We have sent large amounts of money to the districts and to lower councils but we still have a problem of management skills. Management skills are poor and this has impacted on the delivery of quality services that we expect, or that have been entrusted to the local governments.

Mr Speaker, the purpose of this loan is to help ensure that we have the capacity to impart sufficient skills to the people who go to manage our resources and programmes at the districts. What is amazing is that since the introduction of decentralization, even the centers of learning that are supposed to teach or train our people who go to manage the districts – the CAOs and the Town Clerks – need reorganization, retooling and refocusing. They need to focus on being able to train people who will work as CAOs, who know about decentralization and managing the decentralized process.

Many of us who went through Makerere will remember that decentralization was not offered as a programme in the University. It could not be because there was no decentralization then. Therefore, the purpose of this is to help Makerere University and other institutions of higher learning to be able to appreciate, in a practical way, the challenges that are associated with this. These are new roles for cadres of people that go down to manage our services, our funds, and our resources at the district level.

Mr Speaker, we had immense discussions with the committee, and we agreed that this is something that we need to put in place. We need to ensure that as a consequence of this intervention, the University will be a better manufacturer of quality managers of our funds. I beg that the Members do support this motion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members, we have a loan request in front of us for the learning and innovations capacity building at Makerere University. It was referred to our committee as per Article 159 of the Constitution and Rule 138(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of this House. The committee wishes to report as follows.

Background:

This loan request is to help to develop and strengthen the necessary skills and competencies of the people responsible for service delivery and management at local levels. Of course the policy of decentralization was adopted in 1993, and it was moved down up to the local governments. Currently we have 69 units consisting of 56 districts and 13 municipal councils, without counting the five of Kampala District. This however continued to filter down to about 1,000 lower governments like sub-counties, town councils and lower divisions.

The creation of these local governments was, however, not matched with the required capacity to man them. That is the reason we need this loan of innovation and learning for capacity building, to address those problems

Methodology

The Committee met with the Ministers of Finance and Education, and Management of Makerere University. We also looked at relevant documents concerning this loan request, that is, the development credit agreement, project appraisal, and the report on the decentralization and tertiary institutions of learning in Uganda, among others.

The Project Scope

Mr Speaker, hon. Members, the programme will support University units to develop relevant courses and curriculum targeting personnel involved in service delivery at local governments, and Makerere University and its partner institutions.

The programme will also support other collaborating institutions like Nkozi University, the Islamic University in Uganda, Uganda Management Institute, Uganda Christian University Mukono, Nkumba University, Local Authorities Association and some technical colleges like Ngeta Teachers College, Kicwamba, Lira and Elgon.

The major beneficiaries will be the local governments and the institutions involved, who will get training and research programmes to be developed by the institutions mentioned above.

The purpose of involving other institutions is to take the services nearer to the people, as you are aware.

There is a committee called the “University Capacity Building Committee”, which will oversee the project implementation. This committee will analyze the government programmes and decentralized public service delivery at local government level and plan to build the relevant capacity.

In the short run, the programme will be implemented in five original pilot districts of Arua, Mbale, Mbarara, Kampala and Rakai in the year 2000. This means the breakaway districts that were originally part of the above mentioned in the year 2000 will benefit also. For example, in Mbale we have Sironko, in Arua we have Yumbe, to mention a few.

This committee was informed that the remaining districts would come on board by the year 2005. You will be there, I promise you.

PROJECT COMPONENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

Component one is to enhance academic institutional capacity, which has staff development, sustaining academic decision making mechanism, internship pilots and project supports. 

Then Component two, which is called Pilot Support to Local Government Capacity Building by Universities, has curriculum development. Under curriculum development, the initial areas to be covered will be service delivery in basic needs and medical services, agricultural services, strategic planning and management including budgeting, accounting and financial management, governance, ethics, accountability and of course these are the four major national service delivery items Then we have the Fund for Innovative Excellence. This will provide grants for Innovation at Makerere Committee to a unit from Makerere or a partner institution, which demonstrates that it can excel. Then there is also support to local government units that do well. Then we have local government staff training projects, and support to local government planning units.  

For component three, the details are there in the report. You can go through them during your free time as they are well elaborated. We have enhanced decentralisation policy research and formulation capacity linkage with other institutions of excellence, and the decentralisation research fund for students. This will include setting up research for the award of Masters and PhDs, and strengthen decentralisation policy research in faculties. The various Makerere University Faculties and partner institutions will handle this. 

Component four consists of Monitoring and Evaluation. This is important and it is crucial in drawing lessons from this process of experimentation and performance improvement. It has two levels; the general performance monitoring, which will be handled by Innovation at Makerere Committee Secretariat and the University management, and the second is learning from the pilots. 

We have the implementing agencies. They are the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Makerere University, Makerere University faculties and students, local governments and Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Education and Sports, other partner institutions, Innovations at Makerere Committee and the Innovations at Makerere Committee Secretariat, World Bank, and the Rockefeller Foundation. The last one will be providing the funding.

COST OF THE PROJECT

I mentioned four components and they will cost this much. Enhanced Academic Institution Capacity will cost US $4.23 million, of which we are seeking a loan of US $1.81 million. The difference is the grant. 

Then Pilot Support to Local Government Capacity Building by Universities consists of human development, and will cost US $4.66 million dollars. The IDA funding we want for this is US $2.22 million. 

Enhanced Decentralisation Policy Research Formulation Capacity is also human development, and it will cost US $1.72 million. For this fund we want a loan of US $0.79 million.  

Monitoring and Evaluation is institutional development. It will cost US $0.39 million, but we need a loan of US $0.18 million. 

The total cost is US $11 million, but the IDA funding we are seeking is US $5 million.

Comments and Observations 

Mr Speaker and Members, the committee observed that the local governments lack capacity in various fields. There is poor service delivery at local government level in areas of health, agriculture, strategic planning and financial management.  There is poor budgeting and planning process, management and maintenance of equipment and human resource at the districts. There is lack of adequate skills in financial management and governance. The integrity of staff at local government level is lacking. It was also observed that the local government employees lack practical knowledge for proper discharge of their various functions. Most graduates do not want to go home and work in rural areas at district or sub-county levels. This programme will therefore alleviate this situation by the provision of short-term refresher courses related to their specific assignments.

Members noted that the Ministry of Local Government has been offering such courses at Uganda Management Institute but the beneficiaries have been too few.  The development of these local governments will depend on their proper planning such that there are no complaints of lack of absorption capacity despite the biting poverty in such areas.

Members were informed that the training would involve long distance learning facilities and the use of institutions in some districts to avoid traveling long distances in search of education and disruption of district work, which may also be costly. 

The programme will run through the existing structures at the universities and other institutions and the courses will be specific to capacity building in local governments as situations may demand. 

The districts will be responsible for the selection of candidates for the courses, but the candidates must fulfill the requirements of the institutions in question. The courses will be advertised in the media and the candidates selected by the districts will be those working or willing to work in the respective districts. The benefiting students will, during the holidays, go back and work in their districts. 

The number of beneficiaries is as follows, but these are the minimum ones, they could go up. Undergraduates - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you go to the recommendations now?  

MR MAFABI NANDALA: These are the recommendations:

• Provide training needs assessments for all the districts.
• No more should be spent on procurement of vehicles.
• No breakaway district should be left out. 
• The scholarship should be transparent.
• The funds should be used for the intended purposes only. 
• Accountability of utilisation funds should be done on quarterly basis to all stakeholders.
• Kampala District should be dropped out and other new districts put in, since Kampala District has the best brains to get from around the centre.
• The remaining districts should be brought aboard by the year 2004.  

The funding is as follows:

Rockefeller will give a grant of US$6m or five millions; IDA will provide a loan which we are making a request for of US$5m; Government of Uganda and Makerere University will meet the one million. 

The terms of payment: It has a repayment period of 40 years with a grace period of 10 years at an interest of 0.75 per cent per annum.  

The loan is still concessional and in line with the Government’s debt strategy.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, bearing in mind the dire need for a stronger and well focused local governments to foster the decentralisation process, the Committee recommends that the House approves the loan request of five million, but that the funds be used for the stated purposes only to get the value for money.  I thank you and beg to move.  

MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The Committee has considered and presented this report, but permit me, Mr Speaker, to make the following remarks:  When do we conceive policies to do things and how do we prepare for them?  

The report states that the creation of these local governments was however not matched with the required capacity to man them. It means we undertook something, which we had never planned for; we did not have manpower to put it in place.  Why did we conceive it in the first place?  The explanation one can guess at this particular moment is that in 1993, we were going for the Constituent Assembly and there was a serious debate between federalism and other forms of government. So, the idea of decentralisation was conceived to stifle the idea of federalism. So, it started in 1993. Ten years later now, we want to start preparing manpower to implement what we started ten years ago! I think we should look at the way we plan things.

Now, have we planned for this particular course?  Do we have the manpower to be able to implement it? Does Makerere University have the capacity to handle this? (Interruption)

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: I thank hon. Kawanga for giving way. I just wanted to inform the honourable that we have just passed a National Planning Authority. So, we are in the process of planning with the National Planning Authority.  

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the honourable Member on the Floor that since 1993, the number of districts in Uganda have been increased by this very House, but not in anticipation of either adopting federalism or adopting decentralisation, but because this House felt that the people needed services closure to them and the situation warranted that and the House guaranteed it. So, this expansion in districts needed to be matched with increased capacity in terms of human and other resources, and it is part of this problem that we are also trying to solve. Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee on the Economy.  Thank you very much.

MR KAWANGA: That is what I was raising, Mr Speaker, but actually it is necessary that when we want to implement something, we should make the necessary preparations for its implementation. I am happy Government realises that things are totally confused and there is need for this kind of capacity building. 

As I talk now - I come from a municipality, which has no medical officer of Health, first of all because the municipal council apparently cannot provide sufficient work for him.  So he gets there and he feels he has hardly anything to do or, alternatively, the ones who have been there did not find job satisfaction in the area so they have left.  So now we depend entirely on Medical Assistants as medical officers of health of municipalities.  

We do not have engineers to do our roads; we do not have people who can handle buildings or planning on the local authorities.  So, all kinds of constructions go on within the municipalities and other areas, which are a danger to the population. So really, one wonders whether bringing the services nearer to the people when they cannot be rendered is not itself a problem. 

But be that as it may, there is on page 2, again, a statement that “The programme will also support other collaborating institutions like Nkozi University, the Islamic University in Uganda, Uganda Management Institute, Uganda Christian University Mukono …”, but they do not tell us how this will be done. Who, for example, is going to decide that Nkumba University should be involved in this project, and how?  One would have wanted to know how this would happen because eventually the money will come up and Makerere University will eat it all! 

We have not received sufficient explanation why Uganda Management Institute has not been able to handle this kind of situation, and how passing it over to Makerere University will improve the situation!  One would have wanted to know whether the Uganda Management Institute, given the facilities could not have been able to handle this kind of situation! 

Now, the choice of districts where these things are going to be implemented: I do not know on what criteria this has been done, but I wanted to let it for example to the technical colleges where this kind of assistance is going to be given, and I happen to be the chairman of a whole technical college – Masaka Technical College.  I would want to know why Masaka Technical College, for example, was not included, particularly when Rakai District is going to be one of the beneficiaries.  One would have thought that the relationship between Rakai and Masaka Technical College is just a natural thing, and one would have included it.  Now, why is it that it is not there? It is these kinds of explanations, Mr Speaker, which would help to enrich this kind of motion.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would want to know within which time frame this is going to be implemented?  For example, when are the disbursements?  Who is going to conceive the curriculum?  When are you going to train the trainers and when are we supposed to expect delivery of the loan that we are going to receive completely?  The report is lacking essential material which would help us make informed decisions but be that as it may, I would be very happy if capacity building could be done the way it is proposed here because we badly need it. All trained manpower that is serving in the districts, especially university graduates, are finding it difficult to operate in these areas.  They are trained but the people under whom they operate, the political leadership and so on, do not exactly know what these are supposed to do, and there is lack of coordination. So, training the technocrats may not be sufficient because eventually it is the political leaders who take the crucial decisions, or who may even interfere with the work of the people we have trained. So, when you train the technocrats without training the political leaders, you will not have done much. With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I support the motion. 

MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I wish to comment on this report.  First of all, with decentralization, building capacity was left to the central ministries and most of them have been trying to do a lot that they can do.  Every time you hear radio announcements calling CAOs, district chairmen to go for workshops every now and then.  

When you come to Makerere University, you find that despite the increase in number of students going to Makerere University, like private students are going to rise from 8,000 to 12,000 and Government-sponsored students are also going to increase, but the staff of Makerere University is only going to increase from about 1344 last year to only 1407, that is 63 members of academic staff, which means that even Makerere University itself needs a lot of capacity.  People are questioning the quality that is coming out of Makerere University.  So, when we give it money to go and build capacity in the districts, when we do not want to give it money to recruit more staff to train the students who are already at Makerere, it defeats the purpose to some extent.

Secondly, when you go to Makerere Medical School, we are going to give them 6 billion to convert the current status to a college for health science. This will be from the Government of Uganda budget, not this loan but there are many people who have got PhDs who want to join the Institute of Public Health, they cannot join. The very people who are there cannot allow others to come in! Now, you also give more projects but they do not recruit more people.  So, you wonder; what capacity are they going to build within the districts?  Unless we also improve the capacity of the university by giving it more money, even allowing it to recruit more staff and train them.

The other issue is, when we look at support to private universities, these private universities also sometimes request students to pay.  So, if we give them money, will it mean that sometimes some of these students will not have to pay within those universities? Those are issues we also want clarified.

Then in the report it is also mentioned that there are a number of students who finish at Makerere but cannot be recruited at sub-counties or districts and, therefore, this project is going to help at least in that area.  But we understand that these people cannot go to sub-counties because there are no facilities. You find they have no houses to sleep in, there is no water, the student has been used to electricity. So, even if you train, it may not necessarily attract them to go there. 

The Government of Uganda is going to put 6 million dollars in this project. When I was calculating, that would build 500 houses at sub-county level, which would cover more than half of our sub-counties and that would attract more trained staff in those sub-counties.  When you look at health, 10 billion can build 300 health centers and those can help the people.

Finally, Mr Speaker, when we look at the technical colleges just like my friend from Masaka said, although the project is also going to be in Mbarara District, Bushenyi Technical College is not among the list.  Who is going to be provided with this support?  So, what were the criteria used? May I know the criteria?  But despite the comments that I have given, for sure I would support the Minister of Finance to borrow this money, but also to look into getting money to support these universities to build their own capacity before they think of building capacities of other people, instead of simply taking on projects for which they do not have staff to do.  Thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to first say that I support this motion on the principle that it is enhancing decentralization, but I do not agree with it on its modalities of implementation.  Why do I say that?  

One, because to me, the problems facing decentralization now should not be an emphasis of discipline and academic issue.  I sit on the Standing Committee on Local Governments Accounts and we have been able to meet all the Chief Administrative Officers and almost all the RDCs in various local governments.   One of the issues these people have stressed is that even at a decentralized level, even at a district level, they do not have access to the Local Governments Act. The people at sub-county level, at village level and even at district level do not know their roles, responsibilities and duties as prescribed in the Local Governments Act.  Most of these people, the institutions and the statutory bodies do not even know most of what they are supposed to do. 

I would have been very happy if part of this loan was going to address the gaps that are within the local government system practically. Trying to translate the Local Governments Act into local languages and distributing them would have been a good component to be included here. But I do not see it here. I only see an emphasis of decentralization as a discipline in this loan, which makes me very reluctant in really supporting it.  And really, I think we have to streamline our priorities. 

Somebody had talked about Uganda Management Institute. If we are talking about service delivery, I think Uganda Management Institute has been an institute that is addressing practically our training needs by training managers who are already delivering services. They have these experiences but I do not see them reflected in this.  Now, how do we give training of services delivery personnel to an academic institution?  

We have seen in the policy statement of the Local Government Ministry that at times it fails practically because it is designed at academic level.  When they go down it fails.  But we have Uganda Management Institute that has managed to practically bring these people with their experiences and train them in disciplines of management! I would have really loved to support this whole heartedly if it had a very, very high component of improving service delivery, but giving it to an independent institution practically not Makerere University. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think this report is a bit very broad and ambiguous for me.  It does not bring out clearly really - although it talks about academic institution capacity building, support local government capacity, enhance decentralization, it misses out some of the fundamental practical gaps, which we should have addressed.  Of course, I have already told you that I would have supported it if it were to translate the Local Governments Act into local languages. It should have been a big component here, but I do not see it here.  

So, honourable members, this is my humble contribution: if they could only get back to the drawing board and ensure that some of these practical gaps derailing the implementation process of decentralization are incorporated into this before it is truly an emphasis of discipline rather than a practical thing.  I thank you.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Kampala Central Division): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion, first and foremost by thanking the chairman of the committee for having done such thorough research. I thank him because on page 2 he clearly spelt out the other institutions that will be related to Makerere University, and one of them is Uganda Management Institute. I thank him for having included other institutions. I am quite sure that with time, even those that have not been included here will be included. According to his report, 2004 is the time when other districts will come on board, and I hope then Masaka and Mengo will also be included.

I wanted to thank you for the innovation that has taken place. Until now, the local government management staffs have been taken abroad, and the universities purposely are Manchester and Birmingham. It has been costing this Government a lot of money. In some cases they have gone and asked for scholarships from our partners in development, and with that kind of speed we cannot train enough people at a go. 

The only thing that is important –(Mr Mwondha rose_) I have a very short time, he can contribute afterwards. The most important thing is that by putting a faculty in Makerere, which is local, you can train more people at a go and our institution can benefit from the staffs that come out of this faculty. 

This is specialized training at all levels. It is specialized training to an extent that when I was in Local Government, we found out that even garbage management is now being taken at a Masters Degree level. Therefore, for anybody to think otherwise about Makerere University, which we want to empower to have the capacity to train these kinds of people so that we do not take them abroad, is unfortunate. 

I think Makerere University should be given all the support and then other institutions can come on board. And as time goes by, the request I am going to make is that even the lower institutes like polytechnics and colleges also be given specialized areas where they can train middle-cadre staff.  This will be important for our local government.  

I heard a few minutes ago about federalism and decentralization. I was in the C.A and the Odoki report was very clear: it recommended more than one system and we adopted one that has been in existence up to now. Decentralization has taken place, it has taken root and we have decided to go from the small number of districts to more districts. I think it is good; it is healthy.  Therefore, if we need more staff, we should create avenues where we can train these staff so that they can man these local governments, so that they can deliver services better in our areas. 

The unfortunate bit is that Kampala was removed. I was a little bit unhappy. Some people have a feeling, and they create this impression that we have all the staff.  No! In fact, some of our local councils have a problem with training staff, and we need to also eventually be included; maybe not this time, but in the next phase. In the next wave, Kampala District should also be accommodated so that they can also train their staff. This is the capital city, we need good service delivery, we need good garbage collection, we need sanitation and, therefore, we need competent staff. 

I therefore would like to support this motion. I would like to thank the chairman. I thank the Minister for having brought this out, and I pray that all the honourable members support the motion so that we can get the money.  Thank you.

MRS IDAH MEHANGYE  (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members of this committee for coming up with this good report. I would like to support the motion, but I would like some few clarifications before I am convinced to really support it.  

One, I wanted to know where the research was done so that they discovered where there was such need for capacity building, and that where capacity building was seriously and badly needed was in the districts of Arua, Mbale, Mbarara, Kampala and Rakai, forgetting the new districts like Kamwenge. I really wonder whether that is the capacity building that we need.  So, I would definitely want to know. 

I suggest that since we are thinking about throwing out Kampala, then we could put a district like Kamwenge. We seriously need capacity building. Actually, the truth is, one of the problems in these new districts is capacity building, both in the political wing of the administration and the general administration. If the political leadership is already weak, then we cannot get the administrative leadership strengthened and capacity built. So, when do we expect this district to really come aboard in development? 

Also, if we are going to work on five districts every two years, the next lot is supposed to come in the year 2004. How long will it take us to cover the 56 districts without building their capacity?  So, I would really recommend that districts that barely have any capacity at all be considered first and then these other giants come next.

I also think we are really being extremely ambitious when we are looking at university only. Even in this Parliament we lower down to say A’ level equivalent, but here we are talking about university. If we thought about refresher courses, if we thought about shorter courses at the Uganda Management Institute and other institutes, which would train people in the administrative skills and these people would go back and work while we take the university part as a long-term part of this programme, I think it would be more helpful to the districts that need this service a lot more faster.  

Lastly, I would like to say that a lot more is spent in workshops and research. With due respect, I am not saying that they are not very important, but quite often the services take so long to reach down to the grassroots where they are so badly needed. So, I would like to say that some of this money spent in these big top-level workshops could be brought down to the lower levels, which would benefit from these big projects.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY TWO THOUSAND EURO FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK (EIB) FOR FINANCING STUDIES FOR THE EAST AFRICAN CIVIL AVIATION SAFETY PROJECT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isanga Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow 292,000 Euro from the European Investment Bank for the East African Civil Aviation Safety Project:  

WHEREAS a credit of 292,000 Euros is to be concluded between the European Investment Bank and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the East African Civil Aviation Safety Project; and 

WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; and 

WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an act of Parliament; and 

Whereas in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorised to secure the said credit from the European Investment Bank upon the terms and conditions stated. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

The three countries of East Africa, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania did agree to form the East African Community. Each of these countries, under their arrangements, is supposed to be and is a signatory to the convention of international aviation.  

Pursuant to this convention, they are required to put in place facilities and services in conformity with the standards and practices adopted by the International Civil Aviation Organisation.  

Acting through the respective civil aviation authorities of each country, they have undertaken or they are undertaking the development, administration and maintenance of the civil aviation infrastructure, including air services and regulation of civil aviation authorities.

In order to integrate these services and responsibilities within the region, the three governments, under the auspices of the secretariat of the East African Community, have decided to carry out a study. The first part of this study will be on an air traffic control system for international flights in the regional airspace. The second part will relate to a flight safety agency for East Africa.  

The purpose of this loan, Mr Speaker, is to enable the three countries fund the study about the civil aviation safety in the East African airspace.

Each country is supposed to contribute an equal share. The other two countries namely, Kenya and Tanzania have already exhausted all the authorisations they require their governments and their Parliaments to give and have already signed to secure their part.  Uganda is the only country that is being awaited to ensure that it is now a complete financial package.  

So, the purpose of this resolution is to request this Parliament to authorise Government to borrow 292,000 Euros from the European Investment Bank for that purpose.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): This is a report of the Committee on the Economy for 292,000 Euros to be borrowed by Government from European Investment Bank for financing the study of the East African Civil Aviation Safety Project under the Civil Aviation Authority.

The objective of the project is: 

• Providing advice to the Secretariat of the East African countries relating to a decision on the feasibility of creating a capability to provide area control services for the upper air space, search and rescue co-ordination services, map facilities and services within the combined airspace, and the joint use of civil aviation training institutions in relation to the centre.  

• To carry out a feasibility study on the creation of a regional flight safety oversight agency. 

• Advise on the joint use of the East African Civil Aviation Academy in Soroti. 

The study will be for four months, which is for phase I, and 12 months for phase II. 

This is a regional programme and it is aimed to ensure the security of the airspace and co-ordination of the aviation affairs, which will minimise resource allocations.  

This study will benefit Uganda in two ways:
   
• The possibility of revamping and taking over the flying school in Soroti by the East African Community. 

• A minimisation in the utilisation of resources in air traffic and rescue operations.  

As you will notice, many organisations have done it like ECOWAS in West Africa and the Euro Control. We are also joining that class. 

Members were informed that the controversial Tanzania air project is closed and is not part of the study. 

What is of interest is that for all external consultants, there will be a local counterpart consultant. For any foreigner you will see around, a Ugandan will be attached to that one.  So, there will be some money flying to our economy from this broad fund. 

The project is seven months behind schedule, and Kenya and Tanzania have already made the loan requests resolution and are waiting for Uganda’s part.  The total request is EU 292,000 payable in five equal installments beginning by the year 2005 and ending in the year 2009, at an interest rate of one percent per annum.

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, regional undertakings offer better results and fewer burdens to an individual country.  This programme is well timed when the air traffic is increasing and security is paramount.  

The committee therefore recommends that the House pass this resolution to enable the study to take place.  I thank you.  I beg to move.

MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to support the motion but with a few observations.  

Mr Speaker, the East African Aviation Safety Project is just going back to what we used to call East African Civil Aviation, and it was under a flight information region which covered Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania and it had a radius in the Indian Ocean.  This one should be defined.  Some of the countries that may benefit from this are the neighbouring states.  I am concerned about these two phases of study: phase I for four months, and Uganda, according to the brief by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, unlike the other two governments, is contributing 80,000 Euros.   I do not know why.   Maybe the Chairman of the Committee will clarify on that one.  The study further –(Interruption)-

MR NANDALA:  Maybe, if you look at page 4, the estimated cost of the two studies is 1.2378 million Euros.  It will be met as follows; study 1, you run through down, Kenya 40,000 Uganda 40,000 Tanzania 40,000; study 2, Kenya 80,600; Tanzania 80,600; Uganda 80,000, so the total will be will 120,600.  There will be a balance of 361,000 Euros, which will be met by each country in its respective budget.  Thank you.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you for that information.  But the brief I have says EU 80,000; this is the brief from the Minister of Finance.   Maybe it is updated, so I will take the correction and I think that is correct.  

Now, four months for Phase I, it looks reasonable but I am opposed to 12 months for Phase II.  To form an area control services or safety centre, it involves the study of annexes, which is in excess and, therefore, to form the Civil Aviation Agency also involves the study of Civil Aviation annexes.  Now, if the annexes  -(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER:  Now, honourable Member, we are coming into technical details of how much time to take and how much time not to take.  I really do not know whether we are really competent to understand that technical aspect.  Proceed.

MR WAKIKONA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, but I am talking about the time frame for the studies of phase I for four months and phase II for 12 months, and yet the documents used in both are the same.  Now, phase I is forming the Air Space Authority and then phase II goes to form the oversight agency.  Now, once the other agency, the East African Civil Aviation Safety Project, is formed, who will look after it, because the oversight agency is coming in phase II?  That is the clarification I seek.  

Secondly, about this handling of the money, ICAO is to open the account and on this account they will be the ones to sign on it.  I do not see where Uganda Government as a borrower comes in.  They say ICAO is to open a special account to receive study funds from European Investment Bank when Government requests. Now, where is the aeronautical authority involvement in the actual running of the account?  That clarification is what I am seeking, because Government of the East African States will be based in one state of the three partners.  Now, the request for the funds, will it come simultaneously from the three Governments or when the Government requests?  Which Government will request for the funds and at what level will they request for the funds?  

MR MUSUMBA:  I just want to give information so that we do not lose track.  Mr Speaker, I have already informed this House that all this money is being coordinated by the Secretariat of the East African Community, and it is the one coordination centre for the East African activities.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you for that information but, Mr Speaker, here I am concerned about the East African Community headquarters. There will be no Civil Aviation agency.  It is like Uganda Government and the Civil Aviation Authority.

THE SPEAKER: The Secretariat is coordinating these activities and that is what he is saying.  Hon. Amanya Mushega is coordinating all the activities of the Community.

MR WAKIKONA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  But forming an East African area control centre needs people who are really involved in that project. I do not doubt the competence of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Secretary General has got some technical persons working in various areas.  What is the problem there?

MR WAKIKONA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Let me conclude.  You have now informed me and I am satisfied.  I was not aware that there were aviation technical people there.

THE SPEAKER: No, they need not be in Arusha.   They can be in Kigali but having a centre coordinating them.  Yes, the Secretary General of UN does not need to be in Nairobi to control people who are working in Nairobi; but he has a mechanism to control them.

MR WAKIKONA:  I will not continue with that Mr Speaker.  Now, I will just go with your advice.  But in conclusion, I hope this project will be implemented, because in 1996 Uganda Government got money from the United Nations and they got here experts to study the improvement of the East African Civil Aviation Academy.

This is the project they came up with; they spent time on it, it went to the Ministry of Finance here, till today it is in this form. No implementation and no money was spent.  I hope this time the study will be completed and the implementation will go on.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: With your prayers!

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to support the motion and request Members of Parliament that we should put money where we put our mouths, because it has been alleged that our honourable Members of Parliament of the East African Legislative Assembly talk a lot but they do not contribute money to the Community.  I think it is very important at this stage, since our Members in the East African Legislative Assembly have more-or-less persuaded us, that Soroti Flying School is supposed to be a centre of excellence, so I think we must do the obvious and support this bill so that we are seen to make Soroti Flying School the centre of excellence.

Mr Speaker, I stood up to say that I would like, when the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly come to brief us here about what is going on with other areas, particularly on the issue of centres of excellence, I think besides Soroti Flying School, we should take the issue of Makerere University and Mulago University as possible areas of defining other centres of excellence.  But for the time being, I urge the House to pass this loan without much ado.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Now, honourable Members, before we adjourn, I have announced the sad news of the death of the son of hon. Aggrey Awori and burial is tomorrow.  At the same time, we are starting to deal with the estimates tomorrow; we will be dealing with the Estimates of the Committee on Environment.

At the same time, I had announced that there would be elections for Members of the other committees.  But I know some of us will have to go for the burial in Bugiri.  So, this question of election of the committee Members, I think we will deal with it on the following day.  

I want also to take this opportunity to remind the committees to complete whatever you have been doing with the estimates because the Budget Act requires us to finish the budget process this month.  We have now assigned each of the committees a date when they should be presenting the reports to the Committee of Supply.  Please, adhere to this programme so that we beat the time as stipulated in the Act.  I think with this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(Parliament rose at 5.29 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 August 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)
