Friday 13th August, 1993

The Assembly met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, let us adjourn for 15 minutes while waiting for other Members to come in.  Hon. Members, I give you another ten minutes, please.  (Interjections) And we stay here; order, please, let us stay here for ten minutes.  Order now; let us see whether we form a quorum now. Count. Order, please, do not count air.  Is it okay now? It is okay, now we can start.  This time I do not want to see people moving out.  Let us concentrate on this Bill and finish it today, please.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISES REFORM AND DIVESTITURE (PERD) 
BILL, 1993


Clause 8

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Rukikaire): Mr. Chairman, yesterday when I was interrupted for lack of adequate quorum, I was trying to respond to the Amendments moved by hon. Yona Kanyomozi.  He had suggested that we add a certain section after paragraph, I believe 7, immediately after Clause 7 to insert the following new paragraph.  It goes on and runs for several pages and I was suggesting that as a matter of procedure, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning had had lengthy discussions with the Committee on the Economy to try and determine how the old proposed Bill should be amended to accommodate the objections of the Members and also to suggest some other inclusions.  We agreed on almost everything except on one or two things and one of them was one that was subject of an amendment yesterday by hon. Luwuum.  We did not have a problem with the procedure on that one because people had objected and said that this is our position.  The Minister for Finance subsequently went to the Cabinet and what we debated yesterday as you could see, had the approval of the Cabinet but many of the Members had their objections about the inclusion of the chairmen of some of the committees.  

As you know, the vote approved the amendment that was proposed by Mr. Luwuum.  So, although we are opposed to that, procedurally, that was correct.  Now, with regards to this particular one, the problem is different because we did have exhaustive discussions and we agreed that this section that is being re-introduced should be totally removed.  Subsequently, the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning went to Cabinet and informed them that agreement had been reached with the Committee of Economy that this section should be removed.  Not only Cabinet but also further consultations were carried up with many other people and we came back here with the understanding that this section will not be re-inserted.  I have had some discussions since yesterday with the chairman of the Committee on the Economy and I believe that he will have something to say about this one.  I have also tried to persuade my Colleague hon. Yona Kanyomozi.  I hope that by the time he comes here he should be persuaded that it is no longer necessary to pursue this particular position in which we find ourselves as a result of the introduction of this amendment. So, that is about the procedure. 

Now, what about the substance, Mr. Chairman?  The substance is that what is being introduced into this amended Bill has got some problems.  When you look at it, you find that it has made some broad generalisation introducing new regulations that affect all the parastatals uniformly, although those parastatals have got their own individual Statutes.  I find it difficult to accept that one can introduce laws that can govern and regulate the operations of all the parastatals collectively without causing conflicts.  Some of them may be suitable for some others, while others may not be suitable for them.  So, it is important to note that they cannot be equally made to apply effectively to all the parastatals to which this law is meant to make them apply.  

Secondly, we feel and I think some of the Members have discussed this matter; we feel that it may be necessary to look at the individual Statutes separately using the committee on parastatals in consultation with the individual Ministries under which those parastatals fall, so that if there are any amendments to be introduced, to strengthen the operations and the regulations of those parastatals, then amendments can come here to amend the individual Statutes rather than have all the parastatals which may result in unforeseen or foreseen conflicts.  

It is, therefore, my appeal that the Mover of these amendments should reconsider the position and withdraw them without having to subject this House once again to a prolonged debate as we had yesterday.  I would also wish to call on the chairman of the Committee on the Economy to try and give information and clarify to the House what the position of his committee was and whether what I have stated is the correct position.  Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks, I would like to appeal to the House to accept that position.  Thank you very much.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the august House and to confirm that it is true that after the Committee on the Economy or jointly working with one on parastatals have recommended some amendments to part 3 not section; part 3 which contains or contained Clauses 8 to 16 and after we had had further discussions with the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning, we did agree that this whole part could be dropped. However, Mr. Chairman, a few days before, hon. Kanyomozi in the Committee on Finance brought up this matter.  So, discussion with him and as a matter of procedure, I indicated to him that we couldn’t move this as part and parcel of the earlier committee decisions.  He indicated that he was moving it as an individual Member of Parliament.  I am sure he will speak for himself on this.

DR. SEMAJEGE HIGIRO:  I would like to make a comment on the statement made by the chairman of the Committee on the Economy. In actual fact, the Committee on Finance and Planning discussed this matter and we agreed to include this amendment as a Committee.  It was not Kanyomozi at all. (Applause)  It was a Committee.  The Committee agreed to this arrangement.  The chairman could say so and I was there.  

One reason why we need, if need be, we could amend some of these parts depending on the impact. But what has brought down parastatals was failure of getting a criterion of how to manage them.  These parastatals are run on an individual basis.  The Minister takes a decision, yes, but as I said here, once we are discussing this matter, once a Minister changes and another one comes in; new management off and Mr. Chairman, this is not a character of the past regimes.  It is also of this regime.  Look at UEB, all of them, it is just changing. So, we cannot be saying that we are going to have the parastatals with 100 per cent share by government once again run on that kind of basis because the management is not loyal to the parastatals.  The management is loyal to an individual; to the appointing authority -(Interjection)- I have said loyal, loyal.  Pardon? Thank you very much.  Okay, Mr. Chairman. 

I would like to also appeal to you, Mr. Chairman, that this point is important.  I would also like to remind the Members here that this section here has always been a section that unfortunately, the Cabinet Members do not like. I remember when initially we got these classifications, this part of the arrangement was there.  But there was always case to withdraw it and there has been mismanagement of these corporations.  It might be useful to re-amend this but there must be a characterisation.  There must be a way of getting these parastatals some autonomy.  There must be a way of getting these parastatals managed in a way that they are parastatals not managed by a single individual.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.

MR. RUKIKAIRE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, let me give this in case somebody was not clear about what I said.  I did not say that it is not necessary to look at the manner in which the individual state corporations are run.  I have made it absolutely clear that a review of the individual Statutes of parastatals should be undertaken and it is necessary.  We happen to have a committee of this House that is chaired by the Mover of this very Motion that can work in conjunction with the individual ministries under which those parastatals come so that we can review the individual Statutes so that we can come out with regulations.  If anybody is suggesting that the Cabinet is opposed perse to the management of corporations; that is not what we are saying.  

Therefore, I want to assure hon. Higiro that there are absolutely no objections on the part of the Cabinet and the government as a whole about improving the way in which the parastatals are governed.  We are only saying that the manner in which this is being done is not the best.  So, let us go back and look at individual Acts and then come back and deal with individual parastatal laws.  Thank you.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, it is all right to argue about amending individual Statutes and laws but even those individual Statutes and laws already contained how to dispose; how to wind up various parastatals yet we have to go on through the pains of producing this document.  The second aspect is; I do recognise the well thinking manner the Cabinet had considered this proposal in the first proposition.  They knew the problem, and they included it.  There might have been a change of mind but in the first one, it was the whole thing that was there. Let me just clarify it.  

If you look at the old article 9, the old article 9 gives the aspect of autonomy, accountability, support for improvement, rewarding performance to managers, it goes further in the lower article; how should managers be recruited? Managers and directors of public enterprises should be persons qualified by training and experience.  It shows how managers should be recruited; managers including the chief executive of public enterprises shall be based on merit.  These are the very issues that are needed in reforming and restructuring these organisations.  If we are going to wait for - this was a very well thinking of Cabinet itself for which we are recognising.  This is a proposal that came from Cabinet.  We have accepted this proposal and it is in the good interest of both Cabinet and the House and this nation that whatever we remain with, we make it perform very well.  This is the thing we are appealing for.  Mr. Chairman, I am sure the Front Bench will accept that this thing that they very well thought about is good for us, for them and for the enterprises.

MR. SIBO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think here we are faced really with a technical problem.  It is not so much of a matter of principle as much as something technical.  I believe we are all agreeing that this particular section; part that is being included in here is dealing with the best way of appointing management of parastatals and we agree that what is spelt out here is what should be actually attained.  Unfortunately, there are several existing legislations in respect of a number of parastatal organisation.  Now, these existing legislations have not been amended.  If we introduce as we do in this particular case, it would necessitate the bringing up of all the existing parastatal organisations legislations that have been brought up and enacted in this House for amendment.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor that according to our laws, if the NRC passes a law that is in conflict with other laws that we have passed before, those other laws are amended accordingly by necessary implications.  So, we do not need to put them here. (Applause)

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, I think really the hon. Member tore his shirt unnecessarily because I knew that and I was coming to that one.  It is true that once we pass legislation, any law that is in conflict with such legislation, will obviously be amended accordingly.  That is correct. But the question is, really do we want it that way? Some of these parastatals are being in fact, put in different categories and therefore, I would perhaps fall out.  I have in mind Mr. Chairman, the Uganda Airlines Corporation. Uganda Airlines Corporation today, the appointment on management is by the President himself and as you know, we have suggested in this House and we have brought in a number of legislations here that the President should be kept out of the appointment of management.  Unfortunately, that law still exists. We would therefore, have to amend this. 

Secondly, that Corporation itself is being put in category number three in which Government would have minority share holding. Therefore, in that case, the law in fact, does not  - would have to be dropped out because Government is no longer in control.  These are technical problems we would be facing.  

I also want to mention that I happen to have been a draftsman of the first report, which went to the Minister for Finance, and we had included this one in.  When he came back to face the Committee on Economy, we discussed it thoroughly and I think, hon. Kanyomozi was there and we agreed.  Nevertheless, it does not matter even if he was there.  He has a right to change his mind and he may have changed his mind in a Committee on Finance.  We are therefore, dealing now with the views of the Committee on Economy and the views of the Committee on Finance.  Therefore, if the introduction of this Amendment is by the Committee of Finance, it should be looked at from that angle.  But originally, the Committee on the Economy had agreed with the Minister for Finance that we drop this Amendment.  Therefore, it is in that line that I will appeal in fact, to the Committee on Finance to agree that this particular Amendment really is trying to generalise all the different aspects of management in different parastatals and this may be very, very, difficult.  

I have, for instance, looked at Clause 9, sub-Clause 5, where it says, the Board of Directors of the enterprise shall appoint Managers, including the Chief Executive based on merit.  Now, it is true we have been looking at this in this House and we have agreed that the Board of Directors will continue to appoint the management and there is no dispute about that. Therefore, if we look at class one which is the parastatals that remain 100 per cent owned by Government, all of these have in fact got different legislations that apply to them.  Uganda Development Corporation has an Act and that is very substantial, Mr. Chairman.  It does not only help to amend one specific section of that Act without looking at the whole legislation and seeing the effect - the impact the Amendment would have on the whole management of the Corporation.  We may be in fact, putting the Corporation in an impossible predicament in which it may find itself unable to operate.  Therefore, I think that we should be perhaps more pliable in this case and leave these Corporations, particularly those in which Government has 100 per cent shareholding to be reviewed and brought up here for Amendment; rather than having a general Amendment.  The effect of which we are not sure in the management of these Corporations.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NASASIRA (Kazo County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here currently as a Deputy Minister i one of the Ministries with many parastatals.  Some doing well, others having problems. So, I have a bit of experience with these parastatals.  Good and bad experience.  As the lawyers said, they say that, a new Bill or a new Statute cancels an old one.  If I am correct, I am not a lawyer, but I think that is what hon. - amends an old one.  Now, looking at this, I would want although we are very keen on getting these parastatals, efficient, and the managers selected properly, this Amendment if allowed, will make life difficult for those Ministries with those parastatals to operate.  I think, looking at the schedule we are going to remain with very few Public Enterprises reformed one by one, by dealing with each Act individually.  This one is going to cause conflict and confusion in these parastatals. It is well intended to streamline them, but I think it is better that we deal with them one by one.  Otherwise, it might be difficult to renew Boards, and it might be difficult to appoint Managers now after we have passed this Amendment.  

I would want to appeal to hon. Members that I am also worried.  We set up these Committees, hoping that we are going to hasten our work here, but it seems we are going to end up coming here and debating each Clause in Committee Stage and wasting more time.  I would have assumed that the Committees  - the Members consult the Committees for any Amendments and the Committees discuss thoroughly with the Ministers.  Now, this has been done but you could see differences.  We are getting a different opinion from the Committee on Economy, we have a different opinion from the Committee on Finance, we might have different views from the Committee on parastatals.  This, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Although the Minister of State for Finance and Economic Planning, refer to hon. Rwakakooko as being in agreement, but may I inform the House that at yesterday’s meeting, hon. Rwakakooko as a Member of the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning, he was there and we all agreed to that Amendment.  So, there is no conflict.  So, his earlier stand, and position must have been compromised or if not compromised, agreed to. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I was saying, we should used these Committees to hasten our work here; so that by the time we come here, really, more less things are finished.  We expect to agree.  The other issue, as hon. Kanyomozi mentioned, this was in the old Bill.  Definitely, Cabinet and Government had good intentions of putting it there but you must also realise that you must have good intentions of removing it.  Otherwise, it is this same Cabinet that thought about it, but must have - may be analyzed and say there might have been a mistake to include this.  We will find ourselves in more difficult - a situation in Government to run these parastatals by including it.  Why do we not take the good faith that put it in, and the good faith that removed it? Mr. Chairman, I think it will make running of parastatals extremely difficult if we include this Amendment.  (Applause)

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Mr. Chairman, I do not see the problem here.  You see, if we are seriously willing to reform the operations and management of these parastatal bodies, let us agree on the subject matter.  What I know here is this, unless you give authority of a particular person or body, powers to appoint and fire, we shall not get in management at all.  This is what we were discussing in the Committee.  We thought we should try this line so that people who are appointed should be able to control this money; so that we blame them.  If we do not do this, all the blame will come back to Government.  So, I think the Amendment that we stood and found it necessary was really good and for all us.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is true that originally there was an agreement between the Committee of Economy and the Minister to get rid of this section, but it is also true that this Amendment is now being proposed by the Committee for Finance and Planning; and the Committee for Finance and Economic Planning is in agreement with this Amendment. Unfortunately people who are debating the exclusion of this part have not carefully read what is contained in this part.  There is nothing contentious in what is provided in part three. As a matter of fact, part three, is intended to facilitate the reform that we are now talking about as far as the Bill is concerned. (Applause) This part is harmless.  

In fact, this part is not likely to conflict with any of the laws - it is not likely to conflict with Company Law nor is it likely to conflict with any of the Statute which set the various parastatal bodies.  Therefore, I do not think that this part is being included by the Committee for any other reason other than really to facilitate the smooth reform of the parastatals that are going to be under this Committee.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would like to support this Amendment and I would like to call upon the House to support the Amendment. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr. Rukikaire):  Mr. Chairman, you can see how efficient we are here because all of us are ready to come here and deal with the problems they are presenting here.  There is another one, I am sure he was coming; and our presence here signifies the importance we attach to this Bill which we are discussing.  I do not want to suggest in any way that we have a problem nor do I want to suggest that the points which have been made, like the one which has been made by my brother Mwandha there, is being made with any other intentions except to show us that the inclusion of this is not of good intentions.  

But I also want in the same breath, to underscore our own points; that we are not essentially in opposition to the Amendment of the various Statute which govern the operation of the individual parastatals; and indeed hon. Sibo, I think has made the point much more effectively than I had hoped to make them myself.  We are not opposed to the improvement of the running of the parastatals. We want to have them put on a sound footing, we want them to be run by competent people and we want them to be very transparent.  

But, we also want to emphasise the fact that today, the savings of our parastatals and the bad running which they have been subjected to, like the way this country has failed not because it had bad constitution, but because the management of the economy was not sound.  It does not matter how good you improve the Constitution of this country, if the people who manage the country, if the legislators, if the Ministers, if the managers are not up to their jobs; then you can forget about what kind of document you have presented.  (Applause) 

Similarly, we believe that the fundamental problem of these parastatals, whereas it may be related with the Statutes that are governing them, the fundamental problems are within the structures and management of those organisations.  And the improvement of those management will depend on how effectively, first of all, the Minister, will be able to deal with them, how effectively the Board and some of you members here and members of those Board will be able to exercise your authority, how competent the people you appoint will be.  To me, the question of the Rules and Regulations, whereas they are important, they are secondary to the points I have made.  And, therefore, I want to underline once again, that let us not cause more confusion by bringing about Amendments here which is the short-term, may bring about conflicts with the Statutes which have already been passed by this House.

Recently, we passed one about the Bank of Uganda.  In fact, we passed one about the Financial Institutions.  The Minister is coming here with one on UDC.  Recently, we are coming with one on Railways. You are going to be discussing new Statutes and Amendments thereof, in this House.  I therefore, do not see why we should be in such a hurry to introduce broad regulations that have got no uniform relevance to all of them.  

This is a point I wish to make and for once. I would like this House to be united on this one.  That is why, before I came here, I took some time off to try and persuade my Colleague hon. Yona Kanyomozi, that this, need not be passed today; we can look at it together.  That is why I spoke to the chairman of the Committee on the Economy and he assured me that the position as was agreed with my hon. Minister here, was still the position.  Because we could easily make ourselves a laughing stock.  

If we go to the Cabinet and inform them that we have reached agreement with the relevant committees of this House and the Cabinet endorses, and we come here to report, only to find that some other Amendments are being brought either by individuals or by other committees.  So, bare that in mind.  Let us try and be consistent today and therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would like to appeal to you and particularly to those who have spoken and my Brother hon. Yona Kanyomozi that let us drop this general Amendment and come back to specific Amendments dealing with individual Statutes.  I thank you very much Mr. chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you withdrawing it?

(Question put and agreed to).

(Part 111 as amended and agreed to).

(Part 111 as amended do stand part of the Bill and agreed to).

(Clause 8 agreed to).

Clause 9

REV. ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, I have circulated my proposed Amendments in this Clause, the work manipulation is wrongly spelt and I wanted to put the tense, created but it is written created which is also good. So, Clause 9, (i), to me, is - it should only read, the Government shall not be obliged to support unprofitable enterprises, full-stop. All these, other words, are brought here and if not checked, we shall find that whether any enterprises, such as Like Victoria Bottling Company, it will go; because it will be the Government to determine whether any enterprise is making profit or not making profit.  Sometimes we find that, as lay people we find some of these enterprises doing very well, like there was that conflicting report in the Nile Hotel.  The management and Board were saying that, this was making very good profit and Government was saying, not make profit.  So, I would just by this idea that we say, Government shall not be obliged to support unprofitable enterprises. Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I can see the good intentions of the hon. Member that already his statement to submission, you can see conflict.  Conflict being latent.  And what this Bill is trying to say is, the government and nobody else shall determine what is not profitable.  If we stop where he wants us to stop, anybody will still ask the question what is unprofitable which is going to determine, what unprofitable.  Because he said, sometimes we people - let people see its a profitable, then government says, we do not want any doubt, we want everybody to know that the government itself determine what is not profitable or is profitable.

MR. KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, Clause 9, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you moving an amendment?

MR. KASAIJA: Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us finish with his Amendment first.

(Question on amendment put and negatived).

MR. KASAIJA: Mr. Chairman, I want to move that Clause 9 sub-Section 2, we delete the word ‘Government’ and insert the word ‘Committee,’ and also the same Clause sub-Section 3, I want to move that Government should also be replaced by the word Committee.  The reasons are that yesterday we passed an amendment that was basically to enforce transparency and accountability.  This was as a result of what was moved by hon. Magezi in May that the public was getting concerned about the way public enterprises were being divested.  

So, when we give the committee chance to participate in the deliberations of what - the committee is going to do, I think this is going to help because the committee will be having a say and a government is going to stand, also to benefit because the people are not going to say that the government is the one which has done this thing. In any case, the committee that we already have had the chance to look at, then recommend the government, then government will be able to do it. So, this is for the sake of consistency of Clause 6, which states that the Committee shall be responsible for implementing the government policy on reform and divestiture, and this is part of the implementation.  So it is not in conflict, it is just only for consistency reasons, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, while hon. Kasaija is a making some good observation, to government it is very important to locate who is responsible. And this must be a permanent body that is responsible.  You see, government - people may change, but government will still remain responsible for what is done even if those people who exist now are different.  We are saying, although - yesterday we said, there will be a Committee composed some of the new arrangement, still government is willing to be held responsible for all actions being taken.  So, this is tended to pinpoint - yesterday, when I was saying, there is a problem between the functions of the executive, the functions of the legislature.  Now that the legislature has married with executive, still the executive remains responsible for its daily functions.  I think the members of the marriage, the legislature are the higher partners. (Laughter) 

While this new method we are experimenting about, marrying legislature and executive, some one still must remain responsible and I think government must remain responsible to Parliament for actions it takes in the course of handling public affairs.  (Applause) 

Therefore, I would beg that while the committee would do the work, it is government that has access daily to information.  Daily government has command and access to information, and therefore can take responsibility.  For decision it takes it cannot argue that I was not well informed, I made a mistake.  So while I want Members to continue to take only executive accountability, I advise that let us take also a little, but still continue to handle government as in public accountable for things they do eventually although some of them we can do jointly for convenience and for peace.  But still alternatively, government is also responsible for certain things and we must legally ask government to do it.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question on amendment put and negatived).

(Clause 9, agreed to).

(Clause 10, agreed to).

(Clause 11, agreed to).

Clause 12

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I wanted renumbering now would change in light of insertion.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is right.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Okay.

Clause 12

MR. NDEGE: Mr. Chairman I want to move an amendment on Clause 3, where proceeds from the Public Enterprise in the original Bill says to be - the Minister for Finance will decide on which banks are responsible.  I would like to delete and put the committee.  The Committee where is the chairman, instead of leaving the Minister for Finance to hold responsibility on deciding where this money should be on which account - which banks should be holding this money, I think the minister with his committee to decide where they should put this money.  

I think you saw the cheque of Shs.500 million. Nobody was responsible for anything; everybody was denying that he held a cheque.  And I would also want the Minister to not have so many pressures from all these banks some of which are defunct, that we better put this money here or there or there.  I think we should do it through a committee which will decide where this money should be deposited, having other than one individual deputise committee where he is the chairman any way.  I think it is a very simple amendment that the minister should accept.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Hon. Members are becoming very distrustful to me this time.  Mr. Chairman, we shall sell the proceeds of these enterprises but honestly, I do not think at any one time, the proceeds will exceed the magnitude of the money the Minister of Finance by law, is required to be given information regarding the performance of all banks.  He knows the state, the health, and the nature as a right of all financial institutions. And therefore, the Minister of Finance cannot claim that I put money here but I was not aware that these institutions were in trap, we cannot respect responsibility.  

Now, hon. Ndege first of all he is debating the 500 million out of context, I do not think that is what we can use to justify that the state should trust more a committee by the minister who by public act is required to look after the assets of the school.  I beg to persuade him that the Minister of Finance has all facilities and knowledge about banking institutions, and because of that, he must be entrusted with this responsibility, so that if any mistake was to be made he cannot claim that I did not know.  After all, this committee if it takes on the responsibility, it will have to rely on what the Minister of Finance advises it on the state of banks.  Why doesn’t it take the responsibility?  So, Sir, I would like also to say that let us make these laws within considering the existence of other laws already in existence.  This law cannot operate solely outside on its own.  So, I would like to oppose this Amendment in this good faith.  But I still know that hon. Ndege has not underrated the Minister of Finance, I know that very much.  I thank you.

(Question on Clause put and negatived).

(Clause 12, agreed to).

Clause 13

MR. KAYONDO: Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an amendment by deleting Clause - part (b) of Clause 13 on the - and the reason is that, as we were advised yesterday that we should make this divestiture exercise as attractive as possible, the phrase ‘benefit of employees,’ to most investors, tends to be associated with trade unions and what have you, and especially it is associated with socialist way of involving employees and definitely this is not normally attractive as far as investors - so in those reasons that I am proposing the deletion.  After all part (a) can cover the employees as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. M. RUKIKAIRE: Mr. Chairman, we do not have problems in accepting that Amendment, if it will help to bring this matter to the end immediately.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, while socially we have got out of fashion, the mode of running organisations these days, even in the most capitalist countries, is workers participation even at Board level. (Applause) This thing is, therefore, not in conflict, it will not frighten away any investor, in fact, it will give him a caution that the chaps he is going to employee, are the very people who have a stake, after all, we are for a stake for everybody.  And if it is the motivating force to make people work, let these workers, the employees, also feel that they belong and they are going to benefit.  I do not see it in conflict, Mr. Chairman. I, therefore, oppose the Amendment.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, any investor when he invests, he wants to maximise his profits.  Among the inputs in production is manpower.  I do not see any entrepreneur who will buy an enterprise without considering the cost of labour that is very important in order for him to make some profits.  So, any good entrepreneur, will analyze people he appoints.  But the question is not, are you going to require it as a law that when you want to buy Nytil, while you are considering all other matters, also consider the welfare of the current 2000 people employed by Nytil.  

I want to say that most people who come from outside are very fearful of governments in developing countries.  Because we also have a problem of poverty, we want to appeal to our poor people to see that we are helping them, but also we want to say that we want others to come in. And these people think that politically governments in developing countries can continue to use laws and so on to intervene on behalf of their own electorate and their own people.  Then whenever they are stranded.  To me I think this is an impediment, but unnecessary impediment. Someone for example who goes into Nytil, would like spinners who have been there with experience, he would like weavers who have ever done the job.  And I think if they are cheaper than getting weavers from outside, but also we are in charge of immigration as a government, if we think one is bringing here labour that is locally abundant, we can say we do not need these people to come here, we are in charge of working permits.  Now, why do not we use other existing laws instead of putting in the law intended to attract investments.  Impediments, to make one thing of two questions instead of one question.  So, I spot this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 13, agreed to).

Clause 14

MR. NDEGE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on 14, where this time we are on the disposal over proceeds from sale on the divestiture drawn, use, you know, utilisation.  I would like to propose that instead of the government through the Minister, I would like to delete the government through the minister and through the committee. Is there any committee that is responsible for this? The idea is that instead of the minister being responsible again for the use of proceeds of sale, this time he should do it with the committee.  I think there is no harm in that, we have accepted at least, let him invest the money, but this time let him not be responsible for disposing it, he should do it with his own committee. Thank you.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I have given reasons before the Members got convinced.  Honestly, I urge Members, let not our legislature shift responsibilities from the executive to committees. There is a Public Finance Act that for years has safeguarded public funds, and ultimate person responsible for public funds regardless of the method of how money is got but in the name of the public, is the Minister of Finance. He can be anybody.  One day in the future, we may decide that the Minister of Finance will be a committee, and if that becomes a committee, it will be the Minister of Finance as a committee. But today, I urge that do not go on dismantling basic laws that safeguard public interest by shifting responsibility from Statutory provided ways to transition arrangements of managing as far as we are concerned now.  You are making fundamental problems one day you will not be able to trace who was responsible for public funds.  For goodness sake, let us have confidence in these people called ministers, regardless of who they are now, they are by law required to account for us for our money by statute.  They can change.  I beg you, please. (Applause and Laughter)

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 14, agreed to).

(Clause 15, agreed to).

Clause 16

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you look at Schedules of enterprises to be sold off, they are classes 1,2,3, and 4. And classification bear in mind, is to be included in the law.  You find that in Clause 16, sub-Section 2, you only clause classes 2,3 and 4. I would propose to the minister that class 1 also be included for the simple reason that time may come when class 1 companies, or enterprises in class one will have to be shifted and sold off just like any in classes 1,2, 3 and 4.  You find that a company like Uganda Development Corporation, they have a provision in the law as to the way it is to be disposed of the assets.  But Mr. Chairman, we just passed a law here where by we look at all these companies afresh.  And, therefore, I propose that we get class 1 to be included in the law as sub-Section 2. So that it will read, 1,2,3, and 4, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose that amendment because when you read through this first sentence, we are dealing with divestiture and No.1 is dealing with companies which are retained by the government 100 per cent; so the question of sending this does not arise, so, I do not see how we can put it under this Section.  So, I do not think it is proper to put it under this Section because we are only - when we have retained 100 per cent, there is no question of divesting in that company.

MR. OYAT BALMOI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as regards the classes in the Schedule, I give information to the Member who has just spoken that the classes are not rigid, let us not imagine that this class 1 will always be class 1, we can vary them when it comes to the Amendment.  Therefore, I support the proposed amendment by hon. Wanendeya in the light of shifting of the classes.  So class 1 may one day become class 3 or 4.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, the proposal is that as of now, we want Parliament to approve that there is a class of enterprises, that the public will retain 100 per cent.  That is the principle.  We can argue whether a certain company should be in that category or not, but we are saying class 1 Parliament is saying for now, keep it 100 per cent. When Parliament finds it appropriate, it will legislate that thus Body can go. But also in this law there is provision for the committee to re-arrange these companies, shift them 1 to 2 to 3 to 4, and inform Parliament.  If the committee ever got reasons to believe, but one company in class 1 should go to class 4, there will take appropriate decision and come back to us.  But we agreed there must be class 1; there must be body companies for the moment, not to be sold. For the moment that should be in class 1.  So we cannot now put this in areas or provisions that must immediately cater for divestiture.  Therefore, I thank hon. Nkalubo for his foresight.  

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 16, agreed to).

(Clause 17, agreed to).

(Clause 18, agreed to).

Clause 19

MR. J. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I have an Amendment on Clause 19 to the effect that at the end of that Clause we insert the words, ‘but the subject to Section 25 of the Statute’, and the current Clause 25 of the Statute reads as follows: “Any divestiture under this statute, shall not prejudice the right of any person who has suffered damage from obtaining fair, adequate and prompt redress in respect of the damage.” So, really, we want to tie up that Section - that Clause 19 as it reads, “Anything duly done under the authority of this statute, for the purpose of giving effect to the governments policy on reform and divestiture of public enterprises, shall have effect notwithstanding any other enactment’, and you continue to say, but the subject to Clause 25 of this Statute which I have read.  So, the idea really is to make sure that anybody who may be injured as a result of exercise as recourse, and that is why this Amendment is required, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, with respect that Amendment is not necessary.  Clause 19 is talking about acts pertaining to enterprises.  Clause 25 is talking about rights, so the two should be independent.  And Clause 25 specifically caters for those rights that are envisaged there, and 19 talks about conflict of the existing laws that affect enterprises.  So, that towards this thing, it is not necessary to say subject to 25.  Once this 25 is in react, it is quite clear that when we want to consider the rights of the people Clause 25 will apply, and when you want to talk about just conflicts of laws, then Clause 19 will apply.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 19, agreed to).

(Clause 20, agreed to).

(Clause 21, agreed to).

Clause 22

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, under Clause 22, I wish to propose an amendment by deleting the word ‘Cabinet’ which appears on page 13, and insert the word ‘Committee.’ The effect of this proposal is really to facilitate the high powered committee that we set up under this Act to be responsible for shifting enterprises between classes.  I think this job is really just done by the committee and I do not thing that the whole cabinet is really - it is necessary that the cabinet should be responsible for deciding whether a company should be moved from class 2 or class 3 to class 4, and, therefore, I thought that this Amendment is necessary so that we do not over burden the cabinet by giving it a job which can basically done by the committee which we have just set up.  I hope the Deputy Minister of Finance will not this time think that again we are anti-cabinet or anti-minister. I think this proposal is definitely to lighten the burden of cabinet and gave this responsibility that I think is suited for it.  Thank you.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, in support of the Amendment, this committee is chaired by the Minister responsible for Finance, and he is a Member together with the Attorney General, and so the government is fully involved.  And since the committee is going to be the one over-looking the things, it should be the one to see how to shift one parastatal to another parastatal.  And also see from the practice they will have observed in the Schedules problems that will be arising and it will be in the basis interest for the committee to be the one under the guidance, the good guidance of the Minister of Finance supported by, of course, the Attorney General, some supporting amendment because it will smoothen the working of the committee and implementation of the scheme.  I support the Amendment.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FIANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr.Chairman, I wish the matters were as simply as hon. Kanyomozi puts them in government.  The Minister of Finance is responsible to Cabinet, he has no power, and he seeks and exercises in isolation.  Now I do not see the problem. If the Minister chairs a committee and the committee in its wisdom recommends that we think there should be a shift.  This Minister is Minister because he is a Member of the Cabinet.  Why does he not go to his constituency and say that my committee is proposing this? Because ultimately, constitutionally, Cabinet is responsible for running government and they know the policies of that government they want to execute. 

For example, if it becomes government policy and government persuades parliament to accept the policy, that we want to give our people free sugar, now it becomes a policy and, therefore, we want to manage sugar production so that all the sugar we get, we ration it to our people free.  We want to have sugar to be government policy. The government has to insist the manufacturing of sugar and their shares in sugar.  Now, if we start as a committee in deciding in what to do with the enterprises and Cabinet is informed when they are here in parliament in report, I think we are causing problems.  As I said, there is already a big law charging each centre with authority.  Constitutionally, Cabinet is charged with constitutional responsibility; it cannot say that this Cabinet was not responsible because there was a committee. But we have said, before -(Interruption)

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of order. Mr. Chairman, the Cabinet policy - the Amendment moved by hon. Kayonde was opposing Cabinet policy.  He left it and he is now supporting Cabinet on certain amendments.  Is he in order to change from side to side?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, you know we have to get used to work on Friday morning.  We have agreed to enlarge the level of consultation before the Minister goes to Cabinet on this matter.  The Minister will chair a Committee where there are Members of NRC and other members of the public on these matters.  If the committee recommends that the shifts in these parastatals, this consultation will seek Cabinet approval so that the whole exercise is enforced on no one can say he was not part of it.  This is to strengthen the position.  And, therefore, I beg to oppose this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 22 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).

Clause 22

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Rukikaire): Mr. Chairman, it is a small technical point.  If you look at Clause 22, Section 2, you will find that it reads as follows: “The Minister responsible for Finance shall lay before the Legislature, any statutory instrument made under this section within six weeks after the date of its publication.” We are envisaging a situation where a statutory instrument has been made when the Legislature is in recess and, therefore, by the time it comes to meet the six weeks have expired and, therefore, we would like to add that at the end of that, the following: in other words, it will read as follows: ‘The Minister responsible for finance shall lay before the legislature any statutory instrument made under this section within six weeks from the date of its publication or if parliament is not sitting within two weeks from the first sitting of Parliament thereafter.’  Two weeks (Interjection.) Yes, within two weeks from the first sitting of Parliament, such amendment I would like to be for those reasons.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 22, Section 2, be amended as proposed by hon. Matthew Rukikaire.

(Clause 22(2) as amended agreed to).

(Clause 22(2) as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to).

(Clause 22 agreed to).

(Clause 23 agreed to).

Clause 24

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I must report that the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning agreed to the Amendment by canceling out Clause 24 in its entity.  Members considered it appropriate that since the Bill itself came to this august House, there must have been reasons because the agreement of establishing the Act was entered into on the 9th day of January, 1992; and therefore, when hon. Magezi moved a Motion, this House agreed that a law must be put in place and hence we are now debating this very law.  

If we agree in principle to leaving this Clause as it is included in the law, it means would be approving things which had gone on, and which were recognised by this august House as not appropriate. As an example, you find that Uganda agricultural Enterprises was literally about the sale for pea-nuts until we intervened.

There are other reasons why the committee considered it appropriate to amend this law in the sense that you find that East African Distilleries was sold off for 0.6 of million dollars.  We understand that there were offers of up to 1.5 million dollars.  So, the committee should take care of any eventuality as it comes.

You find that also Lake Victoria Bottling Company the owners informed the Ministry that Ugandans have shares in it but it was never appropriately agreed to.  And, therefore, anything that has got to be done, it must be done with passage of this law; and the committee that we have set up must examine any action that had been entered into.  I beg to move that Clause 24 be cancelled from the Bill.  I thank you.

MR. KAYONDE (Historical Member): Mr. Chairman, I wish to oppose that amendment. It is common knowledge that this exercise started sometime back.  And government has entered into international obligation, in fact, which we have also recognised by passing Clause 2.  Clause 2 refers to an agreement that was entered into by Uganda Government and it talks of redundancy accounts and it is defined: “redundancy account established by virtue of the Development Credit Agreement.” So, there is already an obligation and if we remove this section, it would nullify all that government has done in good faith.  So, I oppose that amendment.

MR. SIBO (Historical): Mr. Chairman, I wish to oppose the amendment.  It is true that perhaps some mistakes have been made; but it is also true to say that these mistakes may have been made in interest of the public.

If government has made any mistake in selling a parastatal organisation and this is the fact that which we cannot deny to say that the government has not sold, is not being realistic.  It is the matter of fact that government has sold and we have got to accept that fact.  Now having accepted that fact does not mean that there is no remedy or redress for one who may have been interested in having damaged.  There is a provision in paragraph 25, which indicates that if there is anybody whose interests have been affected, Clause 25 would take care of those interests. In any case, there is a common law on equity.  If such a case has not - is not covered under Clause 25, there is a law that will cover that; and any one who has been affected will still have redress.  For that purpose I oppose the amendment.  

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): With greatest respect I would like to endorse everything said by the hon. Members I just want to add that we should really be careful as legislature, not pass legislation that retrospectively destroys establish rights.  And this Act should not seek to destroy any right that may have been created before this Act is passed, and hon. Wanendeya is talking about a policy matter. For instance, he is alleging that the Agricultural Enterprises could have been sold for a low price. But that is not a question of illegality.  It is a question of policy.  We should distinguish when legislating between policy issues and matters of legislation. This Bill is a matter of legislation.  If you seek to remove this section to Clause 24 you will be destroying establish rights; we do not want to do this retrospectively.  so we should stand as hon. Sibo says, any rights at all which may be taken away or attacked to impute by Clause 4, will be catered for by Clause 25.  I would like to conclude.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 24 be deleted by proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived).

(Question put and agreed that Clause 24 do stand part of the Bill).

(Clause 25 agreed to).

THE SCHEDULE

FIRST READING

Class 1 

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County): Mr. Chairman, I circulated an amendment on Class 1 for seeking clarification of Enterprises 9 and 10. The reasons for this, that affect Uganda Coffee Development Authority and Uganda Tea Authority.  I did make some consultations with the responsible Ministers concerned and I got an indication that they think, the thinking of government is, that the handing of these by these authorities is not necessary, especially in right of liberalisation.  These institutions are just service institutions.  They are only doing administrative work; and this administrative work, for that administrative work they are charging the peasant farmers a lot of money.  For example, in case of UCDA, they do charge say, I think up to 1 per cent; and with falling industry’s prices in coffee, that deprives the peasant farmer of better price that he would otherwise, realise from the export coop.  

Secondly, the same applies to the Tea Industry. In order to support the Tea Authority, farmers have got to say, we would rather have that money going directly to the farmers to increase on the price and on the receipts.  But they are supposed to do research. In most cases these institutions do not have to search these institutions at all of facilities.  

Let me give an example. The UCD has no research institution that we can talk of that they are going to carry out research.  Recently this hon. House did pass a Bill in support of National Research Organisation which is under the Ministry of Agriculture to handle all agriculture research which covers coffee, cotton, everything; and trying to ask the Coffee Authority to set up another research station would be very expensive for us.  I am suggesting that the work being done by these institutions is better done in the parent Ministry by having a desk or a department to do the repository work, that is licensing and what have you.

Furthermore, with the opening of liberalism, the clients, the exporter -(Interruption)

 THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, no amendment can be tabled which is fundamentally against the spirit of the provisions on the Floor. Hon. Kanyomozi is debating the abortion of these institutions which is fundamentally different from improving management or whatever classifications; he is trying us to debate whether we should have or not have.  And this is a fundamentally different matter than a matter related to classifications.  Is he in order Mr. Chairman, to divert the House on another fundamentally different matter?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he is not in order.  You are not in order if you are discussing on abortion.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  No, I am just asking for the two institutions to be put under Class 5, and we have Class 5 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, we have Class 5 in the Schedule; there are Enterprises under Class 5. And I am saying, 9 and 10 should move to Class 5. (Interruption)

MISS KADAGA:  Point of order. Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to pre-empt the work of the committee under Clause 5 without any research on which he is basing his arguments, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order.  

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know what the hon. Lady means by research.  I even gave good reasons in my representation.  And these are substantial reasons.

THE CHAIRMAN: The reasons are good but not in order to move them right now.  (Interjection)- Whom are you giving the point of order?

AN HON. MEMBER: To him.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have already ruled him out of order, please.  Let us move.

Class 2

MR. OKODI (Dokolo, Lira): Mr. Chairman, Class 2, item 17.  I would like to move an amendment deleting the word “International and Complex’ and substituting them with the word ‘Limited.’ This gives effect to the legal lane of these organisations, that is, Nile Hotel and Conference Centre Limited.  Thank you.

MR. NEKYON (Maruzi County): Mr. Chairman, under Class 2.  I would like to raise the following issues -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Are you moving another amendment? 

MR. NEKYON: Yes. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us deal with his amendment first, please.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, government accepts the amendment moved by hon. Omodi and I thank him for this correction.

MR. NEKYON: I would like to seek classification from the Minister on the following issues under this Class 2.  I see the National Insurance Corporation is in this Class, No.4.  But then if you see under 3, that is Class 3, you see No.17; Uganda Hire Purchase Company subsidiary of NIC. How is it possible that you have the main body, ‘the National Insurance Corporation’ under Class 2; and then its subsidiary under another Class? How can government have a minority, retain minority in that subsidiary when they have got here a majority shares.  How is government investing under the minority; and subsidiary separately form the main body.  I would like to help that one clarified.  

Then two; the Lint Marketing Board is being put under Class 11.  The government wants to retain majority shares in Lint Marketing Board. All along we have said here that the Lint Marketing Board is the main problem in the Cotton industry and we demanded persistently that it should be completely liquidity.  So, Lint Marketing Board should have been put under file for liquidation, so as to remove the problem we have with the Cotton Industry.  Then, I want to go to (16) - Steel Corporation of East Africa.  I believe that this one was established by the Madhvani Group of Companies.  I stand to be corrected; but then you have got under (IV) - 29 - Kakira Sugar Works.  

Now, if you put Kakira Sugar Works under (4) where government wants to divest completely, it would only be logical that the Steel Corporation of East Africa be transferred there.  On what basis are we going to hold on to the Steel Corporation when the other bodies have been transferred back to the former owners? I do not see any justification there whatsoever.  Maybe, the Minister will be able to explain to the House how it comes to retain this Steel Corporation under government control. Apart from that I would like to hold on until the next issue. Thank you.  

MR. MATTHEW RUKIKAIRE: Mr. Chairman, let me deal with the question of the National Insurance Corporation of which I have previously been Chairman.  In terms of Cooperate structure of Public Companies or Private companies, there is absolutely nothing odd about a company in which somebody has majority shareholding, having it’s a subsidiary being owned on a minority basis.  There is absolutely nothing inconsistent with that arrangement and in the case of the National Insurance Corporation, if it is the wish to the government and the House that the government retains majority shareholding, its subsidiary in Class (3) No.17 - Uganda Higher Purchase Company can be incorporated in a manner in which NIC has minority shareholding and somebody else has majority shareholding.   So, there is inconsistent about that.

MR. H. KAIJUKA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to inform the hon. Member who raised a point of clarification that, first on Lint Marketing Board, it is true that we shall be coming to the House to request the House to have the Lint Marketing Board Act repealed but that does not suggest that we shall not be suggesting - recommending a marketing arm of government of cotton, that, may wish to continue as a wholly owned company or a minority shareholding by government.  Secondly, you raised issues related to Steel Corporation of East Africa. As I mentioned yesterday, the position of Steel Corporation of East Africa is a bit involved.  The present position is that government in that sphere has registered a new company; entirely a new company - 100 per cent owned by government.  Just because government had put in the recent equipment that there is on site.  However, there has been a legal controversy because as far back as 1972, the shareholding - I think has been circulated by one of the hon. Members, hon. Magezi.  It is correct that at that stage the shareholding was as presented by hon. Magezi and there has been a legal contention to that effect and that has been taken care of.  I do not want to drug the House into the recent developments because government has received support recently from Austria to revive this company and I think the Cabinet or the recently set up Committee under this Bill, will discuss this matter as a matter of urgency; because we can merely afford to continue debating issues of ownership and which category it belongs to.  

So, for me, I am sorry because I think I would like to request at some stage, my Colleague the hon. Minister of Finance, to formally recommend that we merge Class 11 with 111 so that  -(Applause)- we do not waste a lot of time debating this matter. May I, with your approval, I do not know whether it is in order for me at this Stage? I will wait at some right time to do that. Thank you.

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As the Schedule will be part of the Bill; in Class 11 (5), I have realised some typing error that I want to bring to the attention of the hon. Minister.  There is no Public Enterprise called ‘New Vision.’ the Paper is called ‘The ‘New Vision’ and the Corporation that we passed here is ‘The New Vision Printing and Publishing Corporation.’ I just wanted to bring that attention so that it is amended; and I hope that in case that there are other errors, the draftsmen can change so that we have the proper legal names in the Schedules when this becomes a Statute.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, nobody can refuse such intelligent interaction. (Laughter) We accept. (Applause) 

MR. NDEGE: Mr. Chairman, I just heard the hon. Minister saying that Minister of Finance is agreeable to merge Class 11 and 111.  So, I am proposing an Amendment abolishing Class 11.  My reasons for this is that - we are saying government wants to privatise; at the same time wants to hold to majority shareholding in places like Apollo Hotel, Kilembe Mines, Lint Marketing Board, Coffee Marketing Board, and Uganda Commercial Bank.  I reasoned yesterday  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your Amendment? You read your Amendment, please.

MR. NDEGE: My Amendment is that, we abolish Class 11 and transfer all companies to Class 111 or another Class. (Applause) I was giving the reasons. They were circulated yesterday. I have given the reason that nobody - it will be very difficult if we are serious with privatising, for government to keep majority shareholding of the commercial enterprise like Uganda Commercial Bank or Uganda Livestock Industries.  Nobody will invest when government is holding a majority; nobody will put money there.  Now, if we are serious on privatising, let us move these to Class 3 or another Class.  Thank you very much.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. I stand to oppose the Amendment. (Applause) Mr. Chairman, let government chew what it can swallow because if you start disengaging from all these companies - first of all we do not have ready market.  Secondly, we must be sensitive to displacing our people because if already we have 17 companies in Class 5, 43 in Class 4, and 20 in Class 3, these are supposed to change hands where possible and we must look for market - people who can buy them and buy them profitably! Now if you have also to include Class 11, which means you are throwing the whole country in a mess. (Interjection) Yes, Mr. Chairman, let me argue my point.  Can I argue my point, please first? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Please do.

MR. RWABITA: I am talking about displacement of our workers.  When you give a government Company to a private body, that person has got a right to employ the people he wants and definitely many of them will be displaced.  Already we have the retrenchment exercise that is giving us a hard time.  Now, if you put again a number of thousands of people to be displaced in these companies, I think the government will be not supporting our people; although the intentions is good but let us take time. This Class 11 should be kept by government and after all both the government and the Cabinet has got authority to shift one company from one Class to another. Now, what is this hurry of trying to throw away everything at the same time?  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

MR. OBWANGOR: I think the House should be orderly.  In that Part 1V of the Bill before the House.  That is Clause 11 (eleven) has been adapted by this that embraces - it takes all these Classes.  Now, to undo the Schedules - now before the ink is dry, to me - You see Legislation, Law making is also a Science; and a Law must be clear.  So, if we undo it again we spoil therefore, Clause 11 (eleven), which the House has adopted.  I disagree entirely with the Amendment moved before the House.

(Question put and negatived).

(Class 111 agreed to).

(Class 1V agreed to).

(Class V agreed to).

MR. KABUUBI:  I have already circulated an Amendment. I am in fact, on Class 4 to 3.

THE CHAIRMAN: Take your Seat, please. Order, please. I now put the question that the First Schedule as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SECOND SCHEDULE

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an Amendment by deleting (a) up to (f).  Second Schedule Part 1. The reason is that, we should try to make this exercise as attractive as possible.  Now, when you look at (a) and (b), we have made it mandatory and we have even set up schemes that an investor must meet. For the same reason that we used in 13 (b), should apply here.  We are putting schemes where somebody is supposed to set up finance for employers.  So, the reason is that we should make this as attractive to an investor without putting pre-conditions of buying. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. MAGEZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I stand to strongly oppose the proposed Amendment.  (Applause) In fact, we could take the collective decision to amend Class 13; whereas in fact it did not require that Amendment.  What is in the Second Schedule are practical ways that share ownership maybe broadened and they are not mandatory.  I think we really should give the Committee that latitude to do what is best for this country and if a certain parastatal requires that employees must be taken into consideration - so be it.  If it is deemed that this is not relevant, it should not be taken in because it is not mandatory.  It is an option that they can take and I think we should leave our Legislation with that bit of room to be able to have more dialogue depending on the situation that is on hand. So, Sir, I oppose the proposed Amendment.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I see strong merit in both arguments and I think I should take the middle course.  Now, let me start with the argument of hon. Doctor who has been speaking.  These regulations are not mandatory, I agree.  At the same time they can give the wrong signal to potential investors in this country.  for that reason, we should think carefully where we really want them to be part of the Legislation.  The committee is not precluded from negotiating with any particular potential investor as to how we can manage to give some of our property to our own people - Uganda citizens but we should not flood this in a Bill to anybody whoever they are to say - if you are going to buy, then these are the conditions almost to which you are going to be confronted - not everybody is a lawyer.  The distinction between mandatory and not mandatory might itself not be clear to everybody who would like to buy.  

Secondly, look at (c), allowing employers to purchase shares at a discount.  Now, all this really, we are in a sense interfering with the negotiation and if anyone who wanted to come and buy is going to think about this matter - and say well this is a government; this is a law.  I do not think I can make any headway to start negotiating.  So, I would rather in own balance accept the Amendment proposed by hon. Kayonde. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Second Schedule be amended as proposed by hon. Kayonde.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Second Schedule, as amended and agreed to).

THE TITLE

(The Title settled).

MOTION FOR COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and Committee reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
REPORT STAGE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1993 and passed it with Amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION

FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1993 be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Title settled and Bill passes).

MOTION

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I think the happiest man today must be hon. Dr. Magezi who successfully stopped the sale of public enterprises until NRC deliberated on the Policy and Legislation to handle this exercise.  He successfully got Parliament to pass a Resolution to seek suspension of activities related to divestiture.  Now that Government has, as usual, obediently followed and respected supremacy of Parliament and stopped this exercise until you have deliberated on the policy and passed the law, the government now requests you as a House, to rescind the Resolution you had passed suspending divestiture.  

This is the purpose of this Resolution, and it will be recalled that on the 4th March, 1993, the NRC debated and pass a Resolution directing Government to suspend the reform and divestiture of Public Enterprises pending the enactment of enabling legislature.  Government compiled with the directive of a Council.  It will be further recalled that on the 14 the May, 1993 the NRC sitting as political organ under the Chairmanship of His Excellency the President exhaustively discussed the policy of reform and divestiture of public enterprises as initiated by government and found it acceptable in principle and finally resolved to request the NRC in its capacity as a legislature at an appropriate time to reconsider its Resolution referred too above with the view to lifting the said suspension.  

In view of the request by the political organ that the Council reconsiders its Resolution to suspend the reform and divestiture of public enterprises until enabling legislation is elected and in view of the fact that, the Council has now passed the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Bill 1993, I beg to move that the Resolution passed by the Council on 4th March, 1993, be now rescinded to facilitate resumption of the activities of PERD so that the law we have just passed can serve its intended purpose. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.


MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr. Chairman, when Dr. Magezi moved the Resolution to suspend, I seconded it.  I now have the pleasure to second the Resolution to rescind it.  While doing that, I still lament that although we have passed this Bill which is important, I still feel that there is quite a bit which we left out.  The major complaint at that time was, that we are trying to sell enterprises as units which would make Ugandans totally unable to participate. The law we have passed still has that element in it of selling them as units.  It is not going to be long probably when we see Ugandans still behaving in Uganda Hotels mainly as bus-boys whose business will be bringing and removing dishes after the guests have eaten.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Resolution to rescind the other Resolution.  Thank you very much, Sir.

MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Mr. Chairman, I also have the pleasure to support the Motion moved by the Deputy Minister of Finance to rescind the Motion that was moved by Dr. Magezi and seconded the previous speaker.  The previous speaker has doubts about what we have done, but I would like to allay his fears, because what he is saying is fully catered for.  In Section 16, Sub-section 2, and if I can read it for him and I know that the speaker is one of those people who have been advocating for the creation of Stock Exchange, and Section 16, Sub-section 2, will actually facilitate that.  The sub-Section I am referring to, reads as follows: ‘Where a public enterprises is subject divestiture under class 11, 111 or 1V of the first schedule of this Statute, and the enterprise is not already a public limited liability company under the Companies Act. The Enterprise shall - and this is mandate - the enterprise shall be registered as the public limited liability a company under the Act, for the purpose of effecting the divestiture with the respective shareholding as prescribed by section 11 of this section.’ So the fears that have been expressed are fully catered for and all the public enterprises will become public limited liability companies that will have -(Interjection)- I will accept although the Chairman did not accept to give way when I wanted -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman. Let me inform my hon. Friend that he should have a moment to look at Schedule 2, Rule No.6, 9, 10 and 15.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

 DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform this august House that really it is very, very important. But one technical point, Sir, when it was moved, the House said that, suspension will continue until a law had been put in place.  We have just passed it now, but it does not become law until it has received a presidential assent, and therefore, I am suggesting that this Resolution should be effective from the day when this Bill receives presidential assent.

MR. MWANDHA:  I appreciate the information given by the two hon. Members.  First of all, hon. Mayengo referred to a Schedule, but I do not believe that the Schedule will overrule the provision of Clause 16 that is actually in the sensitive part of the Statute. Therefore, I still believe that in spite of what is given in the Schedule, Section 16 must be complied with by the committee.  With regard to the proposal by Prof. hon. Kanyeihamba.  I think he is right that the effect of this Motion should be from the time when it will have received presidential assent.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In light of the clear and legal information given by our Friend hon. Kanyeihamba, Mr. Chairman, and as I had wanted to even show this removal should be automatic upon such legislation in fact this Resolution, the way it was framed, should expire upon the enabling legislation. I beg to amend that the Resolution be rescinded upon enactment of this Bill, in the Statute.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, we are just involved in semantics, I have said here in No.111, that on the successful enactment of the legislation.  If there is no legislation in the country, this takes no effect if you want still to be in those details, we have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Motion for the Resolution carried).


THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I understand that you still have a lot of work to do in the Sectoral Committees and, therefore, you need more time to organise yourselves.  I now adjourn the Council to Tuesday the 31st, August 1993 at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 12.17 p.m. and adjourned until 31st August, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)
