Thursday, 12th August 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(H.E. The President, Y.K. Museveni in the Chair).

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISES REFORM AND DIVESTITURE BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1993, be read the First Time. I say, First Time because I understand that with the other Session, they have been expired. (Applause)

MOTION

MOTION TO SUSPEND THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Rule 85, which says that any of these Rules of Procedure may be suspended with the consent of the Chairman, the majority of Members present.  Under that Rule and under Rule 55, which states that, ‘Bill not to be advanced beyond First Reading at any sitting, unless; this is allowed by the formal suspension by the National Resistance Council.’

This is Rule 55 (1).  I beg to move that the House agrees to suspend these Rules to allow this Bill be read the Second Time this afternoon.  The reason is that, first there is some agency, these Enterprises have been there and really want to move forward to make sure that the Economy runs.

Secondly, this project has some credit that we are seeking and I have been made to understand that unless, we really debate this Bill, and pass its objectives and I hope you will pass it, the credit might last.  These are the two reasons, Mr. Chairman, why I am seeking for suspension of these two rules to allow the Second Reading to proceed this afternoon.   I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now according to this ritual here, will those in favour of the Minister’s Motion say; ‘Yes’ and those to the contrary say, ‘No.’

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISES REFORM AND DIVESTITURE BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I am really very grateful to the House, hon. Members, you can now be serious and mean business.  Hon. Members, the Bill that, sort of elapsed - (Interruptions)- I beg to move that this Bill be read a Second Time.

THE CHAIRMAN: I must call you, hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning -(Laughter) 

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1993,’ be read a Second time.  

Sir, the Bill that elapsed, hon. Members will notice, had a section there, in fact a whole, not part 2 that concerns itself with the running of parastatals.  Now with the elapse of the other Bill, it gave us time to reconsider whether or not that part should be there.  The government thought that really since that really concerns the normal running of parastatals, it is distinct from the objective of this particular Bill, namely, sale restructuring. There was no reason why we should keep that part there.  So it has been taken now -(Interruption)- I was saying that, you will notice that the Bill that elapsed had a part on the running of parastatals, the conduct of parastatals.  Now the government has thought better of this and removed that part from the present Bill. Reason; we thought that running parastatals as such, their conduct was not necessarily relevant to the main objective of the object of this Bill which is Divestiture and Restructuring.  So we took it out.  That is why this shorter Bill is much smaller and I think, much more manageable.

The reason behind this Bill, the rationale behind this Bill has been, as I take it, gone through debated and approved by this Body sitting as a political organ.  Therefore, I should not be very detailed on the rationale behind this Bill. I should however sort of the capitulate reasons why we are having this Bill this afternoon.

First, to promote the expansion of growth of the economy through increasing the efficiency in the operation of these public enterprises through either privatisation or restructuring of such enterprises.  It had been demonstrated worldwide that private sector is more efficient than public enterprises maybe because they have a steak in operations of these enterprises.  Moreover under this policy, government intends to enhance the management efficiency of those enterprises that are not going to be sold off or partially privatised and to reduce financial administrative burden that is imposed on the government by their limitation.

Secondly, to reduce the financial burden on the Treasury.  It is important to note that most of the external debts we are not servicing were mainly contracted to finance operations of some of these enterprises.  For example; the government is now servicing a huge external debt of more than 40 million dollars to the EADB most of which was incurred by government parastatals Similarly, we are servicing a big external debt on behalf of UDB after the parastatals had failed to pay that.  Implementation of this policy is crucial to the day management and stabilisation programme.

Thirdly, to increase capitalization of these enterprises since despite the heavy expenditure on them; most of them are still under-capitalise. Adequate capitalization is a pre-condition for the enterprises to operate efficiently and, therefore, contribute to economic growth.  It is legalised that the budget is constrained and it will not be able to have sufficient resources the next five years or so to capitalise these enterprises.  The only option available is to privatise most of them so that they can be capitalised adequately by their respective new owners.

Fourthly, to further intensify implementation of our policy of mixed economy.  With a private sector taking a living role in production while government continues to provide and enabling environment.

Fifthly, to improve productivity and expand employment on a sustainable basis through restructuring and reform of economic agents including these parastatals.

I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Members, particularly to the following Clauses of the Bill.  Clause 3; Clause 5 and 6, Clause 9, Clauses 11,12, 13, Clause 19 and 20.  And then the Schedules 1 and Schedule 2.  Particularly, I am asking hon. Member to look at these and probably deal with them carefully when they are debating this Bill.  Now, as between this Bill and the one elapsed, hon. Members will observe some changes; I have already talked about the change by taking out that section of that part which talked about the conduct of parastatals.  Now another difference is found in Clause 5.  The previous Clause 5; the composition of the Divestiture, Reform and Implementation Committee is now changed, being cut down considerably, to this size.  You can see this in Clause 5.  The Clause 5; the Committee now shall consist of the following members:

The Minister responsible for Finance should be the Chairman. Then the Attorney General. Then the Minister responsible will define in the Act on the Bill as being that Minister responsible for particular parastatal that is to be privatised or restructured. Then three eminent Ugandans appointed by the Prime Minister on the advice of Cabinet.  We are seeking to bring in the public into this exercise first, to signify importance of the public their interests in public assets how they are run or divested; and secondly, also, to give the public a chance to have their inputs in the whole exercise of sales and restructuring of public assets.

Now the overall objectives of this public enterprises reform are found in Clause 3.  And since these are self-explanatory, I do not think I am going to bother hon. Members with them. Now then I should go straight, therefore, to the importance of the Schedule; that is classification.  Under Schedule 1 we find that public parastatals have been classified into four classes - four or five. There is class one; these are the ones where the state of the public, the state of Uganda should continue to retain 100 per cent ownership. For example UDB, National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC), and Uganda Electricity Board (UEB).  Now these are similar parastatals, the ones where government considers that the ownership of the public should continue to retain 100 per cent because of strategic importance to the economy of the parastatals.  Now these fall under category one.

We have class two, where we seek to retain as government, as state, majority shareholding.  Again the reason is the same but we think that maybe unlike those in class one.  Their rating is not as high as that in class one, therefore, we can afford to sell some of the shares and we retain the majority shares and so and so on.  

Then class three; where the state should retain a minority share.  Now that will allow to the majority to be sold to the intending buyers. 

Class four; where 100 per cent sale should take place.  In other words, the state should divest itself of all the shares in these companies.

The last one is where there should be another sale, no retention but liquidation because of the state of affairs of respective companies.

Now, I will draw the attention of hon. Members to a crucial section - I mean Schedule 2, which concerns itself with guidelines; Divestiture guidelines.  What the Committee should do when it is deciding whether to sell the restructure reform any of these parastatals.  This is on page 19 of the Bill. The really critical rules are: Rules 1, Rule 3, 4, 13 and Rule 15.  Rule 1 reads as follows: ‘The all divestiture privatisation plans due regards with the given to implement the government policy of broadening the basis of the ownership among Ugandans.’  The reason here is that, alright, let us improve the sufficiency of the running and therefore, the productivity of these parastatals.  At the same time it is important that Ugandans, those who can should share, when the state itself as a composed body.  The divestiture itself of this share in whole in part they are saying, let Ugandan citizens primarily buy these shares and own them.  This is what is saying here; ‘That we shall with due regard be given to implement the government policy of broadening the basis of ownership among Ugandans.’ And Rule goes on to say that the committee - The Divestiture Reform Implementation Committee will continuously explore practical ways in which the government can assist Ugandans to participate meaningfully in the acquisition of interest in enterprises being divested and privatised.  There you could see the ways this can be done. For example, employ stock ownership plans, salary incentive scheme; with these we can assist the employees in management of a parastatal that is to be divested to own some of the shares.

Rule 3 states that, ‘The government shall establish the pro tem classification of public enterprises forming part of the programme of divestiture.’ Another words; it is only the committee with the approval of government, which means Cabinet, of course, can decide whether or not an enterprise shall or shall not be divested and restructured.  Of course there is power under this Bill for the Committee to move an enterprise from class one or class five or whatever other class, upwards and downwards; that power is there.  But in addition, reduction should be done by the Committee on the approval of Cabinet.

Now Rule 4 states that, ‘All divestiture plans of the Committee shall take into account the balance between economic consideration, social costs and tangible benefits.’  Now this lays a very heavy burden on the Committee but necessary.  You see, you may have to, in some cases, find that on economic grounds alone, there is no reason why for instance an employee or employee should share the ownership of the parastatal to be divested, on economic pure, economic ground but as social ground might require that this to be so.  I am saying that all these considerations should be taken into account as method of divestiture.

Now Rule 10 on page 22, reads as follows:  ‘Subject to the general policy stated in paragraph 1; the sale or transfer of ownership of public enterprises shall be guided inter alia by the following considerations;

	(a) price offered by the purchaser

	(b) willingness to take on the existing debt

	(c) undertaking to maintain and improve the operation of 		             
                  the enterprise

	(d) agreement to safeguard the interests of the existing 		
                  employees (or indemnify in the case of inevitable redundancy)

	(e) ability to settle the agreed price in a convenient and 		
	     expeditious manner;

	(c) Creation of an opportunity to management and employees on part of 
                  the voting shares capital and enterprise and then the utilisation of 
                 appropriate technology.

Now I would like hon. Members to note one thing.  Some of these are not really condition - some of these requirements might prove difficult in some way, it means that if I want to - but an enterprise, I am a new owner, you say to me you are going to keep those employees there, for instance, now it might be difficult it might be inefficient for me to continue with new production if I keep all these people there but the operative words here are: ‘In the change of ownership the Public Enterprises shall be guided by.’  Now I take this to mean “guided by” and not “determined by.”  The Committee should take these points into consideration but as I interpret it, it does not mean that ‘shall necessarily be a determinant factor in each and everything.

Now Rule 15.  In all cases of divesture the appraisal value of fiscal assets as well as a net value of future earnings of the enterprise shall be taken into account when determining the officer price.  Here again I cannot but point out some cases you might call white elephant cases.  You might think the state might have sunk a lot of money for instance in the salt project, Lake Katwe Salt Project but of course if the state at some point has unwisely invested and want to sell that type of thing, the present buyer must say, “sorry about your past investment but it is not making any profit for the future.”  So these are the considerations to be taken into account.  They should be taken into account but shall not necessarily be the determinant factors as to the final issue.

I think, this is all I would like to say in introducing the Second Reading of this Bill and I commend the Bill to hon. Members and as I have indicated I hope they will be able to discuss it with every vigour and candour.  I beg to move. (Applause)

(Question proposed).

DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, I would like to start by congratulating you and the NRM Government for the handover of ebyaffe to Buganda, and to inform you that the list of ebyaffe is endless.  (Laughter) The Indians got their ebyaffe, the traditionalists have got their ebyaffe and the multi-partyist, Mr. President, also what our ebyaffe. (Laughter)

Mr. President, while still on this very subject I would like to point out that for the ebyaffe in other areas like Ankole, I think great care should be taken, we should not take it for granted that what has happened in Buganda should automatically happen in other districts.  

I now want to come to the Bill.  In principle the Bill of privatisation is supported and I will have no hesitation in supporting it if the Minister can pay attention to a number of crucial issues that I want to raise.  This Bill, I think is taking the NRC for granted.  It want to you us as a rubber-stamp.   You start with Clause 24 of the Bill, sub-clause (1) and (2), want the NRC to rubber-stamp and legalise the sales and transactions that were done before the passing of this Bill.  How can we legalise what we do not know.  We would like the Minister to tell us what the government has already sold so that we can legalise it.  (Applause) We want the Minister to tell us what he has sold and for how much he has sold it and we want him to tell us where he has put the proceeds from those sales before we can decide.  So, unless those questions are answered I will definitely reserve my support for this Bill. (Interruption)

DR. BYARUHANGA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Adoniya Tiberondwa that in a brief to Member of the NRC by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, page 8, there is clear information on various organisations that have been sold, for how much and what has been done with the money.  Page 8, page 9 and page 10, thank you.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, the brief of the Prime Minister is not the Bill we are debating.  In the Bible there is a statement to the effect that ‘blesses are those who believe without seeing but this refers to spiritual things and the sale of Pepsi Cola, for example, Pepsi Cola is not spiritual.  It is economic, it is material.

The dismantling of the Uganda Development Corporation is not spiritual.  We would like to know what has happened to the things that have been done.  What steps have been taken so that we can decide very intelligently?  On this point, The former owners of the Lake Victoria Bottling Company headed by Mr. Kibuuka Musoke are already in court and I think this Clause 24 if discussed in this House is actually subjudice, it is against the laws of this House because the case is already in court.  that is why I would like to propose that when the time for amendment comes that we strike out that clause.

When we come to Clause 5 of the Bill, the composition of the Divestiture Committee, I would like to propose that this NRC that has worked so hard to bring us to this level should be effectively represented on the Committee.  (Applause) 

Then we have the cost of divestiture.  Many expatriates are employed in this exercise and we pay millions of shillings to them that will eventually be paid by the taxpayer and his children and grand children because this is borrowed money.  Expatriates earn up to 10,000 and more dollars per month when the Ugandans who work there hardly earn 2,000 dollars and some of them are just as good and others are even better than expatriates.  We spend millions of dollars to help us sell our dying companies, I think some of these dying companies can be sold by Ugandans without employing expatriate knowledge.  I do not think that we lack Ugandans who are capable of selling some of these companies. I do not think so.  I have a feeling that the World Bank and IMF are creating fat jobs for some of these international civil servants at the expense of Ugandan taxpayers.  I think maybe, in the guideline the Minister may want to include the provision in which PERD can be made a small committee located in the Ministry of Finance instead of having gigantic thing that cost us so much money.  

I would also like to point out that the government seems to be obsessed with propensity to sell.  Recently the Minister of Housing was involved in selling houses. Why are we so keen to sell things? You see selling properties and selling things culturally it is associated with bankruptcy. Are we bankrupt, Mr. President?  Suppose there was nothing to sell, would we not be able to private without selling?  Can’t some of these investors be encouraged to start new ventures instead of concentrating on buying what we made in the past?  

I would like us to consider that seriously that while selling some of the enterprises may be part of the divestiture but the emphasis should not be on that one.  Those who do not want to invest here can invest elsewhere but I think we should emphasize starting new industries, starting new ventures instead of emphasizing selling what we have.  I think we should instead encourage Ugandans to acquire shares slowly in the existing state owned enterprises.  If we do not do that, we have a few rich people who can buy everything in Uganda and the small people will just not be involved in the running of the affairs of their state.  This will make the rich people both local and international very rich and will continue to make the poor people even poorer because these rich people who buy these properties and pay themselves large salaries and can do anything they want with the small fellows.  Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons advanced for selling our enterprises is that Ugandan managers -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I will give each member five minutes, please. Wind up, please.

HON. MEMBERS: Ten minutes!

THE CHAIRMAN: No, ten is too long.  We have already discussed this matter in the closed Session exhaustively and the country is missing a lot of opportunities by holding this matter in abeyance. So, really I appeal to your patriotism to agree with the chairman, that this is the matter that needs to be decided expeditiously and we get moving.  If you go to a place like Tororo there are three big industries there idle and yet the community in Tororo were basing their income on these enterprises, the cement, the fertilisers and the jute.  If those factories were operating everybody there would be very happy, the same goes for the factory in Mbale, the African textile Mill, the factory in Katwe, the salt clay - that is what is there.  The factory in Jinja, the Steel Corporation; the factory in Lira, the Textile Mill and the Starch. That is why I came here today; I want us to finish because I cannot sleep in my house when I see things being mismanaged. By delay this matter we are doing a lot of damage to Uganda and I thought I should come and convey this message to you.  So, please wind up and everybody I will give him five minutes. 

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much and if I know about that Rule before I started because I would have abbreviated but now I am going to follow the Rule, Sir.

One of the reasons advanced is that Ugandan managers are corrupt.  Surely if you are a farmer and you have a manager who is corrupt, you do not sell the farm, you discipline the manager or you change him and I would like also to talk about this aspect of compensation of the people who lose jobs, who may lose jobs in the process of privatisation.  In the Civil Service we have seen that people who have lost jobs, many of those who have been retrenched have not been paid and they have been thrown out of houses, their children have left schools and this may happen to those people who may lose jobs in the industries if care is not taken.

Finally, I have jumped very many things but I would bring out one important issue in the Uganda Gazette. Uganda Gazette No.32 of 30th July, 1993 which is limited to what we are discussing today; the Uganda Gazette, General Notice No.167 of 1993, we have a list of twelve industries, they are being listed for being struck off from the Register after expiration of three months.  This presumes that this Bill is going to pass.  I become suspicious that this Bill is going to pass.  I become suspicious that some of these companies have already been handled and they are the ones you want us to approve without knowing what has happened to them.  These are Itama Mines, Sukulu mines, Agro-Chemicals, Libel (E.A.), Wolfram Investments, Uganda Crane Estates, Uganda Cranes Industries, Hamilton, International Television, Domestic Appliances, Paramount Manufacturing, the Uganda Fish Marketing Corporation.  I do not think we should really have put these things in the Uganda Gazette before we pass this law.  I think, Mr. Chairman, we are settling this -(Interruption)

MR. KAIJUKA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Tiberondwa holding the Floor that he is quoting a category that is being classified as No.5 in the Schedule and I would like to take this opportunity to inform him as a Minister responsible for industries, that most of these appear here but in name because they ceased being operational long time ago although no legal steps had been taken to get them off the register and so there was a requirement for the legal procedure to have them liquidated hence the inclusion in this category. I would like you to be informed accordingly and not to think otherwise.  I thank you.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, many of these, I think about half of them are in list No.4. They are not in category No.5, and in category No.4.  So the Member who is informing me is not informed enough, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, some of these industries already gazetted are actually functioning. International TV Sales is still open, the Managing Director is still in place, the place is still open and we have assets there. Even if we were to go there just now, we would find the place the place still open.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know what has happened in the office of the Registrar of Companies.  But I would like to draw attention that there is a provision in the Companies Act that if a company does not make returns to the office of the Registrar of Companies after when he is required to do so and one year passes, the second year and he does not, the Registrar gives notice so long as the company is registered with the Registrar under the Companies Act and he does not make returns as required, the directors, what and so forth as it should, then they put in this notice requiring it to do that.  If they do not respond, then they can strike them off the register.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, let us now go to the substance of the matter please.  Ladies and Gentlemen, the substance of the matter is that we are debating strategy here of how to revive our economy; whether we should sell these enterprises or should not sell them. I agree that procedures are important but could we decide the strategic question? I am also interested by the other question raised by hon. Tiberondwa about legalising the old sales.  Mr. Minister, maybe you could clarify this later on because I was saying that there are some - this is 24; Clause 24, they are saying that some things were already sold and the Members may like to know.  Maybe, you could clarify this towards the end but please, could we go to the substance? The big issue before this august Body is to decide in the interest of the people of Uganda. Which is the more rewarding way, to go forward?  Do we keep these industries idle or do we sell them so that they are reactivated? Does the government have money to reactivate them?  If the government does not have money to reactivate them, what do we do?  This is the big question.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I am going to finish, Sir.  Mr. Chairman, the very reason why we are here is probably the follow up of hon. Magezi’s Motion.  We are not objecting to the principle of privatisation.  What we queried was the procedure.  And we are still continuing to query the procedure that is not even understood.  The hon. Minister for Justice and Attorney General has just pointed out that many companies do not perform according to rules, you can write them off.  Okay, but we are here now to legalise the writing off and retention of certain companies.  If what he has said is correct, then there would have been no need to include these companies here.  He would have struck them off without coming to this House.  The fact that we have come to this House, we should follow the proper procedures.  Procedures are important.  Definitely, we should be able to improve our economy but we should be able to improve it legally be used to rubber-stamp illegal procedures.  Thank you very much.

DR. BYARUHANGA (Buruli County, Masindi): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for Finance for having brought this Bill.  I think it is appropriate that we address ourselves to this issue of PERD as it is widely known countrywide because in some quarters the divestiture of public enterprises has been viewed as a negative step by the government. But I think, what we have lacked in the past; probably the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning has been public relations.  The Ministry has failed to explain to the people of Uganda adequately what the exercise entails.  In principle, the people of Uganda support divestiture but as the previous speaker has pointed out, it is the procedures, the methodology that has been the centre of contention.  So, I think that is very clear.  In principle I support divestiture; the issue is methodology.  Now, when we look at the Bill, there are certain areas that are not very clear. 

Part 2, Institutional of Framework - Section 5 of the Bill.  This point was very well covered by the NRC Committee on the Economy and a recommendation was made that the Minister responsible for Finance should be the chairman and the reason for this was to change initial proposal that the chairman of this committee should be the Prime Minister.  I would like to disagree here with this proposal.  I still maintain that the Prime Minister should be the chairman of this committee.  (Interjections)-Yes.  The Minister for Finance and Economic Planning has got a stake in these organisations.  His Ministry is the implementing agency.  It would be unfair at the same time, for the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning to Chair this Committee.  So, I still maintain that the Prime Minister should be the chairman of this committee.  Now if the issue is an appeal point, since this is, as Mr. Chairman, you have already pointed out, we are trying to correct the economy and this is a strategic issue, I think I do not see why we cannot appeal to the President to come in if there is any contention.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that it is the committee on the economy and the committee on parastatals of this House which in fact effected the change and not necessarily the government. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so could we resolve that? I do not know whether it is Parliamentary to go forward and backward and not decide anything; because the Cabinet, I am informed, had proposed the Prime Minister to chair this.  The sub-committee of this Parliament rejected that and government accepted it.  Now we are going back. (Laughter) So could we -(Interjections)- Okay, but in the general debate do you have -(Interruptions)

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be just very brief.  Now there is the issue Mr. Chairman, of the procedures of sales.  This concerns valuation, methodology, tendering and all that.  I will not go into details.  I propose maybe at a later stage, that we use a consortium of independent valuers instead of using just one valuer.  This will give a bit of credence and transparency. It will remove room for doubt.  Now the utilisation of proceeds of these sales, the people of Uganda as a whole must benefit from these sales.  The people of Uganda are the ones, through their sweat, who have contributed to the set up of all these parastatals; whether they managed well or managed badly, the people of Uganda have contributed to this organisation.  

Therefore, when we are talking about sale, even to Ugandans, we should be a bit more distributive in character.  The people of Masindi must also benefit from these sales, the people of Kapchorwa must also benefit.  In other words, there should be a deliberate conscious government policy to make sure that all parts of the country get some or benefit from these sales.  I have got in mind here for example, if we have sold Lake Victoria or if we have sold Nile Breweries, the proceeds from this, we could deliberately set up an industrial estate for example in Masindi or in Kapchorwa so that everybody must benefit from this.  There should be a conscious deliberate step by government.  

Finally, under Clause 24; I think somebody has already commented on this.  In addition to the previous speaker’s contribution, this legislation, if we do not or if we just leave it as it is, we shall be contradicting our previous actions. For example, this might discourage investors from outside if we do not put the question of commitment or of ownership of this property.  The example is the Custodian Board; the repossession exercise which is going on.  So in order for us to be consistent in our actions, I think section 24 must be looked at more closely.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now hon. Members, although, some of you have said that in principle, you agree with privatisation.  What we say sometimes does not appear to be in harmony with agreeing with privatisation. Even in principle; forget about procedures.  For instance, one hon. Member has said that selling means bankruptcy. The one who is fond of selling means he is bankrupt.  Somebody said that.  Now I do not think that one means that you really understand the importance of privatisation as a strategy of development.  I am sorry; if you think that is understanding. Then   certainly it is not according to me and if you come here just to display your debating skills, then that is a different matter but I thought we were coming just to solve very serious problems of our country.  Somebody who says in one breath that he understands or supports privatisation in principle, and he is only worried about procedures, then he says, selling is bankruptcy, I am afraid that person does not appear to - then somebody says, I understand the Parliamentary system of the West is just; that somebody says, if the foreigners want to invest here, why do they not start new enterprises?  Why do they buy -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I know about order.  Sit down, sit down.  Could you sit down, please? I know you are going to say that, I am taking part in the Debate. If somebody says, why do they not set up their own enterprise?  Why do they buy old ones? And then at the same time, you say I understand the principle of privatisation; you see, privatisation means you privatise something already there; because if it is a new enterprise, then that is not privatisation.  That is a new investment.  So privatisation by nature means you privatise something already existing, which is State owned.  Now how can you say, I support privatisation in principle but I wonder why these people do not start their own enterprises! So surely, while you are debating, you must be a bit - okay, please.

CAPT. BABU (Kampala Central Division): Mr. Chairman, I stand to support privatisation and liberalisation.  Sir, the methods have been a problem with us and I am quite sure a lot of people will stand up and talk about the methods.  I do support divestiture in all its entirety as proposed but I am not happy with the reform bit. If we are going to reform that is opposed to divesting, it means that the same committee which is going to divest is now also going to consider reform.  I think there are two opposed areas; I think the reform should be totally different from divestiture so that you have two opposed committees the one wants to reform and the other one would like to divest and if it is the same, the tendency will be to divest all the time.  

So, I am a little bit worried.  I know one of the hon. Members believes that we have removed some of their power but I think we should because we have examples in this country where reforms of enterprises has gone on and on one study after the other which has cost this country fortunes. I will give you examples of Uganda Airlines for example where we have had studies and reforms and tailoring and all sorts of things that have gone on.  Now we are saying that when it comes up, we shall also consider reforming some of these enterprises.  And problem, we can divest as many of these institutions as we can but I would like reform to be slightly different.  

I am also not very happy with a calabash given to drink, to sell so many enterprises at ago.  I have a feeling some of these enterprises have got different levels.  I would have liked to see a situation where certain enterprises that cost a certain amount, slightly more people are involved in sanctioning the sale.  For example, Sir, if one was selling - I will take an example, the railways or the Post Office, I would have liked a little bit more participation as individual enterprises rather than to bundle of them together and give this group of people the chance of selling them at their own free will.  There might also be tendency because people want to sell, to starve some of these enterprises and there is a tendency by certain Ministries to starve some of these parastatals of capitalization, of working capital and then at the end of the day, they stand up and say, the enterprise cannot function.  It cannot make profit.  (Applause) Sir, this has happened and we have a lot of examples here.  So that is where I am a little bit concerned for the whole thing. Otherwise, I would like to end by saying, Sir, while I agree with a lot of people privatisation we NRC, we do support the principle; we do and I think whoever comes in with a few changes here and there is making only his own points but I think generally we do agree and we do agree with our committee to the economy. I am only worried about the reform and the starvation of these parastatals.  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have to stand to support the Bill but Mr. Chairman, one of the most important thing is to realise what has caused this dilemma is management.  If management was good and there was skilled management, we could not be suffering hindrance in these companies because they were found with good intentions.  But still nobody took trouble to ensure that these things are money and the people who are managing them are trained; like here in here Uganda, managers are not given a chance in businesses.  Relatives are running businesses.  We have got training schools, we have got projects, people are qualifying in Nakawa, where, where but these people are not employed.  These are the people who could make the economy run.  So, management is the problem.  

Secondly, the technology; all these factories need to be managed; so if we are talking about reform, these must be a need to allow these people who are trained to run management and technology a chance to apply their knowledge which they are getting from schools.  These boys are littering everywhere in town; they are not occupied; they are accountants and so on.  So, record keeping is another problem that hides the facts of the thieves who are stealing from these factories.  

So, I would like these things to be divested because; one, government cannot run these 140 parastatal bodies.  It is too much.  Government manages its affairs politically.  We should have people who are running business, who have enough time to waste doing politics about who is this one, who is this one, but we must manage the affairs of business and the government intention is to make sure that we have in place people who can manage these factories.  For example, if you see at schedule 4 a June Factory which is very vital in Uganda today in Teso I see now people tying cotton with a mere Kasuka when they should be having gunny bags.  They are not there. Such a factory should be our interest to develop because we have got to run our factories.  We should grow even jute.  

So, I think we have amendments to be put in the Committee Stage but let me assure you that we are not against the Bill but only that people though we were hurrying to sell these things.  So, having received the second bill and having allowed this House to divest, to put economic and political scrutiny, we have now realised this bill is good and we should give government a chance to understand that the Parliamentarians are going to participate in that economy.  That is to say this committee should at least have a Member of this House helping the Cabinet; say, for example; the chairman of the Economic Committee, the chairman of Parastatals Committee must be there so that they are sure when we are moving, we are moving together.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and others who have spoken before that the committee on Economy and Parastatals and chairmen of other sectoral committees which are now standing, have recommended the amendment to Clause 5 and also Clause 24. Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU:  Thank you for your information.  So, Mr. President, this is a matter for us all.  We must understand the economy if we are going to get moving. So we should not fear anybody.  If an investor is coming, he should not be treated as first-class; he must be given also to understand our conditions.  I am happy that in this schedule there are reasonable number of guidelines which I must thank the Minister for having done it especially the villagers in Soroti.  They will be watching this gave because there is no factory in Soroti.  So unless there is something to make them realise that we are sharing this economy, it will remain for towns, not for villagers.  So this is a serious matter.  I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MR. MANZI TUMUGWEINE (Rukiga county, Kabale): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill because I believe that government has no business in business. Government should view policy and should direct economy but not engage in commercial activities.  I therefore believe that the only way out is for government to divest out of our businesses and privatise its holdings in commercial enterprises.  The Committee on the Economy with other co-opted Members took more than a week directing on this Bill and they provided a lot of amendments to the government. I am happy and pleased to note that government accepted most of these amendments and therefore, government should be commended for having listened to the Parliamentarians and accepted the voice of the people and taken up all these. That is why the new Bill is different from the old Bill.  The new bill has an input of most of us. 

I am particularly happy that in the section at the end in the rooms if we are looking for procedures, Section 1; in all divestiture privatisation plans, due regard will be given to implementing the government policy on broadening the basis of ownership among Ugandans.  And that is what we are looking for.  Now that it has been put in black and white that Ugandans will be considered, I am convinced that we are moving the right direction.  I am sure, with a divestiture account, then there will be some element of soft loans to lend to Ugandans; because that will be a detail which cannot decide now in Parliament.  That is a detail for the Committee to look at how it can pass on these funds to the entrepreneurs which are provided for in Section 12, sub-section (iv) subject on 14, the divestiture account shall be used for promoting Ugandan entrepreneurs for industrial development and to me, I think, therefore, even the procedure is basically answered; in that, now we know where the funds are going and what they are going to do.  Selling is not but collapsing.  In any organisation, in any business entity, a business or organisation which does not consider selling off some of its subsidiaries as and when it is necessary, then it is mismanaged; because it is unfortunate that the whole of Uganda should have had in the first instance 140 businesses to run when there were other problems to tackle and I think that is one of our greatest crime that we did.  Well and good.  In the 1960s, it was a fashion for the Government to own businesses but I think in the 1990s, it is no longer the fashion and therefore, we can no longer run 140 businesses in this country.  

Therefore, I feel that, after looking at what the Committee on the Economy has done, and after considering this, which I hope all Members have the Amendments provided by the Sectoral Committee on Finance and Planning, I think we should really move very fast, pass this Bill and begin divesting. Divestiture does not mean that we shall sell everything at the same time. We are only giving a programme of how to divest.  We are giving a programme of class one, of the areas where Government should have an interest and these are basically infrastructural organisations like U.E.B., water and others.  Where our economy at present is unable to provide the capitalists that can actually run them and we are also giving class 11 where the Government can in initial stages actually have the majority shares.  But in the long run, I believe should also get out of the those businesses and give it to the private sector and that is why I think 

Although there will be some small Amendments here there, the Minister will be given some latitude with his committee to ensure that as time goes, they can see which areas - which businesses they can move from section 1 to 11, 111 to 1V and or, if it is the national interest, moving from three to one, depending on what we think is our national interest. Therefore, I believe, that if one read carefully this Bill, you will find that there is need to sell and selling is not bankruptcy but that selling is actually reorganisation of the enterprises.  Allow me to comment on reform and divestiture. Reform as defined, and I am sure we have got that Bill, in Section 2, allow me to read the definition of reform. Reform means the strengthening and improvement of the policies and procedures of a public enterprise and of its relationship with Government. And divestiture means, transfer of the proprietary interest in the public enterprise from the state and includes, where necessary, the winding up of resolution of that enterprise. Therefore, as we said, those that we keep must be reformed, restructured, to be efficient and produce and to lead to a situation where the economy is moving forwards and not backwards.  Therefore, I believe that this move we are taking is a crucial move, a necessary move, and something that we must do expeditiously.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Point of procedure. Mr. Chairman, recently, we adopted a new method of work in the House.  We broke ourselves into committees and this Bill has received attention from our Committee on the Economy that amended as hon. Manzi has just said.  The original Bill that was first read here, I never saw the Second Reading.  Government took those considerations into account.  A new Bill came, and then we broke into Standing Committees. This time and the Standing Committee which is chaired by hon. Luwuum; the Committee on Finance and Planning has considered this Bill and made specific recommendations and further amendments.  

Also, the committee on the Economy has looked at this Bill and made joint Amendments with the Committee on Finance.  Included on that Committee was also the chairman and the Members of the Committee on Parastatals. This bill has received sufficient attention from the Members.  For purposes of expediting our business, it will be very important for us to hear from the chairmen of those Committees so that, they can tell us whether the new Bill has proposed by the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning still requires our further scrutiny or not and if those Amendments can be of interest to us, then after their contributions we would then go into Committee Stage and listen to their Amendments where we need a lot more time to discuss specific Amendments, section by section as proposed by our own Committees.  While I am still on this procedure, I would like to say that the amount of efficient and the amount of democracy exhibited in this building these days, is so recommendable, that I am sure that this being the first Bill which is going to receive this type of method of work is not going to escape the attention of Ugandans.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think hon. Karuhanga has made a very good point on the best way to proceed.  So, the chairman on the Committee of Finance Ben Luwuum, let us hear him first.

MR. OKELLO LUWUM (Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Our Committee, being a Committee on the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning - so that this Bill falls within the scope of work of the committee. So, yesterday, we decided to take off time - the time of the committee in order to scrutinise the Bill and this, we did yesterday and we came out with certain recommendations and Amendments which we have brought before this House; and we worked around the clock and by noon today, we have already printed all the Amendments and the Movers of those Amendments are printed on the papers which I am sure, every Member already has.  If you do not have the papers they are outside, you can go and collect the paper from outside.  So, without wasting too much time, I do not know how we are going to proceed, but I could go through the Amendments.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Should it not go to Committee Stage?

MR. OKELLO LUWUM:  I see, well if this was a general report, then I have already finished my report.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we have heard from the other chairmen of the Committees, hon. Rwakakooko.  Okay.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Than you very much, Mr. Chairman, your Excellency.

MR. BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with comments raised by hon. Karuhanga but both of these reports by chairmen of various committees concern Amendments and these Amendments are going to be moved while we are in the Committee Stage; where they will have opportunity to read their Amendments explain and defend them; and debate them.  At this stage, we are supposed to have got the Amendments.  All that can be raised here, are some general issues which I think Members should be allowed to do and then the various Committee chairman, when we go to the Committee, can in detail bring forward their Amendments, explain and defend them.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay to compromise, I will allow six more speakers on general issues, then the chairmen will speak later on.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for the opportunity.  If only hon. Nekyon could give me an opportunity to make a contribution.  Protect me from hon. Nekyon -(laughter)- I think that for us who have been observers to the development of our country, at a time when our country has received microscopic analysis of all sectors of human endeavour since the NRM came into power in 1986.  When all theories of economy have been advanced by our leaders in the NRM. First, I think we came in as strong socialists or so, it was alleged and we were very keen to make sure that the peasants and the workers be seriously represented and take over the management and charge of the economy.  

We then tried to make sure that the entire business was in the hands of Government to the extent that I remember our President moved from upcountry to come and attend to an emergency situation on sugar; so that the sugar could be distributed by RCs.  The parastatals alone had not controlled a sufficient economy, and the economy was even being handled by the RC system; even sugar was being distributed by RC. We then found out that, if you want to import tractors, you bring them and take them to Namalere and then the Minister would be able to distribute tractors.  These tractors then had to move on to the sub-county level in the hope that the sub-county RC system would look after our agriculture better. 

We also controlled the money aspect, such that Bank of Uganda became the centre of attraction of all business and commerce and if you did not have a friend in Bank of Uganda, look and behold, you had to become bankrupt.  Slowly by slowly, we found out that these methods were not going to help our country. I want to thank our leadership for having changed to see that this course - the road they were driving to, was a disastrous road for our development. People may have accused us of having relied too much on World Bank advice and International Community advice, but surely why not? Because these people have been telling us to do what we should have told ourselves to do in the first place and if we think that what they have told us to do is not right, and we try to pursue a system that we thought was best and we find that it is not working, why can we not try their method? If it fails, we will leave it, but so far, all indications are that if you liberalise the economy, if you make sure people do not go back to Bank of Uganda, if you give Forex Bureau an opportunity to operate, if you liberalise our commerce, if you can reduce Government weight from our peoples shoulders and just leave Government as a referee, not a player, the people of Uganda can have an opportunity to do their work and make our country move from point (a) to point (b).  

We now have a decision to make.  Uganda must decide to be a losing nation, a static nation or a winning nation.  to get into the winning nation class.  Our country must first of all look at itself as a key player with other countries. Are we measuring the competence and performance of Japan?  Do we have an opportunity to get to that level? Can we start now? How do we compare with the countries that surround us?  Do we have a chance to take advantage of our geographical setting? Can we liberalise further? If we liberalise, are we going to be a winning nation? What are the economic advantages of our country compared to the disadvantage?  Looking at our centrality, looking at our role in PTA, looking at our leadership? Our leadership capacity we have now -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Is somebody keeping the time?

MR. KARUHANGA: Five minutes, you said, I have only done two minutes. If we look at the factors, and we play a role, taking into account the nature that God gave us, the beautiful, fertile land we have, the beautiful climate we enjoy, all we have been lacking is leadership, key, visionary leadership that can martial us towards advancement and I think we have found the leadership; we have found the correct policies and we are on the move to the development. I am glad that this NRC is going to make the key decision to move from where we have been - backwards, towards the front stage of economic development in Africa.  I think it will be great to live in Uganda. Thank you.

MR. ASIKU (Terego County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  This Bill has been discussed by our committees in various stages and in principle, the House as a whole, has agreed with the Bill.  I will have a few things to commend on which should be improved upon.  One thing I would like to tell the Government is, accepting the recommendation to amend the old Bill where a lot our own wishes were accommodated on class one. Our biggest worry was that, it appeared the Government was willing to serve this country completely and make the government as a body that had no property.  When we look through the new Bill, there is a lot of accommodation, and I am happy that some of these properties must really be diversified.  

On Item 1, of the Bill, I have something to say.  The problem here is when we want some of these important Ugandan properties to be still maintained by Government, we have this problem of corruption or mismanagement.  In fact, most of the items under Clause 2, and those which have collapsed under Clause 5, a lot of it has been mismanagement and corruption. Unless we have a Clause somewhere, this class one will suffer the same effect, and I wanted a provision so that these properties are protected and they are common good.  I have noted of late, also on the industries.  It seems to be a threat from the managing side, maybe, from the various Ministries. Certain industries in Uganda tried their best to recover, but during the time of recovering, I think certain individuals who want to own - because the wind that these properties might be sold, and they are interested in it, sabotaged the effort of the Managers so much so that; the factory actually died.  They were frustrated, and the factories could not perform.  The reason was that they were not granted money.  The fault should not have been of the Managers, but the fault could have been in the method we use money to rehabilitate or to restructure some of these industries.  That also has been noted.

Lastly, I have a comment on Clause 24. Clause 24, is unfortunate because we shall be derived from the start, that is the most metal of disposing some of these properties which government on was wrong.  We expected the Government and the Ministers plus the Cabinet to advise the President, so that the Bill should first of all come here and we get it passed, men would endorse.  Unfortunately, many of these industries or a few of them - the one I am talking about, is the Pepsi Cola issue.  I am not clear of my figures, but the purpose I am saying, this industry was owned by over 700 people, a number of them being Ugandans. Now, if this is true, I take the procedure of selling this particular industry would be to get the consensus of the shareholders.  And if the consensus of the shareholders was not sold, then it becomes a court case.  I do not know how Seguya to endorse if he says when the court is going to decide to relax.  That is a pity of my fear, but otherwise if we do agree, and if we can be explained very clearly what has happened with the manual realised from the sold goods?  We may be in position to solve the problem that comes again.  With these few remarks I support the idea.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, the last people on this side will be hon. Sebaana Kizito, then I will come that side and select three people and -(Interruption)

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  All the parastatal Bodies, Parastatal Companies have failed to tell us what they are.  Although their acts setting them up, provide that they should be giving to this House annual accounts at regular intervals.  I do not speak that there are any that have done so.  Therefore, we are discussing something we do not know about. In the Schedule in this Bill, the Government will retain ownership of some Parastatals in some degree, others 100 per cent, others minority, other majority.  So what I am advising is that, when the Government retains ownership to any degree at all, we should insist that these Corporations tell us how they perform their functions, because at the moment we do not know. (Applause) 

I want also to say that even where the Government retains 100 per cent, like in the case of Uganda Railways Corporation, there should be nothing to prevent the Government from licensing another company that wants to operate in that line of business.  The important thing here is as you know when we - some of us did accompany you when you went to Europe, we accompanied you at our own expense, we found that there are many, many countries which are looking for overseas investors.  Some of them are European countries, while others are African countries.  Those that are European countries are mainly in Eastern Europe that has got a lot of advantage over us, one of them is proximity, the distance from major investors to these countries.  They are very near, they have got advanced infrastructure unlike us. There is also the developed labour that needs little training, and so on.  Therefore, we have got a lot of competition on foreign investment.  

And when we talk about private investment in Uganda, we mainly mean foreign investment, because Ugandans have no money to invest.  If they did, they would have invested long time ago.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. HIGIRO:  Mr. Chairman, I do not think the hon. speaker is right to say that Ugandans are so poor, that they cannot have the money. Mr. Chairman, Ugandans are rich, the only thing is that he is failing a way of informing them.  There are many people Mr. Chairman, who would buy shares even if they are illiterate, they do not know how to read and write, but they could be informed and they buy shares.  We need to have a system that is simple enough for our people to know.  If you go round this city and outside, you will find very many houses which are new built, they were not built, they were not built by foreigners, they were built by Ugandans. So Ugandans have money, and we need to have a system that can encourage them to bring the money.  Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  I have got the whole information, and if Ugandans have money to invest, I would like the hon. Member who is a business consultant to inform them of the business opportunities they are, so that they can invest the money. (Laughter) 

The brief intervention brought me the point which I want to make namely, that these Public Enterprises which we want to disposal, should be analyzed in such a way that there are shares - that the value of their shares is well known so that if we want to involve Ugandans, the kind of Ugandans which hon. Higiro has in mind, we should be able to offer shares to them so that they can sell them.  I mean, they can buy them, and that way, we may have the opportunity of having a person in Masindi owning some shares in a business located in Kampala.

Lastly, I want to caution that the population is very keen on looking at how we are going to treat the proceeds that are obtained from the sell of public enterprises.  I know that some of them may be difficult to sell.  We may find that we have no buyers or we have no people who are willing to pay money, as long as there are people who are willing to operate that enterprise, we should give it to them and charge them, at least it is better, if an enterprise is working and is producing some income to the local people and possibly some tax to the Uganda Revenue Authority, rather than sitting there just saying that I have got something of my own which is not doing anything.  With those few words, I think my time is over, thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, on this side, I will have hon. Ndege, Rev. Atwai, then Dr. Luyombya.

MR. NDEGE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I support this Bill. First of all I would like to say that, this is very timely with dying of communism, it has shown us that Government is unable to control or to do commerce and therefore, there is right for us to say, let Government leave commerce to the people.  But out of a hundred and seven companies that are here, 47 are going to be retained by Government. 100 per cent 17 Government is going to have a majority shareholding.  I really highly doubt that anybody is his right mind will put money in Uganda Commercial Bank as a shareholder, when the President is the one going to appoint the Managing Director to run that enterprise.  I highly doubt that anybody will put money in Posts and Telecommunications when it is the minister who is gong to give the orders on how these corporations are going to run.  T

herefore, it is my belief that Schedule 2 or Clause 2 should get it out, where Government owns majority sharing in any commercial enterprise, I think we should go minority.  That is I think very important, otherwise most of these 17 will stay idle, nobody will be willing to invest and Government will keep losing.  If we do that, I am sure we shall increase the tax base.  Because we have seen that B.A.T. alone contributes 20 billion shillings to the tax to government.  Now, none of these all these added even including those we want to retain, all the total contribution to government does not even equal to BAT. So, why should we hold onto such a dream? Let the dream go.  Let us divest these - let people buy them, and then we - let them contribute to the economy and we let the taxpayers burden a legal business.  I understand that a lot of our public debts arise from borrowing for setting up all these Corporations and this is very sad.  Therefore, in order to save the taxpayer in all the burdens, I am appealing that we sell almost the entire lot right except those of strategic nature, and I say that we should not insist that only Ugandans, but Ugandans do not have the money.  

So, if we say, it is only Ugandans who should buy, who put the money in that account, nobody. So, if you have a NIL account, how are you going to help somebody who does not have? So, I think we should not be discriminative at this point, if our G.D.P. is only 5 billion dollars. And I think the President also said Belgium is 5 million people, have a GDP of 170 billion dollars.  This coke is big.  So let us not hold on the small dream.  Let everybody who comes to contribute to this economy and let us say that these bad managers who have brought us to all these calamities should find another job.  Thank you very much. (Applause)

 REV. ATWAI: Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Bill or the Motion that has been brought with the following observation.  My observations will come from the Title of the Bill, then Clause 3, sub-section 2(a), I also have something to say about Clause 9, 24(1), and the first Schedule.  The Title of the Bill is  -(inaudible)- is very good if it includes the word “reform”. It is supported by the first schedule where you find that in some cases government is going to retain some of those enterprises by 100 per cent. So, it is not only going to retain and keep it as it was, as it is, and as shall be.  It is going to make sure that it is strengthened.  It is strengthened so that it generates more sine dine it was doing, as it was to running them.  

Then in Clause 3, I would like to delete if it need be, as sub-section 1, I think it gives back to Clause 24(1).  I am doing so because many times we fear making retrospective laws.  Retrospective laws will make some of these Front Bench people take the laws into their own hands.  They will go ahead and implement certain things knowing that at a later stage, this House is going to get them out.  And this is very unfortunate, and that is why sometimes the outsiders have always said that we do rubber-stamping here.  A law is a law.  Make any Cabinet Minister with a very good policy present it to the Colleagues in the Cabinet, then thereafter, bring it here so that we legislate upon.  So that it goes and it becomes law.  But to begin from the reverse and bring it here is very unfortunate.  

Then in Clause 9, hon. Asiko was saying that sometimes some people may sabotage some certain things.  The statement there remains a bit vague when it says that, any unprohibitable enterprise government will have a final say whether it is making profit or not, at the end of the day, that government is going to remain one person. Whoever has an interest in that particular enterprise, is going to empress upon the Cabinet Ministers that this one must go and it goes.  And that one is very unfortunate and I think, at an appropriate time, I will come up at a Committee Stage and propose that, that particular Clause be deleted.  Then in Clause 20, if Mr. Teddy Cheeye is to be believed you will find that there is - referring it to investment authority that is already waiving taxes for the rich people. (Interjection)- 

I made the preposition that if Teddy Cheeye is to be believed in court.  We will find that either these people in the investment authority have some good friends whom they will like to cover, it is just a matter of looking at you and then they say, for you, you can go and enjoy whatever you have owned for about five years or more.  I think this has to be checked very, very strictly.  And in Clause 24, as I had already expressed my views, when we say that some of these Clauses must go, we are not opposing the Bill as such, we are improving upon so that we get good laws.  Then in the Schedule -First Schedule, a very wrong impression is created in Class 3, where you can see that Lango Development Corporation as to have government minority shareholding. Anybody who does not know what this Lango Development Company is, may think that it is a company formed to develop only the Langi.  This is the dead cassava factory, the dead starch factory.  And if we are to sell it now, who will buy that defat thing? (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. I would like to give information to the hon. Rev. Atwai on Class 3 of Schedule of First Schedule.  As a matter of fact, there is no need for the existence of this Class 3. There is no need for Government to retain - to legislate to retain a minority shareholding.  It can like any other person apply if it wishes to be a shareholder in these listed companies.  So these companies actually should be scraped off or maybe together with Class 4. 

REV. ATWAI: Your Excellency, this is very good information if it is scraped that I will go ahead and repossess the Uganda’s Spinning Mill which is also falling in that category -(Laughter.)  Government has sunk hill a lot of money, Your Excellency you climbed up and you saw the work done.  But as I talk now, nothing is being done down stairs. So that other industry is , therefore, as good as a go-down for our simsim.  So, I think my only consolation, which is leading to support this Bill, is in Schedule 2 (i), guideline No.1 that is saying that it is for benefiting as Ugandans.  I think we need education to start right now, so that if we are to go and buy Nile Hotel, we can say each share is 100,000/-. Then we know who the shareholders are.  How much money we have realised to be able to be proud of buying something in the art of our capital.  I beg to support.

DR. LUYOMBYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill but I would like to go through a few Sections.  If you look at the First Section (1) of the Schedule (i), I have got worried there.  As already has been hinted on, if we are not careful, there may be damaged done and we should be strict as Parliament and probably legislate against some penalties which could be imposed if gross mismanagement is done in these areas where government in retaining 100 per cent.  There are examples where under government management complete industries have been plundered.  For example, there is East Acholi Ginnery in Kitgum.  Through mismanagement, some people thought they could enlarge the capacity of the ginnery by first grabbing the entire ginnery and building a new one. But they could not get off from the ground when they attempted that. Secondly, the Steel Mill at Jinja belonging to the -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member on the Floor regarding East Acholi Cooperative Union, that it is not true that some speculators thought that they would get a new ginnery if they broke the old, this in fact was a government project, that is why the ginnery was broken down.  Thank you.

DR. LUYOMBYA:  Mr. Chairman, that is what I have said, under government management they wanted the - to improve the capacity of that, instead of adding on, they plundered the whole thing and thought they would build a new. Secondly, the Steel Mill at Jinja, by 1970 this Mill was operating and profitably too.  It was producing about 22,000 tonnes of steel. But someone somewhere, under government management hoped they would improve the capacity by first plundering the entire mill and rebuilding a new.  What we have on the ground today is civil works, and some machinery on this side. Still looking at Section 1, I am glad that Uganda Development Corporation is mentioned.  Because there has been an attempt to scrap Uganda Development Corporation and this has caused annual rest amongst the employees we did not know their future, and it has affected the performance of this organisation.  I hope now it is clear that Government will not come back to us and say that they are scrapping U.D.C. they will allow it to operate.  

While we divest and resell or reform, we should divest and reform what belongs to us.  This Government and this country have not developed a policy of nationalisation.  Now, in Schedule - part 2 of Schedule 1 No.16, Steel Corporation of East Africa.  This enterprise is unregistered and the shareholders are the Madhvani Group who are holding the majority in shares. And UDC in fact, let me tell the Members that by 1972 U.D.C. had 23 per cent in that enterprise.  Then they wanted to increase their sharing and applied for more shares, so that they could be raised to 47 per cent.  But unfortunately, that difference has never been paid for. So in effect, UDC owns 23 per cent of shares in there.  Now, if we put it in Class 2, where government is going to hold majority sharing -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the position of Steel Corporation of East Africa is more involved than that he presents to the House.  And I was going to suggest to him that at an appropriate moment, the House will get an opportunity to perhaps get the details because we have been moving from one position to another.  In 1972 it was a different position and at some stage Madhvani Group was given the opportunity to manage the Steel Corporation under a different name, recently government decided to form an independent new company owned by government against the confusion. And therefore, if we are not careful, we may end up with respect, misleading the House.  

Secondly, with your permission, I thought I would underscore the point made by the hon. Member and the previous speakers by just giving a bit of information on the state of some of the enterprises the way they are operating, to help them understand the plight of Government we are in -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I will ask you later on after you have spoken to give some information.  Wind up, Dr. Luyombya.

DR. LUYOMBYA: Mr. Chairman, there is a lot of documentation which is in the Ministry of Industry and I am sure the minister knows and he is trying to avoid the problem.  Also in Schedule; in Part 4, where government is going to divest fully.  No.8 associated much company.  This is a small subsidiary owned by Madhvani Group again where Government has no shares. I do not know how they are going to divest fully where they do not have any share.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I thought, I could give information also.  In the Bill, one way of privatising is to repossess, so it is mentioned here, that one way of privatising is repossession.  So if indeed it was formally owned by somebody, they can repossess it, it is in the Bill here.  So let those friends of yours put their claim clearly. (Laughter)

DR. LUYOMMBYA: Mr. Chairman, by mentioning thing, I wanted this House and Government to avoid unnecessary legal wrangles.  Thank you very much.   

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  Now before I call on the Minister to reply, -(Interjection) the chairman will speak at the Committee Stage. (Interjection) Okay, can we get information, five minutes, please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I will be religious within your time form, in giving this information.  I am saying Government faces a very critical situation in managing public enterprises and I just want to take this opportunity to just give quick statistics on, for example, if you take one year which is 1992 on the nature of performance and I will pick two areas one whether we made or what loss we made and capacity utilisation.  Last year we made a loss of 250 million, capacity utilisation 9 per cent. Associated paper industries, we made a loss of 77 million, capacity utilisation 8.  Hima because of huge loans, we made a loss of 2.4 billion and capacity utilisation was about 25 per cent. Tororo is almost redundant it was at about 6 per cent and obviously made losses as well. Uganda Livestock Industries 245 million, utilisation 5 per cent.   Blenders that made a nominal profit but capacity utilisation was 6 per cent.  PAPCO made loss of 94 million, capacity utilisation 2 per cent.  ATM capacity utilisation 12 per cent, loss 355 million.  Nytil made a loss last year, of 270 million, capacity utilisation 40 per cent.  TUMPECO just bear with me, because I want you to appreciate why there is some urgency in terms of addressing some of these public enterprises. TUMPECO, made a loss of 29.8 million, capacity utilisation 18 per cent. UGIL; because of huge debts last year made a loss of 627 million, 26 per cent capacity.  Ceramics made 102 million loss at 6 per cent utilisation. Agricultural Enterprises made a loss of 669 million at about 25 per cent capacity. Uganda Tea Corporation made a loss of about 1.5 billion at a capacity was nearly excellent, over 90 per cent. UGMA made a loss of 1.1 billion.  I can go on and on. 

The point I am making here is this, I thought I would be given an opportunity to make just two points.  Apart from the losses that we are incurring on day today basis, it is correct when Members say that Government has sunk money in other Enterprises and we have nothing to say for it.  One, Lake Katwe Salt Project we have sunk in 24 billion and things is right dead, Cultural arguments apart.  

On the East African Steel Corporation; we have sunk in about 17 million and I agree with hon. Member, the thing is just stuck apart from producing nuts and bolts; and I want to also mention that even when we make money and I will give an example, in a big enterprise like Coffee Marketing Board, Government perhaps it is the highest capitalised company one of the highest capitalised, we have sunk in or we have equity of about 60 to 70 million dollars.  But although they made profit last year in 1992, of less than a billion, if you are looking at the return of capital - if that 60 billion was yours as an entrepreneur, that is not money to stick on.  In terms of strategy it is wrong, you maybe, spiritual in approach, it will be wrong for you to mix up your spiritual vision with business vision -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister on the Floor that there are two information. One, that when I was the Minister for Industry I performed better than that and point two, I thank for the Minister to preside over that kind of corrupting industry, I think in all fairness he should tell his resignation. (Laughter)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, since the hon. Minister who is now holding the Floor of the House is a captain in industry.  I think from what he has given us is very educative that we as a House, the highest quantity of bodies, should see to it that all these industries that we set up, we should tell the Managers there that any industry - any business that they have not made a profit is creating poverty in Uganda, so it is taking us to hell other than to have. (Laughter)

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU: Point of information. I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The information I have for the hon. minister on the Floor apart from the beverage industries in this country, I would have liked the hon. Minister to give us the statistics of the private industries in this country that we have not performed and their efficiency.  Because the atmosphere, even of the private industries in this country, is not very good.  The output is not the best.  So, when he is giving us, the Government, he should give us private industries also which are there because his statistics, as far as I am concerned. I am taking them with the pinch of salt because even the private industries in this country apart from the beverage industries, are not performing and their output in not good because of certain constituents put forward by Government.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no. Let us get moving, please. Let us get moving.

THE MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka): Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank Members for giving me information.  If I may start by hon. Tiberondwa with a full respect - my Brother hon. Tiberondwa from Igara County.  I just wanted to inform him that if he had not presided and handed crumpling enterprises, I would be a better and happier Minister than I am today.  

Secondly, I just wanted to inform that in fact if it is violent for the injection of the dynamism we have put in, the little that was as you know, he used to be allocated, so Ugandans never even saw anything.  So, I do not have to continue with debate, I think the general public knows how you presided over most of those industries. (Laughter)  

Secondly, I note the point made by hon. Babu.  He will appreciate that I am the Minister in charge of Public Enterprises.  In other words, it is not by mistake that I am talking about Public Enterprises; which is my constitution my responsibility.  In other words, I am saying, I also have facts relating to private sector performance.  The performance within the last two years, Mr. Chairman - (Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, there are two points where I should be clarified.  First of all, in my view and I think, it is a view of everybody, which the Minister of Industry is surely in charge of all industries, private and public.

HON. MEMBERS: Right.

MR. MWANDHA: Did the Minister clarify that actually as far as the set-up of government is concerned is only responsible for public industries?  And has nothing to do with private industries.

THE CHAIRMAN: I can clarify for him that, that is not so.

MR. MWANDHA: The other point, Mr. Chairman, the Minister has given very serous information of the big losses being incurred by other industries.  But I think we should tell this House what the causes of these losses have been - he is misleading the Minister by simply standing here and telling us, this Industry has lost so much this Industry has lost so much.  That Industry has lost so much, this industry is working at the certain capacity, without actually telling the House what the causes of these losses are.  If the Minister is not in the position to give us this information now, he should really prepare this information and make it available to this House. (Applause)

MRS. NSUBUGA KAGGWA: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. In addition to what hon. Mwandha has asked for clarification, I would also wish to be clarified on over what period where those losses made.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. KAIJUKA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take this opportunity to clarify one point; and that is that I am not blind to the fact that, I as a Minister for Industry looks after industries whether they are public or private. Secondly, I want to take this opportunity to say that all figures available and published officially by the Ministry of Finance and Planning indicate that we have had very positive industry gross and that was largely attributed by Private Sector.  In other words it goes without saying that if you go into beverages, soap industry, and the related industries, Private Sector has performed extremely well and we need to commend them.  The point we are making here is one.  Mr. Chairman, with your permission -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Minister to tell us where these public enterprises for which we are equally concerned as to how much resources and investment government released to these institutions and they failed to perform.  Two, I would also like him to tell us what he did and how much of government debts these institutions are being owned.  The thing is the constraints that make them not perform and whether he is aware of these constraints.

MR. KAIJUKA: Mr. Chairman, in fairness to me, I did not have the opportunity to talk about problems of Industry as such. I came in to give information because we are debating the divestiture bill and I thought this important aspect of public enterprises was relevant as a piece of inform and I can assure you I will take this opportunity to inform the Members if need be, I will tabulate for their information. For their information, this kind of information I have read out and if possible articulate what money we have injected in terms of outstanding loans for their own information; because I will just not do justice to all the industries in response to Members’ comments, for their benefit.  

But going back to the point I was making on hon. Mwandha’s point, I want you to appreciate that the private sector participation in industry has been commendable and second to none in terms of contribution to GDP.  I can tell you if our public sector had not let us down, if only we had move at the speed at which we had wanted, if only cement factory had review, if steel was working, if NYTIL had got joint venture people, the debate that we are wasting time on, on discussing finance where we have budgetary constraints and limited tax base, the situation would be different.  I am saying, Sir, that if it was not for what I sometime call poverty mentality that has really stopped us from developing, we would have moved miles and lastly, Sir, I wanted to say that capital is cash globally.  Every country is yearning for capital, every country is rushing to have their economy and those countries have not been - have not had the problems this country has had.  We are down at the bottom, others are above us, we have to run instead of walking.  So, my last information is, please bless this bill so that we can reform those we retain and divest as quickly as possible.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, let us get moving. The Chairman is hon. Rwakakooko, the other one is -(Interjections) So, I have got two chairmen; hon. Rwakakooko and hon. Kanyomozi.  Hon. Olum has already made his contribution. He finished -(Interjection)- Yes, be brief, five minutes. (Laughter)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I would like to start by just giving some little information. It is not my practice to come back to a statement made by a Minister who is supposed to be the line Minister.  But I think we must always correct information.  We must also pick correct information so that some people are not embarrassed.  I have read Nytil owing 23 million dollars. Nytil has never owned 23 million dollars.  Nytil owes less than 7 million dollars; Nytil’s accounts are audited and the Annual General Meeting for 1991 already held, we made profits.  Since the beginning of Nytil in 1956, this company has continuously made profits.  The government injected directly into Nytil 20 million shillings in 1988 and yet they have been reaping billions of shillings.  Government does not owe Nytil. Nytil is owned by people who pump in notes; they are the people who take dividends by way of interest, and I would like this understood.  (Laughter) 

So, if you give me information, I would like the matter of industrial production to be handled properly so that we do not engage in this kind of exchanges in this House.  I would like to stand and be counted for those managers who work hard. I would like do so without fear.  When I went to Nytil in 1990, the company nearly collapsed.  The government in a letter surrendered it to me from the ground when the losses were about 1 billion in addition to 4 billion that had been accumulated.  In one year, we reversed the trend, and we made a profit of 30 million shillings.  We paid more than 1.6 billion shillings in - can we have a look at these industries more seriously than just glossing over it? I am a very soft manager and I would like to make just a few points.  All the very many points that I would have made have already been included in a report number five of the Committee on Economy working jointly with one on Parastatal bodies. I would like to pose a question.  Is it the practice of the executive to refuse to acknowledge efforts for people in this Parliament?  (Applause) Is it the protocol in this country? Why did the Minister for Finance keep quiet about the efforts of these committees that worked for nearly 50 days without tea, working up late? 

I never had a Sunday, I never had a Saturday, I never a Public holiday in June. I woke up at three o’clock last night. I cannot continue with the Ministers behaving like this! (Laughter) I would like to suggest that leaders give credit where it is due.  I would like leader in this Council, leaders of the Back Bench to provide leadership by acknowledging failures, by acknowledging inadequacies.  Having said so, the Committee of the economy was not in this Parliamentary Protocol referred to in this Bill.  We took it upon ourselves as a duty of this nation, and as Parliamentarians of good intentions, to have a look at this Bill without reference from this august House.  We did so within the mandate of the committee of economy as given by this august House. We were guided by the desire of this august House to pass a good public policy.  We were guided to have the government that is operating and endorsing open methods of work. We were guided by the desire for the Parliament, an executive, to involve the Ugandan public. We wanted to save the public from spending money aimlessly, pumping into loss-making parastatal bodies.  That was the drive behind our study and revision of this bill.  I will demand that the Minister for Finance, when he responds, he gives credit to criticisms.  (Applause) I would also like to suggest that there are many, many Ugandans outside this Chamber who put in a lot of man-hours, very many man-hours.  For those, if the Minister does not want to acknowledge, I do so on behalf of this august House, on behalf of the Minister too. (Laughter) 

So, I would like to suggest that what we have contributed is already here.  I would like the hon. Minister to endorse it entirely on behalf of the committee and I take full responsibility.  I would like to endorse with gratitude the government’s positive response to our observations. (Applause) I must be on record to beat the Front Bench on this matter on behalf of Back Benchers. (Laughter) 

In fact, this bill is not a government bill.  This bill is bill of the joint efforts of many Parliamentarians under the central - not command, please - under the central guidance and coordination of the committee on the economy.  Many members of this august House have had an input into this bill.  So this bill is a collective effort of the executive and the Back Bench.  May I appeal to you Sir, that from now on - and I am saying from now on because these committees that we have recently set up are permanent committees. May I appeal to you Sir, that from now on, the executive comes closer to Parliamentary deliberations; the legislature. (Applause) If you do not do so, I am sufficiently trained in government procedures.  I will pull you from where you are and believe with in.   (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please, make your point and finish.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  So my point was that the reason why we got this far, why PERD was suspended, is because government kept a distance.  And we are saying, please, do not allow us to go to that extent any more.  You must not allow us.  Sir, I want to also make an appeal that the outstanding amendments that we have made with the committee on finance and planning, should go well to the Front Bench. We have made them in very good spirit.  Finally, Sir, I would like to appeal to the government on behalf of those people who are going to be socially destabilised by the economic adjustment in the process. I am talking about people who will need re-training so that they can find employment in a new area.  I think this is one area. As a human being myself, I would like to see government pay more attention so that we do not see a situation developing where people are going to be so unemployed that they are going present very miserable faces.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am going to be very brief.  I am going to be brief on these matters because I am sure the majority of us Ugandans do realise the need and the urgency to do something to the public sector in this country.  We also do realise that the resources we have an our disposal given that we have got to support the social sector and the infrastructure in this country, needs no money to be shifted away from the parastatals to both sectors like education like health, like roads, like building up power supply and things like that.  So we do realise that and it is in that spirit that the majority of us nearly all of us do support the government move to privatise these industries and where possible, to sell them off or even to close them up.  That is point number one.  

Point number two, while doing this exercise, we would like us to take account of the fact that no nation builds itself up without the participation of the indigenous people and in the provision of this Bill - in the spirit both in the Schedule and in the main Clauses of the Bill, we have made sure that, that participation can be realised.  I am saying that the foreigners can come and we welcome them but we should also know that when they come, they take back dividends and that can also be a drain on us.  Even in countries that have developed, a good market economy - liberalised market economies.  There is always that insistence of seeing a percentage of the industries being owned by the people who belong to that nation. (Applause) 

Up to now, getting Quotes Companies on the Japanese Stock Exchange is still limited.  Up to now, the British had stopped a helicopter manufacturing entity falling into the American hands. Up to now, the Americans had stopped British Airways from taking over certain lines in America and these are the citadels of capitalism and free enterprise.  So, we are saying, let us sell but let us take into account the fact that Ugandans ultimately are the arbiters of their own destination -(Applause)- and knowing you very well Mr. Chairman, I am not being personal, that spirit I am sure it is still with you; and let us keep it that way.  

The other aspect that I want to emphasize is on ownership, even locally.  We want to democratise ownership.  The problems of monopolies, I think all of us have realised them and we want to move away from them.  If we make these shares available in quantities that are small - initially using Institutional Structures that we have; we will be able to get the Ugandans to participate.  Now, let us also look at what we are going to retain.  The reason why the Joint Committees and the Sectoral Committees have re-introduced part (111) of the Bill, which I will be speaking to in the Committee Stage, is that those things which we are going to retain must be seen to be manage in a manner that is accountable to us as a nation.  (Applause) 

It is not that know most of these Institutions are established by Acts of Parliament.  We know they are registered but they have failed to perform. The need to emphasize these things in this Bill is to let us move in the right direction because we are not only divesting, we are also reforming and restructuring.  Whatever we restructure must work with the new spirit that we are trying to establish. Let me also touch another issue.  The programme of implementation, we know that countries have been doing privatisation.  We are not the first ones to do so; but let us not be pushed too far; bearing in mind that we want to participate.  There is the amount we can swallow.  If we sell everything in a hurry, if the market is flooded, we may not get the value that we should get.  That is point one.  Point two; if we do it in a hurry we may not achieve the very things that we started with the intention of doing.  So, we are saying let us -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the original intention?

MR. KANYOMZI:  The original intention is to sell and in selling.

THE CHAIRMAN: To sell and get good value?

KANYOMOZI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is one but two.

MR. KANYOMOZI: And also to democratise so that we can retain part of the ownership here.  When I say democratisation.  I mean the ownership being spread.  I will give you an example, Mr. Chairman just - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Those are two but the third one is - you see really I do not know how to debate in your - because you must be very serious about what you say.  The biggest problem we have today is that these facilities are idle.  They are not doing anything.  It is the biggest problem. 

MR. KANYOMOZI: I am going to come to that.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is the biggest problem. They are not doing anything. You get the situation like the one in Tororo; the Cement Factory is idle.  This is the same story in Soroti.  This is the biggest problem.  So, how will this be achieved? To me this is the most important.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, that is equally important to me.  We want to shade off those that are not making any profit.  That is why we shade them off or close them.  We sell those that we cannot manage. We again sell to the people starting from with us. (Interjection) Not RC I If the Resistance Councils (RCs) in Shema can do that maybe, the RCIs elsewhere can; but let me say in Thailand for example when they started the programme - in Thailand to give an example, they made it open.  What I fear is the situation like in Russia where you go headlong and then you cannot contain it.  I am saying we go gradually like partly like the Chinese are doing and will still get there. We could increase on the Chinese speed in our liberalisation or the Hungarian speed in our liberalisation but still get there.  A flood sweeps everything and I think the Eastern European experience especially in the Soviet Union is not a good example of how we should move. Let me try and conclude because my five minutes are over. Maybe if there are any problems we will try and discuss them with you at a later stage.  

Let me assure you that the majority of us want these things in private hands but in doing so we do not want to create situation where we make a handful of multi-millionaires and the country is held at ransom and the leadership is also contained by those few people who can manipulate us. So, that is why we are saying the spread of ownership -(Applause)- is very important.  We all say  -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I also want to inform hon. Kanyomozi that I have been following closely his arguments.  Sometimes I have got lost, if he can help. If one is a rich man today, he can increase his wealth even if he did not use that wealth to buy properties now proposed to e sold. So, the argument that if you are selling instead of maximising the profits to the public by selling to the best offer, you compromise in order to spread the poverty generally on average. To me it cannot be understood because Sir, if the public is getting rid of its property, the public would like to get the highest offer from what it sells.  Then if it gets the highest offer, then the public can re-invest this highest offer into another venture.  So, I would not like an argument where we say we compromise on what we get from what we sell in the name of the public.  So, I would like him to clarify clearly how he thinks, this can be done.

THE CHAIRMAN:  And I would also like hon. Kanyomozi to clarify whether the problem in Russia is being flooded by a buyers or having no buyers at all?

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Exactly, if the market -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, in our economy we do not have an aggressive directing philosophy of the mixed economy sunk into us; because we talk of democracy as the hon. Member holding the Floor Mr. Kanyomozi has stated, we do not have to rush as the Russians did or in the Central Europe. If we went steadily, under the philosophy of a mixed economy because a mixed economy allows both the public sector have some adequate nature to consist, to sustain the economy as well as the private one.  So, that is the only way - the philosophy you can which you can do which will be to all of us if we are a broad-based government.  It is the economy that is based on a mixed economy. Meaning what? Property owned in democracy.  My cow is my cow. My ente is my ente. That is all we want.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  In actual fact, why I was going to reply to the hon. Deputy minister is that I am not encouraging spreading poverty, I am encouraging to spread wealth to all Ugandans.  As for your question Mr. Chairman.  Yes, the problem in Russia is that there are no buyers.  Then if we open up everything and sell it, they will not be any buyers and it will be cheap.  I mean it is your law of supply and demand at time.  That is why I am saying we gradually approach what we can sell and sell it at the most opportune time.  We are not opposed to selling.  Let us sell and sell quickly.  As we get buyers, we sell.  We sell bearing in mind the other conditionalities that I stated that the Ugandans are involved.  Let me try and wind us; wind up on the issue of the Schedules as I see them.  

These Schedules will not be static; and I hope the ten (10) parastatals which are in group one will gradually move to group two and gradually move to group three and gradually move to group four and those of them which will not be performing, will be closed down.  That is another point.  The other point that I am closing with is the mobilities of doing so. I know most people are going to say we do not have a Stock Exchange, we do not have this but we can float companies even without stock exchange.  I think we should encourage that to take place and if we do so, then we open up that transparency that we need in the ownership.  Let me assure you and the government, in the Front Bench that we are all behind this policy and we want it implemented if possible yesterday. Now that we are going to pass the Bill, we hope it will be and the implementation will be quick.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I call upon the Mover of the Motion to reply.  And do not forget to thank all those who contributed. (Laughter) 

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. members for the candid way which I asked for in which they discussed this Bill. 

I think I should reserve my last remarks for the hon. Rwakakooko since the Bill has been generally accepted.  I think I should comment on just a few points.  First of Clause (5); the composition of. An Amendment is being submitted to me and therefore, I should reserve my reaction in response to that Amendment until Committee Stage is reached.  On Clause 24; I must say, Sir, that in every Bill where action has been taken and taken legally by government or by Legislature, it is usual to include such a Clause to make sure that rights which have been created should not be nullified by a later Legislation.  In other words, rights created cannot be retrospectively taken away.  

This is why Clause 24 is included in this Bill.  As for hon. Luyombya’s problems concerning The Steel Corporation of East Africa Ltd., concerning The Associated Magric Co. Ltd. This government has no intention of taking what does not belong to the public.  If you prove that these companies belong to those people you say they belong to, we shall naturally let those people have these companies.  I would like to draw your attention to what is done before in relation to Nile Breweries.  Nile Breweries was returned - and you know it - to Madhvani’s group because we found as a matter of law, it belonged to them.  Why do you now account for and doubt the good will or good faith of the government in this matter.  We shall not take what does not belong to us.  

Now, Sir another precious allegation, has been made, that this government has deliberately denied funds the parastatals with aim of making them unable to operate.  Then I ask the question; if these are parastatals, how did they come into being? Who capitalised them in first place? Who did? How can anyone then say that government deliberately destroys what it created in order to sell it? Mr. Chairman, I do not think I need go on further on this sort of line of argument.  This government does not and will not destroy public assets by refusing where necessary to fund it and  -(Interruption)

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister of Finance that, the fact that a company is dying, does not make it a good candidate for privatisation.  In fact, if you want to privatise, it would be - our task in privatisation - would be much easier if the companies were viable, were doing well.  So, the theory that we denied these companies money in order to destroy them, nezikonziba to make them really go sick in order that they sort of qualify for privatisation is completely erroneous. (Applause)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, had I known that this allegation will be made here, I would have come armed with the amounts of money which have been given to these companies since they were started.  Finally, Sir, I would like to address myself to the structures made by hon. Rwakakooko.  The hon. Rwakakooko seeks to blackmail cabinet into doing things of his own way by saying, we shall pull you down. Now, when a Minister comes to Parliament to present a Bill under his name that is a formal declaration of accountability on behalf of that Minister.  How could I come here and say; Minister of Finance and Mr. Rwakakooko and the economy and whatever; that I could not do.  

Secondly, listen because I will give him a chance to speak.  I stood up here and said on a point of information that the Committee on the Economy, that the Committee on parastatals had already looked at this Bill and in fact, there was no reason - this was because of that reason as made statement, hon. Elly Karuhanga stood up on a point of procedure. Now, if it is the question of giving specific praise to particular people, then maybe the Permanent Secretaries and the Officers in my Ministry, and members of the cabinet who had about so many hours on this Bill; I should also call all of them to come here and give them praise.  Maybe including my small way even my little self. I do not know! But I really think, normally a lot of thought goes into Bills.  I do not really think that it is the practice of this House that when the Minister stands here, he says so and so did so and so.  I have already stated that the Committee on the Economy, the Committee on Parastatals did look at the first Bill that elapsed and made Amendments. I would also like to state this and I did not state this before; that when they made the first Amendments, I went to that Committee and I also convinced them to amend the Amendments that I made but I have not come here to praise myself.  So, let me say this really.  I do acknowledge the may hours which the Committee spent -(Applause)- but I would like to point out that a number of these Clauses - many of them in the original Bill that lapsed, were never touched by the Committees on Economy, the Committee on Parastatals and therefore, we said for anyone to say the Minister of Finance should be pulled down because he will not say so and so. I think really is rather out - for what is worth I want to say that when we come here, Sir, to present Bills we cannot go through whoever did what to be able to praise them.  (Interjection) Let me finish before they can give information, Sir.  You see -(Interruption)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Mr. Chairman, I would like the hon. Minister not to misunderstand that we are looking for personal credits.  I think we generally saying that this Bill, probably unlike any other Bills has involved a lot of many parties, individuals, Members of Parliament, government, I just wanted an acknowledgement of all the parties; not necessarily for the NRC Committee on the Economy alone.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is no problem. When we write a book we acknowledge all those who have contributed.  There is no problem.  (Laughter) 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I think, Mr. Chairman, on that great comment from the Chair, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members before we go to the Committee Stage, I must say how worried I am.  I am really a bit worried about not only Uganda, but also about Africa as a whole.  There is a lot of conceptual confusion.  It is incredible - such a small thing takes so long to be understood by the people who are concerned.  So much, so that there is paralysis in decision-making. First of all, even the question of procedure and in this one the cabinet was at fault because they went and started privatisation without involving Parliament - which is really a conceptual problem.  That is the first conceptual problem; because surely the people concerned should know that this matter should be handled by so and so -(Applause)- so that it is not really difficult to know which matter should be handled by the Muluka chief -(Laughter)- and which one by the gombolola chief; so that the people concerned deal with the matter in the time allocated.  But this was not done, so Parliament came in - now we had to go back.  Now, this is what I call confusion; conceptual confusion about all these different people involved.  

Coming to Parliament itself, when I hear your contributions, I am not sure that you really all understand what you are talking about.  Of course it is alright to have different views but surely something - if there is this House here, we cannot say that it is not House and call it different names.  That is confusion.  That is not different perception.  It is just confusion. We say that, we all agree to privatisation in principle - this is the story I have been hearing.  We agree to privatisation in principle but in the same breath.  We hear somebody saying something that is actually against the whole idea of privatisation.  Then it comes to how we can operationalise privatisation - that is why I came here today. I said Gentlemen, I am ultimately responsible for this whole arrangement - so, could I go and see these hon. members; to see where we are going to go.  We cannot go on like this. Rwakakooko is talking of credit.  I do not if we were to allocate credit to different individuals - who will take the most credit? I go outside the country and I campaign to clean the bad name of Uganda.  Uganda had a bad name.  This republic with the monarchies inside and so on -(Laughter)- had developed a very bad name.  If you do not know this, then maybe you have got a very short memory! We go and work and campaign and talk and convince people to come.  First of all, convince people to come and give us aid, loans and grants.  Secondly, to bring capital.  When they come they find themselves in the quagmire of the internal confusion. The cabinet is doing the wrong things, the Parliament is doing something else, the Investment Authority is doing something else, the City Council is doing something else, and this cannot go on.  That is why myself I am always, even when I discover a mistake, I gross over the mistake because I want to go to the main point.  The main point is that we need to attract new wealth. This is the main point.  

Even if these people have made a mistake or the other man did not do the right thing properly, I say, okay, let us now move and go to the main point.  But when I listen to the arguments, I really do not feel sure that people know what they are talking about. We have got some countries, we have got models; Kanyomozi is talking of models, but there are many models. There is South Korea, there is Singapore, there is Malaysia, there is Thailand on the one hand, and on the otherhand, there is Burma.  Burma is a very rich country in terms of natural resources, richer than all those, there is no country in South East Asia which is as rich, in terms of natural resources, as Burma. Burma has got forest, gold.  It was the biggest grower of rice at one time but you go and compare - because you are talking of models, there we have got a perfect model, economies which opened up, and economy like Burma which closed in. The model is there, and you can go there to Rangoon; you can go there today.  Singapore is just rocky; there is nothing in Singapore.  It is just rocky, and it is a small island.  Burma is a very big country, with a lot of natural resources but compare to two.  

Now, when we come and talk - we met in the Parliament in the closed Session the other day, I even wrote a document to you, to try and separate this idea of linking privatization with indigenisation, but from the way you are talking, it seems we did not get any closer.  My view is that privatisation does not have to go with indigenisation.  I want to repeat this one here, because everybody will be answerable for what he does.  Historically, I hear you record what we say here, so, please, record my statement -(Interjection) Okay, if it is automatically recorded, I am now repeating it; I do not agree that privatization should be linked with indigenisation, especially, during the stage of economic recovery, we are not yet talking about development in Uganda, we are talking about recovery.  Recovery means somebody who has fallen on the ground just stands up or sits properly; somebody who has fainted is revived and sits back in his chair, which is what recovery means.  This is irrespective of whether you will move or what you will do subsequently; we just want him to sit in that posture; that is all. That is what we mean by recovery.  

Now, when you start talking about indigenisation at the state of recovery; minimum recovery not even just to get things operating normally, to get balancing the Budget, to get goods producing in the factory, consumer goods, to get some roads opened up, that is all; and at that time we are already a welfare state - you want to give free wealth, to this, you want to distribute wealth, where is the wealth you are going to distributed?  We are talking of just recovery, the man who is down, we want him to sit up, once the man is up that is when you will be able to discuss what he will be in future. Now, the man whom you are getting from down to sit up, you want him now to start distributing wealth; where is the wealth he is going to distribute? We are talking of recovery; minimum recovery, which is what you are talking about.  We are not talking about a welfare state; a welfare state means you have got a surplus, and then you distribute the surplus to those who do not have anything.  

So, may I, because we shall be answerable historical.  May I say that my position is that I am totally against the idea of mixing up recovery, privatisation in order to achieve recovery with privatisation in order to achieve indigenisation.  May I also tell you hon. Members that in order to indigenise, you must first of all recover, especially if you want to use state resources to assist people who are not able to stand on their own, you must first of all recover, you must first generate a surplus in our budget so that you can use a surplus to support those who are not able to stand on their own feet. I do not see how you can support the weak in society with perpetual Budget deficit.  I do not see how you can do that.  Now, this programme the reason why I am moving this programme of privatisation is that I want the State of Uganda to generate enough resources, first of all balance the expenditure on daily operation, balance the recurrent Budget, then balance the development Budget, then remain with surplus which we can use to subsidise those who are not able to stand on their two feet, whether it is in society or in business.  But you do not wait for this, you want too indigenise right from the beginning when the man is down. I cannot agree with this, I am afraid although we say we agree in principle, but we do not understand what we are talking about, and we do not even understand the principle nor the tactics.  

Let us take the example of BAT, BAT is what would be in class three because the Government has got minority shareholding, that BAT which is in class three is giving the Treasury of Uganda Shs.20 billion in taxes annually, Mpigi district with 1 million people is only able to raise Shs.800 million. So, it will take Mpigi District 24 years to raise the same amount of tax revenue that BAT raises in one year -(Interjections)- Shs.22.5 billion. Yes. Now, this BAT that is in class three according to this schedule here, is contributing revenue to the extent I have mentioned.  If we had a hundred BATs, a hundred factories like BAT, not necessarily in cigarettes, but such factory in 6 textile, another one like that in cooking oil, another one like that in beef, another one like that in leather, another one like that.  If we had a hundred of them, Uganda State would collect revenue of Shs. 2,200 billion annually.  Our Budget this year was Shs.800 billion Recurrent and Development both of them.  

So, Uganda would have a surplus of Shs.1, 200 billion, Uganda will be a donor country -(laughter)- we could give foreign aid.  So, I am really infuriate when I see people mixing up things and bringing something of tomorrow being it today, I am not really amused, I must tell you.  Distribution of wealth will come, but how can you distribute wealth when you do not have any? This is very, very dangerous, this line you are taking of mixing up things of tomorrow is very dangerous and it is my duty to tell you.  Because something can bring a sweat argument that leads to disaster that it is now time to distribute wealth, distribute what? Can I serve any supper here now? I have no supper to serve. Even if hon. Members here moved a Motion and say, 

Mr. Chairman -(laughter)- the House moves that you magnanimously serve supper, I have no supper to serve and the eyes have it. (Laughter) I have no supper to serve, if I want to serve supper, I must go and prepare supper and it will take time maybe, I may serve supper - if I start today, I may serve supper at 10.00 o’clock, that is assuming I get something to cook and so and so forth.  So, please, my personal opinion, in fact, I did not even get a chance to discuss this thing when it was in the Cabinet, because I was busy, doing public relations for your country. Had I been in the Cabinet, it would have been different, some of these things I would not have put them there.  But my personal opinion that I am telling you today is that the time today is to recover not to spread wealth, just to recover. By recovering, what do I mean? One to restore production in all the enterprises full production 80 per cent production; the government cannot do it, these public companies cannot do it, even Rwakakooko’s Nytil cannot do it.  We have got a better chance with private companies unutilising capacity to the full so that Hima produces 400,000 tonnes of cement as it was supposed to do.  So that, Rwakakooko Nytil produces 40 million metres of textiles as it was supposed to do, and it is now producing 23 million, is that not so?

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Will actually, the capacity was supposed to be 29 million metres and 40 million only after pumping in dollars 37 million, so it is now producing between 12 and 15.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, that Nytil is supposed to produce 30 million metres, it is producing now 12 million metres, and in order to bring it to 40 million metres, we need to borrow, Uganda needs to borrow 37 million dollars.  So, why not, if we are lucky to get buyers; the problem is to get buyers.  What I am worried about is that even if we pass this thing here that has taken so much past that we shall not get buyers, this is my worry. For you, you have got imaginary fears that buyers are dying to buy these enterprises.  My fear is that we shall not get buyers at all, because as you hear there are, especially, these days, there are better opportunities in other areas in Eastern Europe, in Argentina in all these places; even if you pass this Bill, I am not sure that we shall get the buyers.  So if we had more of these factories, for instance, like BAT Uganda would change completely.  

Now, there is a question that some people are asking. The question is, why do the public enterprise make losses? Of course, and you are blaming the Minister that the Minister is not supervising and so and so forth, but there is also a question of strategic.  What our Government is suggesting to the country is that even with the best of management public enterprises have got a tendency to be inefficient.  Of course, with poor management the situation is worse, but even with the best of management, public enterprises are not as frugal as private enterprises.  This is what we are telling you, it may be that the corruption in the society has made the situation worse. But in other countries like in Britain, in other countries where they could be more accountability, they have had to get rid of these enterprises, the Steel Corporation, the what, what, they have had to get rid of them, and they are slightly more accountable than we are.  I admitted the Managers, make the situation worse, but even if the Managers are good, the tendency is that public enterprises will intend to be inefficient.  That would be my answer to what they were asking hon. Kaijuka there.

Now coming to this Bill here, because I am going to withdraw, now that is have brought you together, because my job was to bring together so that you sit, because me as a patriot I am concerned.  I see my country losing opportunities and I have now brought you together.  I had to persuade the Vice Chairman to reschedule the Budget, because for Budget you are talking about, Budget of 1993/94. Here we are talking about our strategy for the next half a century. So I thought the strategy for a half-century was more important than the annual Budget.  

So, I am glad that I am about to withdraw, I will leave the Vice -Chairman, but before I withdraw, I do not see why the Minister and the Cabinet - because I did not have a chance to contribute there; this class two, why do you need to have majority sharing in this class - majority - because when you say you want - like for instance, Uganda Commercial Bank or Kinyara Sugar Works or Steel Corporation of East Africa.  If you say that, the Government is going to maintain majority shareholding; this is one way of chasing a way the potential buyers, because the private man who wants to come in, will not want to be a minority; because he knows that if the Government is a minority. That is a sign of none inefficiency, because hon. Members of Parliament will be on the Board and then he will bring his brother -(Laughter)- and if I was an investor, I would be reluctant to invest in this one.  

So classifying these as number two is one way of discouraging to participation by private sector.  I would recommend that you will eliminate this category or you only keep very - like the Lint Marketing Board, alright, that is a bit service oriented. New Vision, maybe, no problem but New Vision because we want to maintain a propaganda machine for the State, like the Commercial Bank, unless you say, you are going to do it in stages  -(Interjection)- but will not come in, then, they will keep out until they gain the majority.  Anyway, you can look at that; it is my own view.

Now, then, another problem is, on the Rules you set up.  The guidelines, where are they?

HON. MEMBERS: On page 19.

THE CHAIRMAN: Page 19.  Now, me I have never owned a factory but I own some cows.  Now, when I take a cow to the market to sell, I always look for the buyer who can buy the cow very early in the morning so that I go back and do other things. In order to sell my cow, I make it as attractive as possible and I do not try to inconvenience the buyer.  If I put conditions on the buyer, and I say, if you buy my cow, you must ensure that you transport it by lorry. If you are going to transport my cow on hoof, be sure that you do not buy my cow.  That is one way of stopping the man from buying the cow or reducing the buyers, at least, because some of the buyers, maybe, this like the late Walusimbi Mpanga in the 1950s. He used to come to our area there to buy cows and he would drive them on hoof, all the way up to Kampala.  Now if you want these people to buy, then we say, that they must allow employees to purchase shares at a discount, you know, you tell somebody I will sell you my factory provided when you buy it, you commit yourself to selling shares to your employees at a discount’ I may not like this, but this assumes - what is the other one say? Allowing employees to purchase shares in installments, and so and so forth - I think really, all this goes to show that we do not know exactly that atmosphere, the assumption is that we have got a lot of buyers who are dying to buy and we can pick and choose, while in fact, the situation is that we may not have buyers at all.  My worry is that, even if we pass this Bill, we may not get somebody to buy Hima, number 1, this is my worry.  We may not get a buyer.  

Secondly, Government will not have money to revive Hima on its own, so Hima may die, Government does not have money to revive it on its own and we may not attract buyers.  So, I am trying to trap in two ways, in one way to say, if I could get buyers, that I would be relieved of for instance, the Equatorial, we have Equatorial back to the Indian who owned it, the man has now repaired Equatorial at his own cost, I do not know much money he used.  Now the only thing I will do is to go and collect taxes from him, is this not clever way of using people to do work for you? But suppose we had made it difficult for, as our people are making difficult for the Indians to repossess their property.  Equatorial would be just like Imperial.  Imperial, we gave back but the man did not come.  So, in conclusion, hon. Members, my perception is, what I would like you to share is that, one people willing to buy are not as plentiful as we seem to think.  

Secondly, the priority now is to revive the economy, revive the economy by one getting the enterprises to start operating enabling the state to collect more revenue from these revived enterprises. Later on, we can be able to come to the assistance of our citizens who do not have enough resources of their own to stand on their own feet, after we have collected enough revenue, from the revived enterprises; and therefore, finally, we need to make the offer we gave to the buyer as attractive as possible and to put as few impediments in their path as possible.  Even then, I am not sure that we shall get buyers in which case, we shall have to come back to see what we do, either we borrow or we raise shares from the public which will take a long time because these shares are there but, they are scattered.  I thought I should share these views with you before we go to the next stage, which is - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, the Bill entitled the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill 1993, be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ENTERPRISES REFORM AND DIVESTITURE BILL 1993

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(Clause 1 agreed to).

Clause 2  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. LUBEGA (Rubaga Division, Kampala):  I notice that the Committee Stage as per Order Paper is scheduled for tomorrow Friday 9.30 a.m.  The Order Paper have been circulated and as for today’s Order Paper, we have no Committee Stage, so to be regular for us -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  That cannot stop us from completing this Bill, according to our Rules of Procedure it is quite in order to proceed.


MR. WASSWA NKALUBO (Nominated Member): Mr. Chairman, under Clause 2; that is ‘Interpretation.’  I am proposing that the word ‘book value’ be deleted and we have the ‘net book value.’  When we speak of book value the Minister should be aware that normally book value in accounting terms should be the cost of assets less depreciation; but when what intended this definition can only refer to the net book value.  So, I am proposing that we delete book value and substitute it with net book value, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe-Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, we accept the Amendment.

(Clause 2 as amended and agreed to).

(Clause 2 as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to).

Clause 3

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Clause 2?

MR. WANENDEYA: Yes, Mr. Chairman.  You find that in Clause 2, paragraph 3, under Development Credit Agreement -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have finished Clause 2, we are now on Clause 3, please.

MR. WANENDEYA: Mr. Chairman, this is vital to the Bill in as far as -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 3, please.

(Clause 3 agreed to).

(Clause 4 agreed to).

Clause 5

MR. OKELLO LUWUM (Chuo County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to move that Clause 5 be amended by the inclusion of three people on the drip committee.  The first person to be included should be the chairman of the committee of the Legislature on the Economy and second person to be included should be the chairman of the Committee of the Legislature on Parastatal Bodies.  And the third person to be included should be the chairman of the Uganda Investment Authority. 

Reason for this is that, are we - as Members will agree with me, if this Statute succeeds, the implementation of the Statute, if it succeeds.  It will be a very great salvation to us as a nation and I would like also to ask Members to agree with me, that we, as NRC should monitor the implementation of this inclusion of our Members of NRC so that they can monitor how this exercise of divestiture and reform is being implemented on our behalf; because without that, we as a House, we may not know what is going on.  This Committee is going to do a very important job and that is why our Members of NRC, especially, should be represented on this Committee.  The Committee will decide on how to reform an enterprise.  The Committee will be in charge of the control and management of the divestiture funds subject to other amendments that we may move here.  The Committee will also advise the government and with the approval the Minister will then be able to amend the first or the second schedule to the Statute.  The Committee will also handle and decide on the valuation of the various assets or enterprises to be divested and therefore, that is the reason why I have decided that we make this amendment.

Another Amendment to be made as you can see.  At (d) the three eminent Ugandans to be appointed.  In the Bill, there is no mention that these eminent Ugandans none of them should be a Minister from the Front Bench.  I think that emphasis should be -(Interjection) Yah, to make it clear because a Minister from the Front Bench could still be appointed as any other eminent Uganda. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER FOR COMMERCE TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka): Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the Amendment for some good reasons. One, it is not that government did not want to have chairmen of these Legislature; the Committee on the Economy and Committee on Parastatals but that two tings, one, that they were suggested to be part and members of the technical team which would part of the secretariat with Permanent Secretaries and therefore, they would be participating.

Secondly, there was a more important point and that is a matter of principle where you have the executive and the legislature.  In other words, if we are not careful we may be setting up a precedent.  Where you have a clear separation in terms of rules, you put legislation in place, and it is a proposal by the executive -(Interruption) Can I finish, Mr. Chairman? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Finish, please.

MR. KAIJUKA:  The executive arm of government is supposed indeed to execute the legislature is to put that policy in place and that was the main reason as far as the Cabinet is concerned why we decided that indeed instead of having the chairman at this stage, they would still be part and parcel of decision making at the technical level; because they will be -(Interjection)

Lastly, the point made - this is why there was inclusion of some eminent Ugandans which point the committee agrees with, although, I think the Minister here will explain whether they are two or three, otherwise, it was well considered reasoning.  I thank you.

MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Amendment.  I happen to have sat on the Committee that originally wrote the report No.85, the Committee of Economy. We took into account the need to expand this Committee so that all interested departments are involved at this level.  I think the proposal by government that the chairmen of the parastatal bodies committee and the chairman of the committee of economy should serve on the technical committee cannot be correct because really, that is not the level at which these committees of the House. (Applause) This Committee is really a high-powered committee and I think, it would even help government to ensure that these two chairmen of our standing committees are involved in the discussions and visions at that level.   So that, when it comes to report to this Parliament, the Members of that committee from this House have already supported government when it comes to report in this House.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I strongly support that we should have the two chairmen of the committees to support to the members of drip.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (A. Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I thought I would come in - I want to get this through quickly.  There are two branches or three branches of government; the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.  I am sure the House knows.  The divestiture and the selling and reform and restructuring of these bodies is within the executive branch of government. We, the Cabinet, government will continue to be responsible to this House for the manner in which we carry out that policy.  Now, if Members of the House are going to be involved in it and create a committee in which the government is in a minority and they carry out a policy to which the government does not agree now who shall be responsible for that policy to this House? Precisely for the reason given by my hon. Friend,  Ben Luwuum Okello; It is precisely for those reasons and I want - really a conceptual problem here.  There is a constitutional problem of the responsibility of the government to parliament. If shall we cease to be responsible to Parliament there or shall we come with what we have done and present - so that this House is not compromised in seeing, reviewing, evaluating and accepting or rejecting what the government has done? It is really what is being proposed here is subversive -(Applause) - and (Interjection) Yes. (Interruption) 

HON. MEMBERS: No, no.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Order, please.

MR. A. MAYANJA: If I had completed, it is not subversive -(Interruption)

MR. KASAIJA: Point of order.  I stand on a point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Attorney General and a distinguished Member of this House who seems to say he knows the three organs of government which we all know and whereas he also knows that he is a Minister and has been put on this part, he would have been the first person to say this is going to conflict with this role because I am a Minister, I am on the executive and at the same time I am a legislator.  Now he is having two roles.  Now, is it in order when actually we deliberated in good faith for him to say that it was subversive when actually we want to strengthen accountability and transparency in the way these matters are going to be handled?  Is it in order Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order to say, it is subversive.  Withdraw the word ‘subversive.’

MR. A. MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, if you have ruled so that bit, I withdraw.  The problem is that, the House did not allow me to complete the sentence. 

HON. MEMBERS: No, withdraw.

MR. A. MAYANJA: Precisely, I have said that I withdraw but the  - we can go - can you conceptually really conceive of a committee of 9 people with three Ministers, two Member of this House who are important - who are chairman of the important committee of the House which we are countable, member of the Investment Authority, three eminent Ugandans nine?  Now any combination of that will produce a situation whereby a policy will be carried out because it is a trick.  Now who will be accountable for the consequences of that policy to the people of Uganda and to this House? Will be that committee or will it be the government?  Therefore, you really must consider this matter seriously and maturely. (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT, WORKS AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. When I look at this Amendment on its first appearance, the Amendment looks very nice that Parliament together with the Investment Authority is trying to assist government to solve this problem of divestiture and reform; but when I look back and I see, the work that has been done by these committees in checking government and realising that some of these committees, in fact, all of them are still very, very young committees which are growing to be to check what government does.  This Bill in itself shows how Parliament checked government.  Now the moment you want to reduce that check by collective responsibility, then you are likely to reduce the powers and effectiveness of this Parliament.  (Hear, hear!) 

It might be very appealing to Members to say that we are there, that you are also involved but I think Parliament will be stronger and these committees - if this committee, Ricky knows there is another committee or two committees who are looking over them to see how they do their work.  It is even becomes more difficult when you look at Clause 6 which you are about to approach because in amending maybe, Clause 5, if the hon. Member amending he had amended Clause 6; because Clause 6 says, ‘the committee shall be responsible for implementing the government’s policy on reform and divestiture of public enterprises under this Statute.’ Are we sure, we are taking these Parliamentary Committees to that level? With those few words, I want to appeal to hon. Members not to be enticed with coated positions that will eventually make this Parliament weak and the committees not respected by ministries and government, as it should be.  I oppose the amendment Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like my Colleagues to save a principal, the strength Parliament has had up to date has been that Parliament has been help responsible for what the Executive does.  That has been your strength, and only the areas where we have had some slight problems, has been in areas where we are not both very clear whether that is a Legislative function or that is an executive function.  Those are the areas that have always caused us a problem, whether you are not obeying Parliament or what not.  There is need and I am saying this for one thing, Sir.  When you want a politician in the legislature you always try to belong to Parliament, becoming a Member of the Executive is temporary to a person and can always change, but you must always long for what to revert to a strong base, the Parliament.  So, for me now, I am a Deputy Minister, but even if tomorrow I am not - for the day I will be a legislature and call the government accountable through me to the people and I do not want government to tell me we were together when you are doing that why are you now asking me?  So, today I may want this because I am a part of government.  I do not want as a principal to surrender my power as a legislature to which I can belong more permanently than the executive.

MR. KAVUMA: Point of information. Thank you very much. I want to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor, that in fact, apart from the separations of powers which we all want to safeguard our rules as Sectoral Standing Committees of this House charge us with the responsibility of monitoring the performance of Government through the Ministries; now the question is how do you monitor a body of which you are a part? My information is, we should not be carried by cheap reasoning but good reason should prevail at the end of the day and we legislate and we reserve our powers as Legislators as watchdogs of the population so that we can demand reports whenever we want from this committee and we take appropriate action on behalf of the people we represent.

MR. MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, as long as the Minister still sit in this House, there is no talking of separation of powers.

MR. EKEMU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, its not cheap reasoning really which brings this kind of thinking, I think if you look back it was partly because of the failure on the part of Cabinet or on the part of executive, to operate hand in hand with the legislature that brought about this abnormally.  So, as a result a legislature now tends to take a protective position, and that is why the legislature wants to be represented in the committee. But if the hon. Minister can hold a seat but I would suggest this I would prefer that, as a legislature we must question ourselves.  We actually, play a monitoring role, we must not compromise our position and become executives it will be wrong, it will be absolutely wrong and we made our work very difficult, even we interfere with our independence to criticise this august House.  So, I oppose the Amendment Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: So, Mr. Chairman, I thank hon. Ekemu for his observations but he should also be grateful that I sat down to give him way to give information.  I was holding the Floor and when I gave him way he is challenging my kindness.  I want also to tell my hon. Colleagues, it is true the way divestiture started, the way selling public wealth - you know there is suspect.  There was this fear of saying, whom do you trust to do this, how can this be done like this?  What I propose to hon. Members, you propose timely judicious reporting, time reporting, to you, for you to take action if need be that is better than saying that we better say, let us play the same role together in order - excuse me, I beg Member, one thing honestly, this habit that cropped up in this House is not good for debate, honestly, any Member must be given time to make his point, and then if you want to help to enforce his point you can give him information that may not be available to him.  But we have started a tendency in this House where really debate becomes very difficult because we are impatient, we cannot listen to someone to complete a sentence, I beg that we revisit our manners in public debating in this House, it is good for all of us.  Sir, if I am one of the offenders I must also refrain -(Interjection)- yes, it is not good manners.  Sir, I am urging Member of Parliament that we should say that because it takes time to scrutinise reports in the whole of Parliament, you delegate your powers as you have already done to the committees.  

So, hon. Members, in this area we can still perform the same function of all participating in this exercise but each one at his level, so that government continues to be accountable to you.  When the committee members become members of the committee, Parliament becomes Members of that committee and Parliament cannot continue to demand that the government reports again to Parliament about decisions Parliament has taken jointly with executive; and you are making an arrangement that even in the future generation of Parliamentarians will not really enjoy.  

So, I am begging Members to reconsider and withdraw this amendment, so that Government remains responsible for its own actions for you, you have made your job as Parliament you have legislated, government should not operate outside your legislation and your committees should check on Government whether government is following the law; and if government is not following the law the committee will recommend to you as Parliament to bring government to book.  Therefore, not because we do not have -(Interjection) I want information. (Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much hon. Chairman.  Actually I would like to seek information from the speaker on the Floor whether government has made a ‘u’ turn because if I recollect a position it was government which proposed under their own esteem that the chairman of the committee of the economy should be a member of its committee, this was taught, it was here; now there would be no need to go into this position if you can only consider and say there is a ‘u’ turn our policy is different.  That is the point I wish to give the speaker on the Floor.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  No, let me handle that information first.  I want to handle one information at a time.  Mr. Chairman, there has been - let me answer hon. Magezi, there has been no ‘u’ turn.  The Government proposed the first draft of the Bill.  Although my great friend hon. Rwakakooko did not also say we were very nice to work together because we work together and spend hours together. Whenever he summoned us as a ministry we were there with him. But I think there is no problem.  

When hon. Rwakakooko and hon. Kanyomozi proposed to the Ministry of Finance that they would like us to carry out an Amendment that would involve membership of the two committees, for us as a Ministry of Finance we said there is no problem, but we also said that the Ministry of Finance is part and parcel of government.  The proposers we have discussed with you will be discussed with the whole Cabinet as a Government.  In the process of balancing who is responsible to who accounts to whom, we found that the Minister of Finance daily must account to Cabinet his Colleagues for what he does on divestiture.  But that also Government is doing, in order to allow for these cheques, in order not to say this committee is final, cannot be asked by anybody else we said no, let us separate the powers.   Because I think in the next Constitution really it is going to be on separation of powers; what is the power of the presidency, what is the powers of legislature, what is the judiciary.  We said we better enforce this right now. 

So, Sir, this does not stop Parliament at any time through all laid procedures for Parliament to demand at any time accountability of what is going on.  He does not stop Parliament amending the law that you pass in order to handle matters that are not going very well.  So, it was in this light of not compromising, of not dealing with a situation and leave nobody else to say, please, come to book, that government - what to be responsible together with the people it will appoint accountable to you; and for you know you have stronger cane to hit government if government does not listen, does not follow your laws.  So, as a principal hon. Ladies and Gentlemen I beg you to compromise on this proposed Amendment intended to reinforce the power of Parliament over government.  It is only in light of this that we refuse these amendments, but we encourage you to constitute measures of cheques and balances on Government in this exercise.  So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to oppose this Amendment because solely of this reason. 

MR. KAHERU: Now, Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the Amendment.  You see, Mr. Chairman, the public has been concerned on this procedure for a long time and since the public has been investing money, a lot of money in these bodies for years and losing a lot of funds it is important that they are assured and that the decision making is made wide, and it would be a mistake to try to confine this matter.  You know the hon. Attorney General has raised the point of constitutionality but surely he knows he is talking about a presidential system of government, but here we have got mainly a Parliamentary system, although we may have a President but really it is basically a parliamentary system and in this system Member of Government sit in the House and also some members of the legislature can participate in some of these functions. In fact, there has been a precedent here, some of the Members have been appointed on Boards of Directors, and so on and so fourth.  So I would request that in the interest of this Bill so that we strengthen it and we strengthen the credibility, the Government should accept the widening of this.  Now then there is paragraph (d) I would also want to support it for one reason the Amendment on paragraph (d); the reason for putting on some other Members of the public is that again to strengthen the Committee; in fact, I would propose that when Prime Minister is considering appointment he should be in people of certain calibre for example, valuation surveyor, a person like that, or a very outstanding accountant who by just looking at the papers brought to the Committee could really make a significant contribution rather than putting on politicians.  Thank you.

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA: Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the proposed Amendment.  Hon. Members it has been just this afternoon, you saw the President taking over the Chair, we should have had in the normal Parliament a Speaker taking over.  The President has come in and he has been very effective.  Similarly, the Ministers have been good debaters here and legislators and we have never complained that they should present their reports and go out.  In the same spirit we have worked in close connection with these Ministers, with the Executive.  You see, it would be very abnormal where you find the Minister, of Justice and he is the Attorney General but here it is normal.  In the same spirit hon. Members, this question came in when there was a lot of rumour that our things were being done in the wrong way.  We had the agriculture enterprises that was being donated and we have the worry that if we continue like this who knows? We want to watch what is happening, because these are own assets, our own saves we need to watch what is happening and we are answerable to the messes. I think the Executive should not take it as an offence, since they come in and legislate we can take also the responsibility.  

Recently, we have had another case. We have the Custodian Board in the Custodian Board.  We have here, the Ministers on the Board and we have Members of Parliament; and they have done a commendable job! I do not see why at the time we want to resist, anyway, I know the resistance is very common, but I think in the interest of this nation, I suggest and I think we should accept that, let this House also be represented then we bear, as the representatives of people.  We bear the consequences when we are well represented.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5, be amend as proposed by hon. Olum.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 5, as amended agreed to).

(Clause 6, agreed to).

(Clause 7, agreed to).

Clause 8

MR. KANYOMOZI: I am suggesting Mr. Chairman, immediately after Clause 7, Clause 8 we re-institute what was originally part three on conduct of public enterprises.  The reason for this is that, while we do recognised that all these parastatals that we are retaining unless they are removed from the schedule, have Acts of Parliament and Statute establishing them their conduct has been lacking.  In that Section, the clauses which are in the original deal on page 8, going on, we had provisions which required the companies to present their records, their performance and management contract on how they are going to perform.  There was provision on annual certificate of responsibility.  There was details on how they would relate the Minister, they were also - how they would present their cases and how people are going to be recruited to manage these institutions, one of them is the very thing the hon. Ndege was talking about.  Even when we have a majority shareholding under Section 2, how do we appoint directors, how do we appoint managers?  This section is so important and so crucial to the operations of the remaining parastatals, that I feel very strongly that Members should support it. We in the Committee both of the economy and parastatal and also in the Sectoral Committee on Finance, on looking at the new Bill realised this issue had been dropped the reasons have been given to us, the reason was that we use the present, statutes but the present statute have been there, all along and the complaints we have been having in the system have been that, (1) managers appointed on patronage, they are not appointed on competitive position.  There is no set target for managers to fulfill what this section provides. 

So, it does not take us away or contradict anything, but it only reinforces the system and makes it work more efficiently.  Secondly, Sir, the Bill is for reform, restructuring and divestiture, that part of reform and restructuring will be more meaning full if this section is put back.  I am suggesting - and I am sure my, the hon. Ministers have no objection to this - that this thing be re-instituted because it will make the system work more efficiently, and be more accountable and transparent in its system; and I beg that it be accepted. 

MR. RUKIKAIRE:  Mr. Chairman as my Colleague have pointed out before, most of the provisions which appear in this amended Bill which has been presented today, were subject of extensive discussions between the Ministry of Finance on the one hand and the Committee on the Economy on the other; and as it turned out this particular Amendment which is being introduced by the hon. Yona Kanyomozi happens to be one of those which had been agreed that it should be omitted.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, are we in order to continue without a quorum in this House?

MR. CHAIRMAN: It is not in order, please.  Therefore, we stop there.  Please, move a Motion for Adjournment.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. A. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, now that you have ruled that we adjourn, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Council resumed).

BILLS
REPORT STAGE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. A. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I want to report that the Committee of the whole House was considering the amendments to the proposed Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1993 but did not finish it and will continue deliberation.  Sir, I beg to report.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. Thank you.

ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until tomorrow, Friday 13th August, 1993, at 9.30 a.m.)











