Monday, 18 August 2008

Parliament met at 10.49 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

Parliament was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting and I do hope that during the course of the morning, other Members are going to come. We had to inconvenience you to sit in the morning because last year we were not able to handle many committee reports and Members have spent one year unhappy with our office. So we did this to give an opportunity to all the committees to report so that the country can know what we are doing. I encourage the Members to come and we do business this morning. Thank you.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

10.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. Attached is the Certificate of Financial Implications and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny. Please, report back.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF: 

1)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008

2)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we were expecting replies from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism. At least I was informed that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here. You are there? Okay, Minister of Internal Affairs.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, there were two main concerns that were raised concerning the Ministry of Internal Affairs. One was about dual citizenship and I am glad to report that today the Bill that is intended to operationalise that Article has been read for the first time and the process will continue. 

Secondly, there was concern about fire fighting equipment. I am glad to report that the Ministry of Internal Affairs has received three sets of fire fighting equipment from the Government of China. Also in this budget, a provision has been made for six more sets. Subject to the availability of funds, six more will be acquired this financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you know how they are going to be distributed?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Yes, to begin with they will be managed from the centre but as we acquire more, they will be dispatched to the regional centres.

10.54
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wonder whether government is serious in the sense that over the last few months we have had a lot of cases of fire outbreaks in schools and other institutions. When the minister comes up and says that as a result of the concern for these infernos, government is coming up with an arrangement to procure six fire fighting equipment! When I look at the regional diversity of this country and if these six are going to be managed centrally, what happens if, God forbid, Lumino Senior Secondary School where my friend hon. Gabriel Opio comes from or Terego - well that is your own imagination, there is no district called Nyadri -(Laughter)- so if such an unfortunate occurrence exists, what mechanism does government have in place to come to the timely rescue of these institutions, let alone the people when these six are going to be centrally managed here? 

We know for a fact that even at regional levels and I can speak for Arua, Arua Police Station has no fire fighting equipment; the whole of that belt. Even Gulu, Jinja which is just 50 miles away has a very desolate Mercedes Benz lorry, which cannot even leave the station because it is not mechanically sound. I don’t now what the situation is like in Masaka. Surely, shouldn’t government come up with more serious arrangements so that all these problems that people have gone through where even in Kampala when a building catches fire, SMS and SOS are sent to Police but by the time the Police fire fighting equipment arrives, a whole building has already collapsed. I think government needs to be more serious. 

I would like to seek clarification from hon. Matsiko whom I commonly refer to as my senior granddaughter. Can you assure us that the six sets of equipment that they are talking about are not just a matter of political expedience but are real and will help us? We are saying all this because of the pain that we have gone through. We all know how we lost children here in Budo. Probably if there had been timely fire fighting equipment we wouldn’t have lost all those children and property. So can you give us assurance and clarify as to what arrangements you have in place to ensure that this equipment that you are talking about will really be able to answer the suffering and pleas of the people? Thank you.

10.58
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for that information about fire fighting gadgets. I would like to agree with my brother from the Opposition, hon. Kassiano Wadri that instead of leaving these gadgets here in Kampala where we have private people who have invested in fire fighting like the Fire Masters, I would like to strongly propose that these gadgets, which have arrived in the country, should be distributed upcountry for instance in Fort Portal where I come from. 

We have had a lot of fires and I do not want to remind this august House of the fires in Kicwamba and very many secondary and primary schools in the Fort Portal region. The town is growing at a very fast rate and it can ably serve almost the whole of the Rwenzori region. There are some gargets in Mbarara - I think one garget - but it cannot really come to these areas of Kyenjojo, Kabarole and Hoima. So I strongly recommend that the ones we have got should be distributed to regional police headquarters like Fort Portal and maybe Arua and along those lines -(Interjection)- and Jinja, it would really save us a lot of trouble.  

I want to thank the government for thinking about this because we have a whole department of Police with trained human resource to use these gargets but they have been getting salary without doing any work. We have highly trained people in the Police; we have a fire fighting section in the Police but they do not have the equipment. So I really thank the government for thinking about bringing in these gargets and once the Minister of Internal Affairs comes with a request to purchase more, I would like to request this House that we approve that expenditure because fires have become fires and most of them - I think some of them have been accidents. In fact most of them have been accidents and as these upcountry towns continue to develop, fire accidents are inevitable.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to take these recommendations very seriously and I hope at an appropriate time they will revise the way they are going to distribute this fire fighting equipment. I thank you.

11.02
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know what the minister means by “the centre”. Is it central region or the centre of power?  

Two, in the past the use of fire fighting equipment has been very bad due to shortage of water. When the vehicles are parked the people who live there use the water; they use all of it and when a report of fire is received, you hear of the vehicle going to get water from Port Bell. The property is already burning; for three hours they are still collecting water because the water that should be there all the time for use in case of fire is being used by families. What arrangements has the minister put in place to ensure that this new equipment will not be used the same way? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.04
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to get clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. First of all I want to agree with my colleague, hon. Okello-Okello that in the Sixth Parliament, when fire broke out here at Parliament one of the Police vehicles arrived here empty. They had to go out to fetch water. That meant that it was actually without water. Two vehicles arrived here after sometime but they discovered that one did not have water so they had to go out to fetch water. Fire is a disaster. I do not know why this department should not be re-located to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. 

The other clarification I am seeking is: apart from China donating, was the donation from China a response to a request? Because now he is very fast to say, “Okay we have received this donation.” Was it a request or was it part of the planned arrangement of government who knew, “We need this much,” and therefore when China donated some amount, they said, “Okay we can now budget for this remaining one.”  

Lastly, the clarification I want to get is: you get gargets but what policy framework is in place to fight these rampant fires, which are ravaging the entire country?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): I want to thank Members for the supplementary concerns and questions. One, for the record, there is a district called Nyadri composed of Maracha and Terego and recently -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would be the last person to rise on a point of order against my senior granddaughter, hon. Princess Masiko, but she has pushed me to the wall and I have nothing else to do other than to bring her to order.  

In 2005 during the constitutional amendment exercise, Parliament did approve the creation of a district to be curved out of Arua consisting of the two counties of Terego and Maracha. It is a known fact that since then this district, which was supposed to consist of these counties, has never taken off because of the peoples’ failure to agree on the location of its headquarters. It is further known that a name for the district is only derived from the name of the headquarters; and it is further known that the people of Terego and lower Maracha have petitioned the High Court and this matter is in the High Court. 

Is it, therefore, in order for a person whom I regard in high esteem, who is even knowledgeable and as part of government, she knows very well that there is no district called Nyadri? What is in all government books? Even in the policy statements presented here, is there a district consisting of Maracha and Terego? Is she in order to begin asserting herself on a matter, which is before court and going ahead to give a name to a district whose name first of all is not there? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will not go into the details of what the honourable member raised. But I am aware that there is a High Court matter going on so the matter is really sub judice. I do not know what district there is but for now please leave that business alone until the High Court pronounces what is where and what it is called.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I thank you very much for your guidance but money is going to that district under that name.  But -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): I think this is important information because my good friend was saying that the name of the district must be derived from the district headquarters. I want to inform him that this is not necessarily the case. For example for Oyam District, the headquarters are actually in Anyeke. Also I can say that whereas the people of Otuke are likely to get a district –(Laughter)– the headquarters will not be at Otuke. Otuke is a beautiful hill and for us the name Otuke is where possibly all the people of Lango migrated from, but we are going to have the district headquarters in another place. So, the statement that the district headquarters must always be named after the town where they are located is not true and the case is Oyam. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us leave the business of districts, please!

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Okay, Madam Speaker, kindly protect me from hon. Wadri – whatever the name. 

For the record, the three fire equipment sets I talked about were donated by the Government of India, not China.

Secondly, we are aware as government that there is need to equip this department for fire fighting, but the resources that are available – and hon. Members, you are in charge of voting these monies to these departments and ministries and you know the basket that we have. For now we can only provide for six fire engines. We have been assured that the Ministry of Finance will release this money to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to enable it acquire and add to its stock – and by the way we are just adding.

About the management of the vehicles, I did say that for a start, there will be central management. When I say central, I mean the Ministry of Internal Affairs and not central as a region. But there is also a plan to decentralise the equipment, first to the regional headquarters, not the districts. This will also depend on the availability of the equipment. However, I can assure this Parliament that government is doing all that it takes to ensure that our people are really helped to handle this so-called disaster of fires. 

As for restructuring, you know fire fighting is not only in terms of equipment, but also in terms of personnel. I can inform you that there are people who have been specifically trained under the Ministry of Internal Affairs to do this. I do not think it will be very wise at this moment to transfer this department to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness.

Was this part of the plan? Yes, as government we have a plan to ensure this department is properly facilitated and equipped. So, even the three fire engines we got from India and the six we are planning to get are part of the bigger plan to ensure this department carries out its mandate efficiently and effectively.

As far as the management of vehicles is concerned, I would like to say that this is an administrative issue and my ministry will look into it. This concern had not been brought to the attention of my ministry, but now that the Members have raised concern over empty vehicles going to fight fire, we shall look into it and those who are responsible will be brought to order. I beg to respond, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if there are any other queries, they will come after the Committee of Defence has reported. Can I invite the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry – where is he?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: He will be coming shortly, Madam Speaker, and I apologise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the Minister for the Presidency. She is also not around? Okay then, let us have the Minister of Public Service.

11.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, my response is in writing and the copies are going to be distributed.

The response that I am going to provide is on the issue of pensions in particular. We want to respond to the issues raised by honourable members and those that were raised by the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when discussing the issue of pension reform.

I rise to clarify that the issue of pension arrears that is reflected in section 30 and its subsequent discussion by Parliament - at the close of Financial Year 2006/2007, the outstanding arrears bill stood at Shs 286.4 billion. Out of the amount that government gave in the last financial year, Shs 186 billion was for public service pension. All this money was released and paid to 40,725 beneficiaries. I wish to present the breakdown of how this money was used so as to assure the honourable members that the payment of pension arrears is on course.

For the commuted pensions gratuities and other gratuities, the payments were made to 6,200 beneficiaries and out of these, 2,700 were UPDF widows and orphans. We also used the money to update the single spine pension arrears and these went to 24,500 beneficiaries.

I would like to also say that we paid Local Government pension arrears and the beneficiaries were 3,300.

As I reported last year that we had remnants of the East African Community particularly the airways; I would like to inform the House that part of this money was used to pay 504 former East African Airways employees. The defence officers that retired: men and women were paid; and we paid 3,200 individuals.

There was the revalidation pension, what is commonly known as old age pension, and this was paid to 350 beneficiaries. The payments were phased out and based on the quarterly budget allocations and they were disbursed through bank accounts of individuals by electronic transfer. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to report that all payments of pension arrears to the former employees of the East African Community and the single spine were concluded last financial year.

During the financial year, the ministry paid out a sum of Shs 17.5 billion as pension arrears for Local Governments. I want to highlight the Local Governments that were paid on that money. There is Kitgum, Bushenyi, Rukungiri, Masaka, Kanungu, Moyo, Yumbe, Mayuge, Rakai, Kyenjojo, Isingiro, Mbarara/Ntungamo, Bududa, Arua, Bundibugyo, Sembabule, Bugiri, Kiruhura, Jinja, Kamwenge, Sironko, Pallisa, Mukono, Kasese, Kabale, Kapchorwa, Mubende, Kisoro and Tororo. 

The local, urban authorities were also paid. These include: Moyo Municipality, Soroti Municipality, Mbale Municipality, Masaka Municipality and Iganga Town Council. The payments were however held up by slow submissions of claims by the local governments. Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the honourable members to support us and urge the local governments to submit their outstanding pension arrears for payment.

I would like to present the payment plan for this financial year. During this financial year, the ministry has received a budget allocation of Shs 113.8 billion towards clearing the outstanding pension arrears. The initial allocation was Shs 30 billion for local governments, 14.2 billion for the traditional civil service, 14 billion for teachers, 31.3 billion defence veterans, 13.7 defence widows and orphans and 10.7 billion revalidation of pension.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this was the original allocation. We have been advised as a ministry that Shs 13 billion will be reduced from the total allocation to cater for Parliamentary pension arrears. When the adjustments on the allocations for each category have been done by the Ministry of Finance, we shall inform the honourable members.

However in this payment, I want to confirm that we have prioritized the payment of local governments and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces pension arrears. These arrears have been outstanding for far too long and it is the view of our ministry that we should prioritize them to make sure that the beneficiaries receive that payment. That concludes the issue of payments of pension and pension arrears. 

I would like, however, to talk about the wage shortfalls. The wage shortfalls have arisen because the staff establishments of ministries and local governments have not stabilized. But we are sure that this financial year they will stabilize and the entire wage bill will be managed a little bit better than last year. 

I want to conclude by informing this august House that we are committed to resolving the problem of pension arrears through the allocations that have been given to us and my ministry wants to confirm that those funds will be disbursed to the beneficiaries as soon as they release the names of those staff that are supposed to be paid arrears, particularly those in local governments.

I also want to confirm to honourable members that we shall put up the list and intensify communication with the beneficiaries and the general public through the print media to indicate the progress that we are making in the payment of pension arrears.

Madam Speaker, I wish to submit that as my response. (Applause)

11.25
MR SAMMY OGWEL (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a concern – in the first place I would like to appreciate the presentation of the Minister of Public Service for at least putting it in writing because it has become a document of reference. When we go to our constituencies, this is one of the critical issues that we face from our constituents, from all sectors including the UPDF. In fact most of the time I receive calls from the pensioners from the UPDF.

My concern, to the hon. Minister of Public Service, is contained on page 3 of her submission. When I look through the districts, which have benefited so far and the municipalities, I get concerned because I have not seen any of the districts in Karamoja as beneficiaries. The same for Moroto Municipality, where I have the greatest numbers of public servants who have retired, and also the UPDF retired combatants. So I do not know why any district in Karamoja has never benefited. What is the problem? Because most of the submissions to the Ministry of Public Service – I remember that I submitted some of them right from 2001, some even from the 1990s but up to now they have never received their pension. So I would like to know why they do not appear as part of the beneficiaries. 

I would also like to suggest that whenever some funds are released, they should put that list in the media, just like the way the UPDF does. That way people can see the names and numbers of those who have benefited in the media. That way when you go to your constituency, you can advice the members whose names appear on how to get their benefits. 

The second concern is on page 4. She mentions that – you know, information is very important, and that includes announcements on radio and TV. Currently Karamoja hardly receives any signal from UBC or any other radio, apart from private radio stations. So, I do not know how the people in Karamoja can benefit if such information is not put in newspapers because at least the New Vision and Daily Monitor are accessible although they get there very late, sometimes at 6.00 p.m.; but people are able to read the papers the following day. That way people can be able to get some information. 

So this raises concern of how these messages get to the people. Sometimes when we go to our constituencies you find that these beneficiaries are completely ignorant about any developments. So, I would be very grateful if there were other means. And sometimes the people designated to deal with these pensioners have very poor public relations with these beneficiaries. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was wondering why you did not explain to us why you have only paid 30 local governments, and more than 40 have not been paid. There is no explanation. Maybe you will let us know.

11.30
MR WILLIAM WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was a Member of that committee and we worked very well with hon. Sezi. When we were talking about Shs 17.5 billion as pension arrears for local governments, the cut off date was 2001 and the assumption that we had then was that it covered all local governments’ pension arrears throughout the country. Therefore, I wanted to follow up with what hon. Loote was saying and ask: why only these and not all those that we thought were being covered by the pension arrears? 

Secondly, when the President was campaigning in 1996 and 2001, people were told that the former war veterans, the Kings’ African Rifles, UPDF, Uganda Army, should fill forms. And they did fill forms and they travelled to Bombo to open bank accounts. But apparently, there is total silence. And when you are there, these people come and ask questions, and they know that we are very close to the ministry. So, what has happened? Here we are talking about the UPDF, which is the most recent Force compared to the Forces, which had been there earlier. 

Lastly, since we have the minister here, I was looking through the papers and I saw that civil servants are to be retrenched. I wondered whether this could be true because currently the civil service staffing is 57.5 percent and in some districts the staffing is very poor. Could we be thinking of another retrenchment when we have not even – but I thought that maybe it is not true. But since the minister is around, maybe you will help me so that you can allay my fears. 

And of course if it is possible, on this issue of the wage shortfall, the President was recently in Eastern Uganda and the message was rural transformation; that we should modernise agriculture, and that extension workers are going to be used as major agents of NAADS implementation. But the staff personnel in the production sector are very poor. And since restructuring, this particular key area has not been restructured. How will the wage shortfall of these people who cannot be promoted be handled and how will they be motivated to implement this good programme? I want the minister to help me appreciate this unique position where for the last ten years people are not promoted because the ministry has not restructured; the Cabinet has not decided; what is the problem? Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

11.33
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course as a pensioner I will definitely have to comment on this. I would like to thank the minister for this response. I am looking at page 2, where there is a breakdown of the beneficiaries. To me I actually feel that that breakdown is not exhaustive enough. Why out of those 6,200 who were paid, do we only mention the 2,700 UPDF? What about the teachers? What about the nurses? Where do they fall? And I think there is also a big group of people who fall under that category who I feel need to be mentioned specifically. It would also be a good idea at one point for us to be given an idea of about how much they get paid, more or less like per person on average of those people who retire. 

I would like to recommend to the minister that for future payment planning, you should mention a few more people this financial year. But we still need the groups because we have more people retiring than are mentioned in your presentation. Thank you. 

11.35
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the submission but I have a few things on which I need clarification. On page 2, the last bullet, the minister says, “… UPDF: 3,200 for the officers, men and women who were recently retired from the Force.” My brother-in-law was retired recently but he has never been paid. So what does “recently” mean? I think the minister has to be specific so that we know exactly what “recently” means because I have a case of a recently retired officer who has not yet been paid. 

Secondly, the minister on page 3 says that local authorities have delayed to bring in records, for payment. But even some of those who had brought the records, there have been changes of offices in that ministry I think from Crusader House to where – when my people go there, they tell them, “We are still arranging offices”, and it is not mentioned here. One of the major reasons why some of our people, at least those in Luweero, have not been paid is because of change of offices from one building to another. 

The other thing where I need clarification is from page 3 where the minister mentions Shs 31.3 billion for Defence veterans. Who are the Defence veterans? Are my people in Luweero also included? Are my people who participated actively, who enabled this government to come to power, included in this definition of Defence? They were also defending this country from bad governance.  

Lastly, in the second last bullet she mentions Defence widows and orphans; I ask myself, are there no widowers? Is it only men who die? Are there no women who die and leave their husbands, because you are just saying it is for widows and orphans? I need clarification as to why those men whose women were in the forces and died are not included. Thank you very much. 

11.38
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the honourable minister. First of all, I would like to thank her for this response, but I want some clarification from page 3. Kabarole is not among the districts but I see Kamwenge and Kyenjojo which were part of Kabarole. When Kabarole was divided into three districts, the mother district, Kabarole, was supposed to pay off pensioners from Kamwenge and Kyenjojo. Can I take it that now Kamwenge and Kyenjojo pensioners have been paid off and then what is left is for Kabarole, so that the number of Kyenjojo and Kamwenge is subtracted from that? 

Secondly, the honourable minister was saying that there was slow submission of claims by local governments. However, honourable minister, I think you will recall that I have really been trying to follow up the submissions made by Kabarole District and Fort Portal Municipality. I really wonder why; is it because of the slow submission as you say or because of the shortage of funds? Can I be assured that maybe with the Shs 113.8 billion, Kabarole and Fort Portal Municipality pensioners will now also benefit from this amount? 

I would also like to get some clarification on the Defence veterans because in my area, we have the Rwenzori/Katebwa war veterans. I think last financial year they brought some money and almost three quarters of the veterans were not on the list. I have been following this up with your ministry but I have failed to establish the list of the Rwenzori/Katebwa war veterans. Out of the 8,000 people, the ministry has about 800 people - almost 10 percent. So, where can I get that information? These people are really very annoyed with government because they sacrificed their lives to liberate this country but they feel neglected. I want to ask the minister to dig out that information from her ministry so that I can assure the war veterans of Rwenzori/Katebwa that there is a ray of hope. 

Lastly, on the Defence widows and orphans, I have very many widows and orphans in my constituency but the problem has been that there is a lot of bureaucracy in getting this money. They have to send them to Bombo and to the Ministry of Public Service here. I am wondering whether the Ministry of Public Service cannot at least establish an office to try and decentralise so that these widows and orphans can be helped at the district headquarters - maybe the office of the CAO. 

The Ministry of Defence used to have a liaison officer at the district level; I wonder whether you cannot use this UPDF district liaison officer to assist these Defence widows and orphans. Most of them lack logistical support and cannot process their documents; they cannot follow up their payments to Bombo or Wandegeya here. So, I request that if it is possible, this activity could be decentralised so that our Defence widows and orphans can be covered. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you could just ask supplementary questions. Do not make submissions, pre-ambles and proposals. Ask questions arising from her answer. Please, let us be brief. 

11.43
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for this presentation which I think has been overdue. I would like to thank the minister also for the statement that the ministry is committed to solving the problem of pension arrears; it is very important, Madam Speaker.

To me, the information gap is the worst enemy of transparency. I am happy to note that the minister has stated that sensitisation of the pensioners will be done countrywide through print media, radio and TV. I hope this will be continuous and not once and forgotten. 

The other thing which I would like clarification on is the mechanism the Ministry of Public Service is going to use to decongest that ministry. The offices of the Ministry of Public Service are one of the most congested offices in the ministries. I do not know what mechanisms the ministry will use to cause decongestion of these offices because it is time consuming and maybe a waste of human resource.

The other point which I wish to seek clarification on is the listing of the districts which have already benefited from pension payment. Would it not be good if the ministry would list the districts in chronological order of payment so that pension is taken away from those districts which are not listed here?

Madam Speaker, last but not least, I would like to urge the ministry to make teachers a priority in the settlement of pension. I think this will encouragement other teachers who are still in service to hope that when they retire, they will not be forgotten. Thank you.

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Madam Speaker, mine is just a clarification. Apart from Kitgum and Soroti municipalities, the entire region of Acholi, Lango and Teso are missing. What criteria did the minister use to pay off these districts? Two, I think there should be some correction – I do not think Moyo is a municipality but in the minister’s statement she indicated Moyo as a municipality. 

The third clarification I want to get is about the whole question of ghost payment. The ministry is just in the process of cleaning up the payrolls; how can the minister assure us that with all these payments, she has not been paying ghosts? Even with salaries we have been paying ghosts. What can the minister tell us to show us that she has not been paying ghosts for all this?

Lastly, about for the former armies, I understand that the data was destroyed some time back at the army headquarters and tracing data for the people who served the country is extremely very difficult. Given the fact that there have been many ghosts in the army, what criteria is the minister putting in place to clearly come out with the rightful people to be paid; those who have served this country in all the past armies? Thank you.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable members for appreciating our big task in settling our senior citizens’ payments. I have taken the concerns that have been raised and I want to reiterate that as a ministry, with the budget allocation that has been given to us, we promise that the issue of arrears is going to be handled fast. In a matter of time, it will be behind us.

On the issue of municipalities and about Karamoja; we are handling the submission that we made in 2001. When we got money to pay, we requested the local governments to update their records because some of them had actually settled some beneficiaries. Those local governments that did submit and update the data are the ones listed here. I want to assure honourable members that our policy is first come first served; otherwise, we would not disburse that money. That is why I have appealed to you that if your local government is missing, be our partner in helping us push those local governments. We have written, we have gone there, but the process is very slow.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that the –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Honourable minister, we had Shs 17.5 billion for all local governments’ pension arrears up to 2001. If some had already paid, then it means out of the Shs 17.5 billion we had to have a balance. Some had already paid so the principal sum remains. How much had been paid by other districts before the others were paid?

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I want to indicate that those districts that updated their pension obligation, their allocation still went to those local governments. We did not allocate their money.

On the past armies, the case is in court and therefore I have no comment until the court has made a ruling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable minister, there is a group which went to court but there is another one which did not; these are the Kings African Rifles. These are old men of 80, 90. I do not think they have gone to court. They are the ones who were made to fill forms. The ones who are in court I think are the UNLF, the Uganda Army, but we are talking about the others like KAR because they have been filling forms and filling forms. Those are not in court. That group is not in court.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to refer KAR to my colleague, the Minister of Defence. There is an indication that the British Government paid but I will make the necessary consultation. It is not under me and that is why I am referring it to the Ministry of Defence.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, KAR was disbanded just before independence and those who wanted to retire at that time were paid by the Queen’s government and those who went to their respective countries joined the new armies. The Ugandans from KAR, for example, joined Uganda Army and served with me like Amin, Tito Okello and others. So KAR have got to claim, if there are any claims, from the British Government but Uganda Army and others after that - UNFL, UNLA and all armies subsequent to that - are the responsibility of the Uganda Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for that information but I have people in my constituency who actually have an association of very old men of KAR; they were never paid. (Interjections) They did not even join the Uganda Army. For you to say that they should go to the British Government, I think really it is an insult to the old men who served this country. I think it is the responsibility of this government to assist those old people to get their money. (Applause) How do you expect someone from Kidera to come and chase the Queen in London for his pay? I think it is the responsibility of this government to assist the senior citizens of this country.

DR MALLINGA: Actually, as far as I know, some money is received from the British Government. If somebody contacted Maj. Gen. Mondo, he is knowledgeable and he has been the go-between with the British Government and those who retired from the British army.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to hear from government whether our people will really be assisted. You know, these are very, very old people. I think hon. Gagawala you also have them. We have so many of these people. I want to hear how they will be assisted, please.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: It is true, Madam Speaker, that there are questions which should be ferried, but maybe we would request you to wait and you get a submission from the Minister of Defence about this issue. We cannot renegade on the responsibility of government to all citizens. 

It is true all citizens remain the responsibility of government, but then as you may later know, at independence the government of Uganda inherited all the liabilities and assets. Therefore, you are right that government must come out clearly. However, the Front Bench can only promise you that we shall revisit the matter and submit to this Parliament a clarification on the matter.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, that issue falls under the Ministry of Defence. I undertake that the Minister of Defence will come here with a statement to give the status of KAR - whether they were paid and what action will be taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming interns who are attached to this Parliament. They are from the Islamic University in Uganda, Nkumba University and Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was the issue of the cut-off of 2001. I have already responded that local governments did update their data. On the issue of the Uganda Army and past armies, I have indicated that this case is in court and we are waiting for court’s decision over the matter. 

On prioritising teachers, I want to confirm to members that the teachers’ pension is identified and allocated for teachers. So, that is the emphasis that we give to teachers. The breakdown that I have given this morning also indicates that the allocation for teachers is separate from the rest of the service. The medical staff that has been raised are part of the traditional civil service. So, that allocation for the traditional civil service covers the medical staff and other health workers.  

On the issue of the newspaper caption today, that there is retrenchment, I want to indicate that that discussion was following the restructuring of the ministry. Normally when you restructure, excess staff are laid off and paid. That was the context of that discussion which was brought up in the papers. Depending on the structure of that ministry, there may be no retrenchment but if there is excess, there may be retrenchment. I think that was the context of that caption.  

On the issue of liaison officers to help the widows and orphans, the RDCs have been playing that role of liaison officer to assist widows and orphans to make sure that their papers are handled. Of course, there are also widowers. I think the emphasis has been put on widows and orphans maybe because the majority are women.  

On decongesting the Ministry of Public Service, we want to confirm that we are making some renovations of the facility to provide an adequate and very conducive working environment. This financial year, we shall see more improvement on our facility so that our pensioners can get into our good offices. 

On the issue of Kabarole Municipality, I think I have already indicated what happened. I want to say that on veterans, widows and orphans, the processing sector is with Ministry of Defence because they hold the information. The role of the Ministry of Public Service is to pay. Once the documentation and approvals have been done, I think for us we have an obligation to pay. We also guide our clients who are widows and orphans and the retired soldiers on how to handle most of their issues. This we try to do with a human face.

Madam Speaker, the last clarification was the criteria that we use to ensure that we have no ghost payments for beneficiaries. We do this first of all by the processing of documentation, by confirming that they were public officers and lastly, the money is transferred to the individual accounts. Once the processing has been done, the individual accounts are paid. However, there are cases where the Administrator-General has handled the issues of widows - now I am talking generally about the widows and orphans. There are cases were some of the money is given through the Administrator-General to those individuals where people have died and they need the services of the Administrator-General.  

I think I have responded to the issue of teachers. The teachers are given priority and advice. There is little criteria that has to be followed. The Ministry of Education must confirm that one is a bonafide teacher and there is evidence of registration and qualification. Once that has been done, the ministry is able to pay. I want to confirm that with the resources that have been given, we are committed to ensure that our senior citizens that were former public officers are handled and paid promptly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any other issues will be discussed when we debate the committee report.

12.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to apologise sincerely for coming late. I just arrived in town from upcountry but it was not my intention not to be here in time. In fact, my other colleagues are not here; Prof. Kamuntu has escorted the Prime Minister to Turkey to start the African Conclave and hon. Janat Mukwaya is having other commitments. So they have left me to submit this afternoon. 

I would like first of all to thank the Minister of Finance for giving us a very good exposure of the budget. Secondly, it is the first time that the Opposition has come out with a good response from the shadow Minister of Finance - (Interjections) - It is the first time they have been able to put forward a serious case answering the speech by the Minister of Finance page by page. We thank the Opposition for having taken a positive stance towards the development of the country in order to be an effective opposition. 

However, in the response by the shadow minister, there are certain issues which were either intentionally glossed over or were half truths. It is true that there have been cycles in trade but not all sectors of trade in exports suffered a decline. There are some sectors in trade which went up and there are certain sectors which went down. It is unfortunate that the shadow minister did not say why. He only said there is a big decline in trade. Actually, all trade in the world does suffer fluctuations. Let me go to the subject because we do not have much time.

The shadow minister raised some issues during the budget discussion and I will respond to some of them. There is the question of a rising import bill and deficit thereof; it is pertinent to know that as a country –(Interruption)

MR DENNIS OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the preamble of the minister, it appears that he was not ready to answer concerns that were raised by members and what he is now proceeding to answer is the response by the shadow minister in charge of finance. We still have so many pertinent issues and it looks like we shall keep repeating them even with the committee reports that are soon coming. If the minister is not ready to respond to issues that were particularly raised by honourable members in response to the debate on the general budget, are we proceeding in the right direction?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The submission of the shadow Minister of Finance is part of the debate on the budget. I expect that after the minister has addressed that one, he will go directly to the issues of the members.

MR WAMBUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The shadow minister was the first MP to react and then I will answer in summary to all the other responses. They were not very many, incidentally. 

The most important thing which I had wanted to say is that as a country continues on the development path, there is a tendency to import more in order to be able to meet the development needs and in particular the development of infrastructure. As you know, our infrastructure budget not only within the Ministry of Works and Transport but even for the private sector is bound to be bigger than what we normally have. When you are developing and you start a factory worth US$20 million, in the same year you cannot expect to immediately export goods worth US$20 million. Once you say that you are developing, you must invest in infrastructure. You must invest in imported capital goods which are normally bigger than the exports. The major share of imports are –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Minister, you are aware that when Government of Uganda through the structural adjustment programmes and through its PIP programme, which is the overall development strategy for this country, adopted the import substitution strategy in the interest of creating the Export Promotions Board, we were trying to move away from the excessive imports to export more. That was the essence of the private sector led growth. Are you therefore suggesting that government has dropped that objective?

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you. In order to do anything, you must have a strategy, a foundation and a plan. We are following this plan quite seriously and on course. As I talk, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has started by developing the Uganda National Exports Strategy launched in 2007. I beg to lay it on table. We are not joking; we are actually working. The ministry again has gone ahead and developed the National Trade Sector Development Plan, 2008-2013. I lay it on table too. The ministry has also developed the National Industrial Policy, 2008. Again, the ministry has developed a Uganda national tourist law, which you passed in this House yourself. I think we are on course and things are working well. 

It is true that there are some fluctuations in trade but if you surf the internet, you will find that our biggest business was from COMESA, followed by European Union, the Middle East and then the other countries. Certainly, the Uganda formal merchandise exports grew by 39 percent, that is, US$ 962 million in 2006 and to US$ 1,340 million in 2007. This is a clear picture that we are actually starting to grow and are transforming. In fact, the government strategy, that every home is going to earn UShs 20 million, will take us very far from the current US$ 300 GDP per capita. It will be going much higher in the coming year. I am asking that you give us time; we are actually changing. If you look at the tourism map, in 2001 we had 164,000 -(Interruption)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the minister is moving on and on and not answering the real issues, which he is supposed to and which we raised here in the House. Can he please guide us as to what he is talking about so that we know what he is trying to answer? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are suggesting that whenever he is going to say something he adds that he is reverting to what so and so said and then he lays? Is that what you are talking about? I think they want you to say, “I am reverting to what so and so said” and then you lay the document.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, it is very important for us because the debate has got to be properly organised. However, if you want me to read verbatim what the shadow minister said, I am answering that and in the process I am also answering the honourable Members of Parliament. 

The major share of imports was mainly on machinery and transport equipment, which helps in boosting domestic production. Petroleum products, and in particular those for the generation of power that is needed by the industry to produce, are the big import bills that we have. Of course, the Minister of Finance will go on and enhance this further.

Madam Speaker, the other element is consumer goods, which accounts for the bulk of our imports. We are importing in excess of consumer goods that we are exporting. It is incumbent on us leaders to persuade our citizens to start thinking of producing most of what they consume. The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is appealing to all leaders that if we consume much more than we produce internally or export, our import figure is likely to remain higher than our export figures. 

To transform the economy therefore, I beg all leaders in this country to do one thing - let us mobilise our people not to export our jobs but collectively wake up to say that it is possible. Instead of importing juice from South Africa, we should grow our own fruits and convert them into products. I do not have to tell you that if you go to the supermarkets, most of the juices are either from South Africa, Kenya or Egypt and yet we are a country gifted by nature to produce juices not only for ourselves internally but also for export. 

I am told that food grown in Uganda is very good for our bodies; it does not cause oxidation of body cells. That is why the tourism sector is increasing from 205,000 arrivals in 2001 to a current figure of 642,000. You cannot say that tourism is not growing; it is actually growing. It may have suffered some setbacks from last year but even then, last year we had 538,000 arrivals. [Mr Okello-Okello rose] Can I just finish my point then you clarify? 

As regards the culture of high demand for four-wheel drive vehicles, it is us the leaders who are actually involved in this. If we want our population to get good examples, let us help our people by showing them that before we consume, we must produce competitively internally and also be able to export externally. 

Madam Speaker, concerns were raised on what is called lack of strategy in the export sector. As I said, I have already handed over and we have a full strategy on that. I was surprised that people are not aware of some of these strategies, but they are there. I would like to say that we shall clarify other issues point by point when we come to present our budget plan as a ministry. We shall submit it to you and we are already discussing it with the committee which supervises us. I beg to rest my case.

12.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the many contributions that you have made on the budget speech and the budget itself. I would like to respond to the most fundamental issues in this debate. The number of points raised is extremely large so if I tried to respond to each of them, we would be here the whole day. I would therefore like to select the most critical ones that I think are important to the resolution of this debate.

The strategy of this debate is the prioritisation or selection of the priorities necessary to accelerate Prosperity for All. This is the theme of the debate. Prioritisation means that we do not have enough money to pay for all the areas that we would like to do and that we have to do, and we are forced to choose a few areas that are most critical to the development of the country and to Prosperity for All. This choice means that some areas have to be put on hold in terms of resources, and this is a very difficult and very painful process of deciding which areas to commit resources to and which areas we have to hold for the time being. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy to say that throughout this debate, there seems to be a general agreement that the prioritisation of roads is a good and important priority; that energy is also a critical priority; that agriculture is a critical priority, and that human development - i.e. education and health - are critical priorities and these are the priorities we have put forward in the Budget. The impression I have is that there is general acceptance of these priorities. But after accepting that these are critical areas to prioritise, Members then want to take resources to other areas.  

I would like to appeal to this House that once we accept priorities, then we must concentrate our resources on these priorities. What has been very difficult for me is the pressure to put money in the non-priority areas without reducing the money in the priority areas. This is an impossible task, Madam Speaker. The resources are critically limited so if we agree on the priority areas, then it is not possible to put money in the non-priority areas.  I would like to appeal to hon. Members and the sector ministries to see that this constraint cannot be overcome; we have to make choices and sacrifices. 

Madam Speaker, there has been a great debate on the issue of economic growth, on the issue of poverty reduction, on the issue of economic stability and on the issue of income distribution. I want to appreciate that these issues have been raised because they are very important issues of the economy.

Economic growth has aroused a great deal of comment. I think, Madam Speaker, there has been a suggestion that maybe we need a workshop on this issue outside here so that we can spend a lot of time and have maybe some experts and look in detail at the statistics. I want to support this idea if resources can be found, that perhaps we do this and have an opportunity to understand in some depth what we are talking about when we talk about economic growth. 

For the sake of the record, I would like to say that the economic growth rate is simply a measurement of the increase in the gross domestic product and that is all; comparing the gross domestic product of this year with the gross domestic product of the previous year. Perhaps we should not try to read too much into it because domestic product is an attempt to estimate the value of the goods and services that have been produced in a given year. It is a statistic. Trying to read equity in distribution, I think is probably putting too much into it. But I hope that when we have this workshop, we can go into all these issues.  

In terms of poverty reduction, Madam Speaker, the most important method of getting out of poverty for our majority of people in rural areas is:

1.	To increase productivity, more output per acre, more output per person so that the household has more to sell.
2.	To increase acreage cultivated perhaps using machinery such as the hand tractors that we talked about.
3.	By being able to get higher prices for the products that they sell.  

These are the ways to reduce poverty and as Members know, we are proceeding along these lines to increase productivity through provision of inputs, through extension work and training and through provision of mechanical means of work - the hand tractors and other forms of equipment.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of economic stability, I would like to put on record our concern for continued economic stability. Those of us who lived in the 1970s and 1980s and know the rates of inflation and the shortages and the lining up for commodities and empty shops, we know what the meaning of economic stability is, and we know why it is so important to maintain stable prices, to limit government spending and deficit spending so that the economy is able to recede in a stable manner.  

I want to register our concern at the current world wide economic instability because of oil prices and because of food prices. But I want to say that Uganda, in my view, is well placed to contain these pressures in the not too distant future. The oil prices can, and I think will, be contained by accelerating our domestic production of oil. This is extremely fortunate otherwise, we would be in a big problem if we did not have this possibility in the foreseeable future. 

Equally important is that, we are a net exporter of food and by encouraging and giving incentives to our people to increase food production, to increase irrigation, to increase inputs, we can quickly respond to the pressure of food prices, both for ourselves and also to increase our income. And I believe that in the foreseeable future, this will dampen the current rise in inflation.

But I would like to appeal to Members to surely recognise that this is a problem facing the entire world. Inflation is up in Europe, in other parts of Africa, in our neighbouring countries, in Asia and even in China; it is not only a Ugandan phenomenon but also a world wide phenomenon. I believe that we will exercise the necessary discipline. I want to assure Members that we will not allow money supply to rise excessively so that it becomes a source of economic instability.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of the economy, is income distribution. This is a very important issue because we know, from the statistics of 2006 household surveys, that although there was some slight improvement in income distribution, certainly the Northern and eastern parts of Uganda, which were affected by war, had a much more serious problem of poverty than the other parts of Uganda. 

However, we hope that by the next survey, which will take place sometime to come, some improvement will have been realised. Although there was a slight improvement in 2006, it is not enough; we want to see more increase in incomes of our people in the North and north-eastern Uganda than there has been before because of the war. But I think this should not be used as an excuse to say that economic growth is not important. Economic growth, Madam Speaker, of our country is extremely important as a way of getting out of poverty and it is good to note say that since the 1990s up to now, the number of people living above the poverty line has been increasing substantially. The last measurement showed that 69 percent of the population is growing above the poverty line.

I know that there has been an attempt to say that because of rising population, although the percentage of people below the poverty line has fallen, the absolute numbers have actually risen. This is true and on both sides. The absolute number of the people living above the poverty line has risen just as the absolute number of people below the poverty line has also risen because of the rising population. However, in percentage terms, the number of people living below the poverty line has been falling consistently and I think this is good. That aside, we know that we have to work very hard to make sure that all the people can be raised above the poverty line.

Madam Speaker, another issue that was raised but, which has been answered by the Minister of Trade is about the importance of balance of trade. Again, I want to say that in my view, although we have been greatly helped by the inflows of remittances from our people overseas as well as direct investment from overseas, which has helped bridge the gap created by imports being far greater than our exports, I believe that when we start using our own oil and substitute for imported oil, this will greatly help our balance of trade. The fact that there is rapidly growing exportation of food to the region will also help in bridging the balance of trade.

Madam Speaker, I want to comfort everyone that the growth of our exports is actually remarkable. This is so because some of us have seen the days when we only had coffee as the export earner. Now, we have literally hundreds of items that are being exported; we are no longer dependant on one item. When you look at our structure of exports, it is encouraging. We have diversified substantially. This growth, in my view, will continue to bring a more balanced trade to our economy. So, I am hopeful that our future trade will actually be greatly in favour of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the issue of the budget process and strategy, which I think is the most serious problem we are facing.

The taxation revenue determines the expenditure limits. We can only spend what we have. Any attempt to spend more than what we have creates a crisis. Madam Speaker, the minimum standard for becoming a Member of Parliament is, I believe, advanced level and by then everyone will have had to study equations. In an equation, there are two sides. For example, in the budget equation, you have revenue on the one side and expenditure on the other; the two must balance. If you attempt to increase expenditure, you must increase revenue. You cannot increase expenditure and leave revenue untouched. That is no longer an equation; it is an inequality, which requires a different solution.

So, Madam Speaker, when we bring a budget before this august House, we indicate all the revenues available from taxation, from foreign and non-tax sources. We also indicate our proposals for the distribution of these funds that are available.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the august House that if someone wants to alter the equation, they have to do it on both sides. If you want to increase expenditure for a certain vote, you must reduce the expenditure for another vote or you must increase revenue.  I am not trying to lecture to the House, Madam Speaker, but you will forgive me because we are having a lot of pressure to increase expenditure without indicating where the money should come from. The only alternative to spending more money without increasing revenue is to print the money. But that will devalue our currency; will increase inflation uncontrollably and we will be hopelessly out of order.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the Minister of Finance relates to the fact I thought that government always sits down, agrees on how to distribute the little resources before presenting the budget. But today the minister is complaining of pressure. I think it would be important for this House to know where this pressure is coming from. Just talking about pressure is not enough. Is it pressure from heaven, from – [An Hon. Member: “From hell.”] It would be important for this House to know that.

MR TOOLIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Finance is saying that 70 percent of the revenue is going to be funded locally and that the 30 percent may be funded by the foreign donors. Why don’t we reduce the local revenue percentage to 60 and you increase the donor funding? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to reopen this debate. He was responding to the issues raised in the general debate on the Budget. Do not bring in new issues, please.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The amount of funding available from outside is not under the control of the Government of Uganda. What we have put in the Budget is what we expect to be able to obtain. If the honourable member knows some additional sources, we would be happy to receive that information. But to the best of our knowledge, this is the maximum amount that we expect to get from available sources both in form of grants and in form of loans.

I have met in the Budget Committee of this House the chairmen of all the sessional committees and there has been a great deal of pressure from these Members to increase resources for their sectors. And I have indicated that I am sympathetic but we could not increase resources available -(Interruption)

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for giving way. It is true he has met several sessional committee chairpersons in my committee where they are all ex-officio Members. The pressure the minister is talking about, I do not think is really pressure at all. These committees work on a figure which the ministry itself supplies to us and to this Parliament and when he is told to come and clarify, it is a matter of clarification that he has got to make. It is not that we apply any additional pressure. It is not that we do not know maybe arithmetic and how much he is supposed to use to run programmes under all these sessional committees. 

It is really very unfortunate that on many occasions, the ministry itself comes with different figures every now and then. For example, at the beginning when we were given the national budget framework paper we had Shs 5.1 trillion as the amount of money available in the resource envelope. Somewhere in the middle, it raises to a different figure, Shs 6.0 trillion. We now have to ask ourselves, how do we re-allocate this to fit into our programmes? That is not an indication that there is pressure from anybody. It is really a matter of trying to argue with him on issues to do with this resource allocation. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson of the Budget Committee, you are really saying that the minister is making a false claim that your committees request for additional resources to what he has. I think that is his problem. Isn’t it?

MR OKECHO: We do not press for additional resources. He brings additional resources most of the time. And this is all above the ceilings that he has given.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe let him explain the pressures he is getting; maybe then we shall appreciate what he is saying.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, one of the issues which were raised in this august House and in the Committee on Finance, is to raise a threshold from 130,000 to 235,000. And there has been tremendous pressure to do this, no doubt about it. If this is done, it will reduce the revenue by Shs 87.5 billion. If we reduce the budget revenues by this much, we will have to effect corresponding cuts of that amount from the expenditure. There has been no indication from those advocating that line of thought which areas should be cut by that amount. I interpret that as pressure. (Ms Bako rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let the minister finish. Other issues you will raise when we are debating the committee reports. The committee reports are coming, please let us finish.

DR SURUMA: I believe, Madam Speaker, that -

MS BAKO: Please, honourable minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, do not negotiate with the minister. You must speak through me. Do not negotiate with the minister. Please, conclude.

DR SURUMA: I am very happy by this reaction from the Members, Madam Speaker, because if there is no pressure, then certainly this will be a smooth budget process, a harmonious one and it means that we will have a balanced budget, that revenues will be allocated to the appropriations that are considered best by the House and we will have a smooth process. I am only putting on record that please, as representatives of the people, let us not play a popularist game in which we attempt to say, “Put more money in this area, put more in that area”, without indicating where the money will come from. This is all I am saying and I hope that if this is agreed, then there will be no problem and no difficulty. I thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY

12.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Edward Baliddawa): Madam Speaker, our committee considered the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates of the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology in accordance with the provisions of Article 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in compliance with Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Section 9 of the Budget Act, 2001.

Madam Speaker, the sessional committee considered, examined and discussed several documents. We also interacted with various stakeholders including the Minister of ICT and his technical staff. We did look at a number of documents: we reviewed the policy statement and we also reviewed the framework for the ministry for the financial year 2007/08. 

MRS SEZI: The ministry, Madam Speaker, is called Information, Communication and Technology. It has no word “Education”. Thank you.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I do not intend to read the entire report. I will highlight the few things that we need to take note of as Parliament. So, I will skip page 3 and go to page 4. 

The key sector achievements for the ministry for the financial year 2007/08

The Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology achieved the following: First, it completed phase one of the national data transmission backbone and e-government infrastructure project, which entailed the following:

•	The laying of fibre of 183.3kms connecting Kampala to Entebbe, Bombo and Jinja. 

•	The ministry also installed e-government infrastructure connecting 27 ministries with voice, data and video services.

•	The ministry gazetted and recently laid on Table, for the first reading, the NITA-U Bill.

•	The ministry developed the business process outsourcing strategy.

•	The ministry co-ordinated the ICT learning centres for digitally marginalised children in the districts of Kampala, Ntungamo, Kabale and Oyam. This was under the auspices of a project named, Hole in the Wall, which was done in conjunction with the commonwealth secretariat and the government of India.

•	The ministry also co-ordinated and promoted the establishment of computer refurbishment centre, which is located in Industrial Area in collaboration with development partners namely; UNIDO, Microsoft, as directed by the Presidential Roundtable Investment Council.

•	The ministry offered technical support to CHOGM and the 35th OIC conference.

•	The ministry also strengthened its ministry through procurement of vehicles, office equipment and staff training. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will note that this ministry was new and it started from a clean slate. It did not have logistical equipment, it did not have an office, and it did not have furniture. So, to us this is a big achievement that it has been able to realise these. 

On page 5, Madam Speaker, we intend to highlight the achievements of the autonomous institutions, that is, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). In 2007/08, UCC achieved the following:

•	It operationalised the new licence regime. Madam Speaker, you remember that previously we had a duopoly where we had only two companies operating and offering network coverage in this country. But after the full liberalisation of the sector, a number of companies have been licensed. That is to say, 10 private infrastructure provider licences have been issued. 

•	There has been a development and adoption of a strategic year plan for UCC.

•	There has been a marked increase in the national telephone penetration to 20.6 lines per 100 inhabitants as of March 2008 as compared to 13.2 lines per 100 inhabitants in 2006/07.

•	There has been an increase in the telephone customer base to 5.7 million mobile subscribers compared to 3.5 in 2006/07.

•	There has been a growth in national switching capacity to nine million at the end of 2007/08 compared to 4.5 million in 2006/07.

•	There has been a growth in telephone coverage to 80 percent from 75 percent in 2006/07.

•	There has also been a total increase of payphones to 34,177 compared to 21,475 in 2006/07.

•	There has been an increase in the international bandwidth to a total of 383.1 megabytes per second compared to 344.4 megabytes per second in 2006/07.

•	There has also been a growth in mobile Internet accounts to 170,000 from 50,000 in 2006/07.

On page 6, Madam Speaker, we want to highlight the achievements of POSTA Uganda in 2007/08:

•	POSTA Uganda won the international mail quality certificate of 2007.

•	It did facelift the postal building, which is its property.

•	POSTA Uganda acquired four new buses and extended bus routes to Arua and Gulu.

•	POSTA Uganda extended postal networks by opening seven new sub-postal offices, and installing 750 private letter boxes.

•	 POSTA Uganda signed two new strategic alliances including Afri-payments for money transfer and Akright for postcode pilot project, which is intended to offer door-to-door mail delivery.

•	POSTA Uganda has also introduced new products like POSTA at Schools, which is aimed at rejuvenating letter writing in schools.

•	POSTA Uganda has implemented a computerised human resource database, which will facilitate it in the smooth implementation of human resource policies and staff management. 

Madam Speaker, we also want to highlight the achievements of Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology, as one of the key institutions under the Ministry of ICT. In 2007/08, the institute achieved the following:

•	It introduced new study programmes namely; a certificate in ICT and a certificate in Business and Management Studies.
	 
•	The institute procured 40 computers and established a new computer laboratory for training of students.

•	The institute developed a prospectus for the institute.

•	The institute acquired new titles for the library, that is, books and journals.

•	The institute set up an ICT and Business Development Centre to provide training and consultancy services and manage all projects, activities at the institute.

•	The institute set up an ICT maintenance and repair workshop.

Page 7, Madam Speaker, we have a table which shows the budget performance of the ministry for the year 2007/08. If we look at column No.6, this table has seven columns; column No.6 shows the release performance and column No.7 shows the actual performance of the budget.

The ministry had a release of 5.87 billion out of the approved 6.49 billion last fiscal year. Budget release was at 90 percent. Out of this release, the actual expenditure was 5.79 billion, showing that the budget performed at 98 percent. This performance was attributed to low staff numbers in the ministry. The ministry has so far 43 staff out of the required 111 but we are informed that the ministry is in the process of recruiting staff.

Madam Speaker, on page 8, we want to highlight the key planned activities of the ministry. The ministry in the financial year 2008/09 plans to do the following:-

It plans to implement the second phase of the national data transmission backbone and the e-government infrastructure, which will see 20 districts connected to the national data backbone.  

The ministry intends to operationalise the National Information Technology Authority (NITA) Bill. The NITA Bill   was read here for the first reading and the committee of ICT will be scrutinising and reporting to this House. 

The ministry intends to implement the business process outsourcing strategy. 

The ministry intends to establish 10 District Business Information Centres (DBICs).

The ministry also intends to finalise the review of the telecommunication and postal policies.

The ministry also intends to complete the development of information technology policy.

It also intends to gazette and present to Parliament the cyber laws, that is, the Electronic Transactions Bill, the Electronic Signatures Bill and the Computer Misuse Bill.

The ministry intends to fill the vacant positions.

Uganda Communications Commission (UCC).

The commission intends to do the following: 

It intends to enhance the enforcement, monitoring and compliance of the licences provision to promote a levelled playing ground and protection of consumers. 

UCC intends to review the Rural Communication Development Fund (RCDF) policy in view of expanding of universal access obligation.

UCC intends to enhance postal regulation with emphasis on reviewing postal policy and the development of the post code.

UCC intends to empower consumers through education, strengthening the complex handling mechanism and build capacity for consumer associations.

It also intends to promote, monitor competition by implementing a cost-based interconnection regime and developing a competition monitoring framework and tools.

It also intends to improve on affordability of services with emphasis on development of new tariff regimes. 

UCC intends to develop and improve UCC human resources through review of human resource policies, implementation of new organisational structure and mainstreaming gender. 

POSTA Uganda

POSTA Uganda intends to launch the electronic money transfer.

POSTA Uganda intends to improve the efficiency of EMS.

It intends to refurbish the Internet Café at the General Post Office.

It intends to establish containerized post offices.

It also intends to establish post code address management system.

It intends to establish counter automation.
 
It intends to embark on a five-year strategic plan that will enable POSTA Uganda to turn around the image of Posta; that will enable it increase revenue by at least 10 percent per annum and it will enable POSTA grow its average market share by at least 25 percent per annum.
 
POSTA Uganda also has an ambitious plan of being the best employer.

The Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology (UICT)

The Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology intends to do the following:
 
Increase students’ intake by 10 percent.
 
Follow up the process of approval of governing council of the institute.

Continue with the curriculum review process and intends to implement the first phase of building a library.

Procure more books for the library to improve its students: book ratio; and
procure more ICT equipment for the training of students.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, here we present to you our budget outlook for the sector for the financial year 2008/09 under Vote 020. The total budget earmarked for the sector amounts to Shs 14.9 billion of which Shs 594 million is for wages, Shs 1.64 billion is for non wage; hence the total recurrent is Shs 2.24 billion. Ugshs 4.26 billion is for development expenditure and Ugshs 8.44 is to cater for taxes. So, the total budget earmarked for the sector is Shs 14.9 billion.

Madam Speaker, on page 11, we have our committee observations and recommendations. On the basis of the discussion and consideration of the ministry’s policy statement, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:-

Relationship between the Ministry of ICT and UCC. The committee notes that establishment of the Ministry of ICT has created some conflicting roles with UCC in overseeing the activities of the sector. UCC is performing functions that the committee deemed should be spearheaded by the ministry. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Uganda Communications Act be reviewed in order to rationalise the functions of UCC and the Ministry of ICT in order to establish a proper reporting structure between UCC and the ministry. Madam Speaker, this is made on the basis that the Ministry of ICT was established long after UCC was put in place. 

Establishment of a communications tribunal

The committee was informed that the reason why the establishment of the communications tribunal as provided by the Communication Act has not been done was due to the desire of the Ministry of ICT to have the tribunal that would have been comprehensive enough in order to reflect the convergence of technologies that has taken place in the ICT world. In order to achieve this, the Ministry of ICT had proposed that the Electronic Media Act and the Communications Act need to be harmonised. However, the committee was informed that the process of harmonising the two laws had been halted by the suspension of the transfer of the Broadcasting Council to the Ministry of ICT until necessary consultations were concluded.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the communication tribunal as envisaged in the Communication Act be established expeditiously. It is the view of the committee that once the process of harmonising these two laws is completed, the ministry will be at liberty to cause an amendment to address the required harmonisation. 

Tightening the procedure of exporting scrap copper

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the procedure of exporting scrap copper had not yet been tightened despite Parliament’s earlier recommendation. However, the committee was informed that the telecomm operators were liaising with relevant security operators to ensure protection of their infrastructure and some were opting for new transmission media. The committee recommended that the Ministry of ICT works with the relevant authorities to ensure that laws on exporting scrap copper are enforced.

Madam Speaker, this observation is made on the basis that most of the network of the operators is being vandalised because people who want to steal copper wires go and cut them and export them to the neighbouring countries. 

National digital backbone project

The committee observed that the progress made by the ministry in implementing the national digital backbone project was tremendous. It was noted that the project is funded by a loan from the Chinese Government and implemented by a Chinese company called, Huawei.  

The committee notes with satisfaction the progress made so far on phase one of the project. However, it was observed that there was no independent expert to supervise the installation of equipment and fibre cables. 

The committee further observed that there were two Ugandan sub-contractors. Madam Speaker, I want to make a correction on that. Here in the document it is, “There were no Ugandan sub-contractors,” that is wrong. It should be: “There were two Ugandan sub-contracts in the name of Data Fundi and Bank Shore during the implementation of phase one of the project.

The committee recommended that during phase two there is need to have an independent consultant to oversee the entire project in order to ensure that there is value for money. 

The committee further recommends that the sub-contracts should be given to Uganda citizen in order to build capacity.

District Business Information Centres

The committee was informed that the procurement of the necessary equipment and furniture for establishment of District Business Information Centres, in five districts, was completed. However, the committee recommends that there should be regional balance during the selection process of the areas that will benefit from these centres.  

Building a home for the ministry

During the discussions with the ministry, the committee was informed that due to the increasing number of staff that the ministry is taking on as it continues its process of strengthening the ministry, there is need for more office space and thus more funding for rent allocation. The committee recommends that the ministry should consider building its own home in the medium term to save on money spent annually on rent.  

Transfer of the Uganda Institute of Technology

The committee observed that the Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology was, following a Cabinet decision, transferred from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of ICT, without its budget line. The committee further observed that the transfer did not have legal backing.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that the relevant law be reviewed to enable the transfer have legal backing to enable the Ministry of Finance to provide a budget line for the institute.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, when we were interacting with the ministry, we were informed that this institute was just receiving a grant of Shs 200 million from the Ministry of Education and that for this financial year, the Ministry of ICT has allocated Shs 100 million. So we thought that this should be legalized and should be formalized for the institute to have its own budget line other than depending on the wishes and whims of whoever is giving them money.

Lack of governing council for the Uganda Institute of Communication Technology

The committee observed that some of the challenges faced by this institute were the lack of a governing council due to the absence of a legal framework. The institute had a governing council when it was under the Ministry of Education. Now that it was transferred to the Ministry of ICT, there is need for a new governing council to be established. So the committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT expedites the process of establishing a governing council.

Legal Framework

Madam Speaker, this observation has partly been overtaken by events. We had observed that the ministry was taking long in presenting the NITA Bill, but the NITA Bill has since been presented to this Parliament. What remains are the cyber laws that need to be presented to Parliament.

POSTA Uganda’s Liabilities

The committee observed that POSTA Uganda as an autonomous institution has liabilities to the tune of Shs 11.8 billion, some of which were inherited from Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Limited (UPTL). The committee further observed that these liabilities are affecting the investment portfolio of POSTA Uganda, so it cannot expand or improve service delivery. The committee strongly recommends that the government should urgently consider the capitalization of POSTA Uganda, by employing the most efficient means to clean up its balance sheet to enable POSTA Uganda expand, invest, borrow and improve service delivery to our people.  

POSTA Uganda’s reserved business area

The committee observed that when POSTA Uganda was being established, there is what they called a “reserved area” that was reserved for POSTA Uganda, and that was to carry mail weighing below 350 grams and below; that such mail is supposed to be carried by POSTA Uganda alone. But some courier companies have been licensed since, and have encroached on this reserved area with impunity, which has affected the operations of POSTA Uganda in terms of revenue and, therefore, it is facing problems.

The committee recommends that as a regulator, UCC should employ most stringent measures to any operator found encroaching on POSTA Uganda’s reserved area.

Postal License

Although POSTA Uganda’s major postal license was reviewed as reported by the regulator, it has not been issued with a new license by UCC due to Posta’s indebtedness and failure to meet its licence obligations. The committee, therefore, recommends that since POSTA Uganda is a vital government body for national service delivery, the government needs to take up this issue as a matter of urgency to enable the institution operate legally.

Postal Act

The committee observed that the previous year Parliament recommended that the draft postal policy be handled expeditiously to enable the establishment of a Postal Act to enable effective and competitive delivery of services by POSTA Uganda but this was not done. The committee, therefore, now recommends that the process of establishing the Postal Act be expedited in order to give the institution the necessary legal backing to operate competitively.  

Exemption of taxes on telecommunications equipment

The committee observed that in the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2008/2009 delivered to Parliament on 12th June, 2008, on page 42, paragraph 126, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development exempted import taxes on telecommunications equipment. However, this exemption has not been reflected in the ministry’s policy statement as expected. The committee seeks clarification from the Minister of Finance whether this exemption includes equipment for the planned phase two of the National Data Transmission Backbone and the e-Government Infrastructure Project.

If this exemption also captures telecommunications equipment of phase two of the backbone, then we wonder why the Shs 8.4 billion as taxes is factored in the ministry’s total budget allocation.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament do approve the following amounts of money for Vote 020 for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology for the Financial Year 2008/2009:

The amount of Shs 202,244,260,000 is recurrent expenditure; the amount of Shs 4,260,350,000 is development expenditure; and the amount of Shs 8,000,445,000 is taxes, and the total of Shs 14,949,610,000 is the total budget allocation. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. I have looked at the signatures, they are 14 out of 20 and the debate qualifies for debate. However, I was requested by the Opposition Chief Whip to permit the Shadow Minister in charge of ICT to make a few comments. I will do that but I want to add that this is a Committee of the whole House so whatever comments and rebuttals that we have to make should be as brief as possible. You are all members of these committees. I invite the Shadow Minister of ICT to make his submission.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, it is true that the shadow ministers are members of this committee, but you also know that the Opposition are the minority in this committee. And of course there are certain issues in these policy statements that the shadow ministers should be allowed from time to time to contribute to before the general debate sets off for every sector. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already said that I am going to allow it; I was only saying that we will have to use our time well, notwithstanding that we are all members of this committee. Let us not have a complete alternative report. Let us hear from the shadow minister of ICT.

1.18
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ICT (Mr Wilfred Kajeke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. And in the interest of time, I have a written statement that will not take more than ten minutes. 

As the Shadow Minister of ICT, I e-mailed copies to Members and I assume that they have them now. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you e-mail to the Speaker as well? 

MR KAJEKE: For the Speaker, I did, but I also have another copy for you. Madam Speaker, this is the response of the Opposition to the sectoral policy proposals by government in the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology, for the Financial Year 2008/09, presented by me: Wilfred Kajeke, MP Mbale Municipality and Shadow Minister of ICT. 

The President said some time back that my constituency is orphaned, but I am still alive, you can see me talking; I am not dead.

Madam Speaker, by now I believe, and rightly so, that there is no doubt in the minds of all reasonable Ugandans that Uganda being a landlocked country should not equally by e-locked. Therefore, the ICT sector should be given a priority position among others. This does not mean just talking about ICT but committing substantial resources, funds and human resource to this sector. 

When you look at the budget estimates for this financial year, you wonder what is happening in our beloved country. Information and technology should be paramount if one is to talk about any meaningful economic development. A total budget of Shs 14 billion was allocated to the Ministry of ICT. And out of the 14 billion, 8.4 billion is for taxes and only Shs 4 billon is for development. I think this is not being serious and at a later stage I will request the Minister of Finance to clarify to this House on this issue of the taxes of Shs 8.4 billion. 

Some of our neighbours who are equally landlocked have taken up the ICT sector seriously. The Republic of Rwanda, for example, commits about 2 percent of its total national budget to the ICT sector. And because of this, Rwanda has now positioned herself as the ICT hub in East and Central Africa. No wonder when they recently joined the East African Community they demanded that they become the ICT hub of the community among other demands. On the contrary, for us in Uganda we are for the fast tracking of the political federation in order to have the first president of the community. 

It does not surprise anybody in this House that when the process of fast tracking was halted, H.E the President of Uganda in his State of the Nation Address did not find it useful to mention anything about the East African Community. We would be positioning ourselves as a hub of agriculture and education where we have comparative advantage. 

If I were in the shoes of hon. Dr Ham Mulira and hon. Alintuma Nsambu, Minister of ICT and Minister of State respectively, I would have done the following:

I would have advised the President to allocate more funds to the ICT sector for the fact that as a landlocked country that is the only option we have. 

I would have advised Cabinet not to have adopted the Public Service standard, colonial structure of ministries for the Ministry of ICT because the purpose of the establishment of the Ministry of ICT was to lead in the cause of change from large bureaucratic structures to a lean one, to save a lot in terms of administrative costs.

Madam Speaker, I would have advised government to get some substantial amount of money from the licences that have been given to new telecommunications companies, that is, Warid and Hits instead of giving them licences for peanuts. In other countries, for instance the Government of Nigeria raised US $600 million from the four licences that it gave out. That is US $150 million per licence. Rwanda raised US $20 million from one licence and Saudi Arabia raised almost US $1 billion from one licence. Which other source do we intend to raise money from if we almost give out free licences? The argument that if they pay a lot of money it would be passed on to the end user does not hold because our mobile service rates are the highest in the region and the second highest in whole world. 

I would have advised the Ministry of Finance to gradually reduce on the excise duty on airtime as it discourages more use of phones thus affecting the rate of telephone penetration in the country. Studies have proved that excise duty tax impedes growth in the sector and economy. In any case, government would in the long run benefit through high VAT and corporate tax collections from an enlarged telecommunications sector –(Mr Mulira rose)– hon. Minister, why don’t you hold your fire?

Other countries like Thailand and Rwanda that used to impose excise taxes on telecommunications services have since removed them and many other countries all over the world are either reducing or abolishing excise duties on ICT sector. 

Excise duty is a luxury tax that should not be applied to a critical sector in the development of any economy. To impose this luxury tax on ICT sharply contradicts the government’s stated objective of developing the ICT industry. Excise taxes just increase the cost of telecommunications services, consequently increasing the burden on the end user. 

The current user tax on mobile services in Uganda has reached a rate of 30 percent, that is to say, 18 percent VAT and 12 percent excise duty. Fixed line services attract a tax rate of 33 percent of which 18 percent is VAT and five percent excise duty. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda Telecommunications Commission (UCC) as a body supposed to regulate and monitor the communications sector in this country should stop collecting one percent levy on gross revenues of telecommunications operators as this makes UCC appear as a shareholder and a regulator at the same time. This sows the seeds of conflict of interests. I recommend that this levy goes straight to the national fund and thereafter be allocated to UCC through normal budgetary channels to perform its duties. 

The approved structure of the Ministry of ICT required the transfer of the Broadcasting Council from the Ministry of Information and National Guidance to the Ministry of ICT. This would be in line with the current global trend of regulations of both broadcasting infrastructure and telecommunications due to the convergence of the technologies. In the process of the transfer, the Prime Minister suspended the transfer of the Broadcasting Council pending consultations with the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of Information and National Guidance. When are these consultations ending? We need to move. This has also constrained the process of establishment of the Communications Tribunal as provided for by the Communications Act. 

Hon. Minister of Finance, during the Budget Speech you announced that you had reviewed import taxes on telecommunications equipment thus exempting them from those taxes. Could you clarify to the House under which category the equipment being sought for under the EXIM bank loan fall? And if they are under the telecoms equipment, do they not qualify for the tax exemption? And if not, what measures have been taken in line with the above pronouncement since these funds can be allocated to other development activities? A whole Shs 8.4 billion for taxes out of a total of Shs 14 billion for the whole ministry and doubling Shs 4.2 billion for development needs clarification because you said the equipment has been exempted from taxes and now in the Policy Statement of Ministry of ICT, we see taxes taking the biggest share of the amount allocated to the ICT sector! 

Even when you read page 19 of the policy statement, you can see the minister lamenting because they need Shs 5.7 billion to counter-fund the second phase of the laying of the backbone cables because the donors are giving us a loan of Shs 60 billion in the second fund but they need counter funding of Shs 5.7 billion. That alone cannot be got because the total development budget is Shs 4.2 billion and that item alone needs Shs 5.7 billion. You realise that there is need for more money in the sector so that things can move in the right manner.

Finally, can the Minister of ICT explain to this House the high rate of turnover of chief executive officers of POSTA Uganda? In a period of two and a half years, we have had five of them. We need the minister to explain this to us. The current one, seated here, is six months old and I think he is about to go. (Laughter) Has this contributed to the mismanagement of POSTA Uganda? Hon. Minister, are you aware that POSTA Uganda is insolvent? Are you aware that POSTA Uganda is indebted to the tune of Shs 11.8 billion? Are you aware that part of this Shs 11.8 billion is owed to NSSF and the question is who took the workers’ money? And if somebody took it, what steps have you taken to apprehend the culprits? 

Are you also aware that the management of POSTA Uganda spends most of their valuable time in law chambers pleading with the creditors, running up and down dodging court brokers instead of concentrating on their desk work? Are you aware that POSTA Uganda has a universal obligation to provide postal services and therefore the obligation rests entirely on the Government of Uganda to provide this social service? Are you aware that POSTA Uganda has no licence as we speak now? How can a government institution operate illegally, honourable minister? 

I strongly advise that government becomes more serious in terms of the ICT sector as there is no other option. Failure to become serious will mean no change - as usual in the words of the National Resistance Movement Party. Thank you very much, Madam speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. May we ask the Hansard people to correct the spelling of the word “excise”? Hon. Shadow Minister, it is repeatedly spelt out in your speech as “exercise” but I am asking the Hansard staff to correct it to “excise”. Thank you.

1.35
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I intend to be very brief. I am seeking some clarifications from the minister responsible for the sector. One of the biggest problems that we have in this country is planning. We create new sectors and ministries and yet we don’t avail them with the necessary human and financial resources to develop. This seems to be the case with this particular sector.

This ministry has been in place, I think for the last three years now, but looking at their policy statement on page 49, there is what they call a planning unit. There are five vacancies approved for this unit and there is zero staff. That means that there is nobody in the planning unit. Tell me, how does a new ministry operate without a planning unit? 

When you look at 49 again, there is a Directorate of Information, Technology and Information Management Services, which is supposed to be the core of this ministry. There are 12 approved posts and of the 12 posts, nine are vacant; they only have three. I expected the committee to raise these issues. It looks as if all the money is provided for salaries and so on yet you don’t have the staff to do the job. 

I would like to seek another explanation. The biggest problems that we have had are these ad hoc organisations or organs in ministries. There is one in the ministry called the National Backbone Project. Why do we have projects and people employed on contract terms? Why don’t you create a department and eventually recruit? In fact when you look at this project, Members will note on page 51 that all the posts have been filled whereas the established staff of the ministry is lacking.

Furthermore, when you look at the Department of Communication and Broadcasting Infrastructure, it is the same case. There are nine approved posts but we only have two filled and seven vacant. You will find in all these departments that the filled positions are those of tea girls, stenographers, drivers - who do they serve? The officers are not in the departments and you are busy recruiting secretaries and office attendants! I think we have a big problem. 

I have been looking again at the Broadcasting Infrastructure Department. The approved posts are nine, filled posts: one; vacant posts: eight. I don’t think the ministry is very serious. They should explain to this House why they have not filled these posts and they are busy recruiting tea girls and drivers and yet if you are talking about the salaries, I am sure they are provided for. If not then that is another matter and we shall go back to the doctor. You know professors teach economics and today I found one teaching commerce; he should explain to us why he cannot provide resources to have the staff recruited and instead he is busy providing resources to recruit tea girls and drivers. This equation of his does not make sense to me. If we were to go back to senior -(Member timed out)

1.39
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the committee for coming up with this report and the shadow minister who presented the Opposition view and proposals. I hope that the minister concerned will treat our proposals from this side with the seriousness that they deserve.

I would like to add my voice to the matter raised by the shadow minister concerning these taxes of Shs 8.4 billion. What is the source of this tax when the development budget is about Shs 4.2 billion and the taxes alone come to Shs 8.4 billion? This raises a lot of concern so I would like to seek clarification on this. 

Secondly, there has been a lot of talk, especially in the media, that all civil servants in Uganda are to be provided with laptops. I thought that this was not very workable but that perhaps the minister was going to include this in the budget. I checked the policy statement but there is nothing included to this effect. The question I am raising is, was that just wild talk from the ministry or some person was trying to do business using the ministry?

Finally, I would like the minister to help us. Two years down the road, how far has this ministry helped other ministries to link up and how far have they moved in having districts linked up using computerised systems? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to give opportunity to Members who have not spoken yet.

1.41
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, the shadow minister and the ministry for the achievements. I want to note that the ICT sector is the fastest growing sector not only in Uganda but globally. In the committee’s recommendations, I want to handle three areas: 

One is the delay in implementing the provision of Section 75 of the Uganda Communications Act, Cap 106 for the establishment of the Communications Tribunal. Last year this same committee in their report emphasised the same. On 8th April I raised a question for oral answer to the hon. Minister of ICT on the same. This financial year again in the committee’s report, emphasis is still being made on the same and calls are being made to the ministry to ensure that a Communications Tribunal is established. 

I am a village boy and in my considered opinion, Parliament has always been an institution where laws are debated, passed and changed. My fundamental question to the minister still remains: when does he intend to comply with the provision of the law? If the law is not okay, when is he intending to come back to Parliament for an amendment because that is the provision? This should be done by Parliament but I think the issue of when should be answered.

Second is the delay in presenting the cyber laws to Parliament. I must admit that the process of drafting started in 2004, even before the ministry was created and I am happy that this law, once established, is supposed to go a long way in regulating a number of activities: e-learning, e-commerce. 

I am also happy that last week the minister tabled the long awaited NITA Bill to this House and in the report the committee is saying that the first phase of the backbone is already completed. That also makes me happy but I am worried because there is no mechanism for managing this backbone. Madam Speaker, can we get to know from the honourable minister - this House demands to know the impact of the first phase of this backbone. The minister should tell us for example: what are the cost benefits; what are the savings that we have made on expenditure of government as a result of this backbone?

Three, in 2006 I led a team of young Ugandans from Northern Uganda on a tour of Kigali. In that tour I met officials from the Ministry of ICT where they were chairing a very important meeting that led to what we now call the Kigali Protocol. In that protocol it is indeed the Ministry of ICT and the minister who chaired that meeting, where Uganda, even as a country did commit itself and signed a Memorandum of Understanding. The Kigali Protocol was an African Union framework for open access of submarine cables under the auspices of NEPAD. 

However, two years down the road, Uganda, which chaired this meeting and even signed the Memorandum of Understanding to demonstrate our commitment and interest, has not ratified it. Seven countries have so far done so but we who sat on the chair have not gone ahead to ratify it. May I also seek clarification from the honourable minister: when does he intend to bring this protocol here to be ratified by the Government of Uganda? Because in my country, you cannot organise a party at home knowing so well that you have chicken and you invite eagles. That cannot happen. 

So, Madam Speaker, those are my three basic and legal concerns that should be answered because this Parliament is mandated by the Constitution to make laws; it is this Parliament where laws are amended and it is this Parliament that should in its oversight role ensure that the laws that are made are implemented. Thank you.

1.45
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I must also thank the committee for this report. I do not want to take long raising my concerns. I have only two, on which I want some explanation from the minister. 

My interest is drawn to page 11, paragraph 6(i): the relationship between the Ministry of ICT and UCC itself. I do not know how the ministry operates when there is this conflict and apparent lack of clearly defined roles between the regulatory body under the ministry and the ministry itself. And because of this confusion I would like the minister to tell us and inform this House the role being played by the Minister of State responsible for ICT because when government establishes some of the ICT labs in higher institutions and also upcountry, often it is recommended that the beneficiaries get some of this equipment from a company, which belongs to the minister. 

I would like first of all the chairperson -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, what did you say? Can you repeat that? I did not clearly get what you are saying.

MR ODIT: Yes, there is a company, which I think the chairman will have to remind us of, belonging to one of the ministers in that ministry that is supplying equipment to establish laboratories. I want the minister to clarify here whether this apparent illusion I have is right. Because if that is the case then there is clear conflict of interest and role because the ministry should be regulating the sector but it is also responsible for implementing some of these policies -(Mr Mulira rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are going to answer later.

MR ODIT: Two, I would also like to know whether the minister -(Dr Mulira rose_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are going to answer as a minister in charge of the sector.

MR ODIT: Mr Minister, you take note. Madam Speaker, in our earlier investigation we also learnt that Uganda is apparently giving away its code number to a neighbouring country under a company called GemTel. I do not know whether we are not losing revenue by voluntarily giving away our country code to Southern Sudan, which is not a state and which cannot qualify under the International Telecommunications Commission to get its own code? It should normally be operating from the Sudan country code but it is sharing our code and we are a different country from Sudan. 

I also want to know from the minister what that means to this country and more so the relationship between Uganda and the main Sudan in this matter. I thank you.

1.50
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for the report, which they have submitted. I also wish to thank the committee for their analysis of the budget performance for 2007/2008. 

It is indicated in the table and I wish all other committees could follow the same example, that there is unspent balance of Shs 77,061,086 in this particular ministry. Madam Speaker, I think you are aware that we have been fighting for a long time with having to know how much has been unspent by each of the Vote holders after each financial year and for the first time I am seeing it here indicated in this report by the Ministry of ICT. 

Secondly, the issue of the relationship between the ministry and UCC was discussed in our report, which we sent to the President as Parliament and it was recommended there that possibilities be explored to have some of the resources, which were collected or which have been collected by UCC, to be utilised in the promotion of ICT projects being implemented by the Ministry of ICT. This recommendation is supposed to be echoed on page 11 under recommendation 6(i) because it was felt that the UCC collects so much money and yet the ministry itself is starved of money as you have seen from their budget. It is important that this should not be overlooked and that the House should pronounce itself on how UCC can give up some of these resources to enable the ministry undertake some of the major projects, which it undertakes as a ministry and not as just an agency like UCC. I think this is the point that I wanted to raise. It is information, which is contained in our recommendation to the President.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I have been looking at the Government Front Bench. One, I do not see the Leader of Government Business, neither -(Interruptions)- no, no! The Leader of Government Business is a constitutional matter; not anybody can occupy a constitutional office -(Interjections)- there is no Leader of Government Business. Let me make my point. 

And then two, we are debating the budget and questions being raised touch Finance and the Minister of Finance has walked out of this House. I can only see Disaster -(Laughter)- Minister for traders -(Laughter)- Minister for Disaster Preparedness and the others. I do not see the Minister of Finance and when we raise these pertinent issues it is my view that procedurally the minister should be here to clarify and respond because these are very critical issues concerning the budget and the sector minister or his assistant should be really. That is the issue that I wanted to raise. We are not debating for the sake of debating. Government should be serious with the relevant ministers in the House to respond to our concerns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now I do not know who to address because last week I gave notice that we would require all of you to be here from Monday morning so that we could debate each and everyone of these committee reports. But I notice that obviously some of the key people are not here – no, but there are certain issues, which I heard from your reports that have not been answered and which I think the Minister of Finance should answer.

So I will reluctantly adjourn this House to 3.30 p.m. and can we have all the relevant ministers, including both the Minister of Finance and the Leader of Government on both sides? I suspend the proceedings until 3.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.55 p.m.)

(On resumption, at 3.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we suspended the House a few Members had indicated the intentions to contribute. I now invite hon. Baryomunsi.

3.38
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County, East, Kanungu):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution on the discussion of the report from the committee. I also want to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for the report brought to us.

The first comment I would like to raise is a procedural matter in regard to interventions by the shadow ministers. I know this has been an issue in the House, but I was prompted to ask this because the shadow minister was raising a number of pertinent questions for the minister to respond to. I am saying this because it has become a habit – much as I respect the view that shadow ministers should make their presentations - I think we may need to revisit our Rules of Procedure as Parliament and provide space where they can formerly raise their issues. 

My concern comes from the fact that I notice that it has become a habit for the shadow ministers to refuse to sign reports of committees. Sometimes a number of them refuse to attend the discussions and when a committee has completed a report, they make a copy out of it and prepare a counter report. I think we should not be proceeding that way because some of the questions that the honourable member was raising could have been clarified and answered by the minister during the committee meeting. 

I have seen this trend and I think, as Parliament, we need to look at our Rules of Procedure and streamline the way shadow ministers can intervene.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give some clarification to the effect that we should first of all understand why shadow ministers are in place. I am saying this because a shadow minister is not like an ordinary Member of Parliament who, when he is a member of a committee should adhere to the committee position. A shadow minister may not necessarily be a member of that committee; he may not because it is not by our Rules of Procedure that a shadow minister should be a member of a particular committee. 

It has only been for the convenience of the Opposition that we have decided that at least for the meantime, let shadow ministers be members of the respective committees to get an insight. But within these committees there are no provisions where a shadow minister is supposed to give a presentation before the committee finally comes up with a report. 

The idea is that there must be a balanced debate; policy statements are presented to the House and therefore the response should also be in the House. I think the two should not be mixed. The opinion and views of the shadow ministers should not really be suppressed. Why do you want to suppress their views? Why don’t you give them the opportunity? In any case the time allotted to them is not beyond that of an ordinary Member; they are always limited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not true. Anyway, honourable members, I think our Rules Committee needs to look at this matter. It is a grey area and it gives us a lot of trouble, as presiding officers, to create time for the main committees where a shadow minister is and also create time for the shadow minister. So, I think our Rules Committee needs to look at this matter so that we agree on how we are going to proceed. But also there is a possibility of a minority report so that even the chair knows that there is a minority report. The committee should know that there is a minority report, but you know you sit there and do not sign and later on you wake up and say, “I am the shadow minister; I have come with this.” Let us try – no one wants to suppress the shadow ministers but we should have a means of operation that keeps us all working in harmony so that I can allot time to a particular committee and so on.

Before hon. Baryomunsi comes up, we have in the strangers’ gallery, students of St. Cecelia Boarding Primary School, Buyamba in Rakai District. You are welcome. Ah! There they are. You are welcome!

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I respect your ruling on the matter. I definitely know why shadow ministers are in this Parliament, but I was saying that we should streamline our rules to give you that provision not really to just act the way we are doing.

I have a few comments, some of which have been highlighted. However, I also want to raise the question of the budget for the ministry where more than half is indicated to go to taxes. We really need an explanation either from the minister or the chairperson of the committee why over half the ministry’s budget should go to taxes with only less than half of it going for services. I expect the minister to clarify.

I agree that the ICT sector has improved and expanded because when you move in the city and outside, you realise that internet access has greatly improved. However, I just want to raise a concern – and I would want the minister to help me – on whether it is possible for the government to block some of the material that is being accessed through the internet? When you go to most of the internet cafes in town, you find many young people, including children, accessing pornographic material. I just want to be helped by the minister on whether there is a way the government can probably block some of the unwanted material so that they cannot be accessed especially by the children. I am saying this because this material is corrupting the morals of Ugandans; something should be done to save the minds of our young people.

Finally, I want to emphasize the issue of establishing a Communications Tribunal. I thought that when Parliament makes a law, then the next step would be to implement what has been passed but not to go back and negotiate whether what has been passed by Parliament should be implemented or not. So I am raising this concern as hon. Obua also raised it; the Communications Act was put in place in 1998 and many years down the road, the minister tells us that we are negotiating whether to institute it or not. I thought this is unfair. 

Once we pass a law, if you are not happy with some of the provisions, I think the right path would be to come back and maybe seek an amendment in the provisions of the law. Other than that, what we would expect is implementing the laws which have been passed in this House. With those comments, I support the report and would want us to adopt it as Parliament. Thank you. 

3.46
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank hon. Baliddawa for the report he has produced. I have a few comments. The first one is on page 12 under the heading “National Digital Backbone Project”. Under that paragraph, it says: “However, it was observed that there was no independent expert to supervise the equipment, fibre cables and the installation of the fibre.” 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious thing. We expect that when we get a loan, maybe from China - and the contractor is Chinese; I do not know how he got the job - where there is no independent supervisor, we are bound to get substandard work, inflated costs and the rest. So I want the minister to tell us why this contractor is going on with such a big job where there is no independent consultant or supervisor.

My second comment relates to page 13 under “Building a home for the ministry.” Yes, I like this idea, but let me appeal to the government to utilise space maximally. We are spreading so many small building everywhere and we have very limited space. If you take Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for instance, and the Statistics Building, each one holds just part of a ministry. That space would have been used by about six ministries if we utilised vertical space. I appeal to my colleagues in the Ministry of ICT to go and talk to the Leader of Government Business to utilise vertical space so that we can get many ministries in the same place. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on posts - Uganda’s reserved business area - the impression I got is that they have got an exclusive right as the only operators. This is wrong. Let them open up. If they are inefficient, let them get out of business. We are not going to allow post office to be inefficient while we suffer the costs. So, I propose that this monopoly be scrapped. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that I want to give the honourable colleague is that the exclusivity is on mail below 35 grams not anything else.

MR BYANDALA: I do not even see why there should be monopoly in that area. They should be open. Let us compete. If they are not efficient, let them get out so that people get value for money.

3.49
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to the others and thank the chairperson of this committee for the good report. I also want to thank the members of this committee for their input. I finally thank the ministers in charge of ICT for the fundamental changes they have achieved. 

I have some few observations to make, Madam Speaker. If we look at the vision, mission and mandate of this ministry, it is a ministry that is supposed to collaborate with virtually all ministries. Yes, we may say that there is very little money allocated for this ministry, but when you analyse other ministerial policy statements, you will find that in almost every ministry, there is a very big component of ICT. If we sum up all the monies in the different ministries, we will realise that we are actually giving a lot of money to ICT.

Having said that, I want to focus on the achievements of this ministry, especially in communications technology. One time I had a chance to go to Australia; I travelled with H.E. the President. One investor in Australia wanted to promote the image of Uganda abroad and he was quoting big sums of money but now that the world has almost become a global village, I would like to see the achievements of this ministry. Let them liaise with different ministries like trade and industry, tourism, and maybe foreign affairs to see how they can really help this country with marketing, attracting investment and promoting the image of this country abroad. 

I also want to see how this ministry links up with the Ministry of Education, especially in public universities. We recently agreed to pass a loan of 23 billion just to construct one institution – to beef up Uganda Management Institute. I think this Ministry of ICT has a very big role to play in putting on board our public universities so that we can start offering programmes, especially in the humanities. Most of the disciplines in the humanities can be offered online. I would have loved to see one of the major achievements of the ministry being that in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, they started an open university in this country as a way of moving towards universal university education maybe by the year 2015 or 2020.

I also want to say that we have been crying about our civil servants not building their capacity to enable them to do a good job. I think this is a ministry that can work very well with Ministry of Public Service. On Page 8, I see that there is phase two of the National Data Transmission Backbone and e-Government Infrastructure Project. I think if these two ministries put their heads together, we can even exploit the opportunity and see how we can build capacity and how we can design some extramural programmes for our civil servants for purposes of empowering them to do a better job for purposes of reserves. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I also want to add my voice to that of hon. Byandala on the issue of supervision. I think government trusts contractors too much. I want to appeal to government to stop over trusting these contractors. It is not only in the ICT ministry but many other ministries. In Ministry of Health, for instance, there was a contractor doing some construction at Buhinga Referral Hospital and the supervisor was coming from the ministry to supervise that person when the work was almost over. We really need to have serious supervisors or consultants who are going to supervise.

3.55
MR SIMON TOOLIT (FDC, Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must also add my voice to thank the committee members and the minister of ICT. My concerns have been drawn to the amount of tax or taxes which these people have put in their budget. As you can see, the recurrent estimate is Shs 2.24 billion, which should actually include the taxes. However, the ministry has gone ahead to put Shs 8.445 billion as taxes, which is even higher than their budget estimates. If you studied last year’s performance, there was no budget for the taxes; is the minister telling us that last year they did not pay any taxes?

Secondly, I have a problem with POSTA Uganda. We have been told that POSTA Uganda does not have a license. If you study their activities, you will find out that POSTA Uganda is now involved in the transport business of carrying passengers in more than six-seater vehicles, which is not actually in line with the business that they were set up to do. So, I think the minister should give us the clarification on the involvement of POSTA Uganda in the transportation business. Thank you very much.

3.57
PROF WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have only two points to raise in form of emphasis. 

Uganda currently is following a liberalised economy; that is the economic policy. I would not like to see anywhere in the economic activity of this country some people being excluded. That is why I would like to get some clarification as to why POSTA Uganda should have a reserved field of activity. I am sure the couriers who are doing this have licenses. If they have licenses, I think nobody has a right to prevent them from carrying out their economic activity.  

Secondly, I am very worried about the staff of the ministry. The ministry has been in place, I think for three years now, and it has an establishment of 111 and the staff position is 43, which is less than half. I do not know how that ministry is operating if the staff situation is so bad like that. I would like to get some explanation as to why the ministry has not been able to recruit in the last three years. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.59
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had wanted to ask the ministry of ICT about these computers being supplied to all local governments. It started with Members of Parliament, now they are supplying to all local government civil servants. They call it e-Governance programme under Ministry of ICT. 

Last week, I heard that it is now being launched in all secondary schools. Would the minister want to tell us whether it is a ministry project or whether it is someone’s private business? If it is someone’s private business, what memorandum of understanding was reached between those private individuals to use the ministry’s name so that they can pass their products as part of the government policy?  I think this is a very serious question and I want a precise answer. 

What is the project? Is it your programme to sell computers to other individuals? Where are you buying them from? Why is it being handled from premises not in your ministry if it is part of your package to help all civil servants to get connected? Thank you.

4.01
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern is on Page 11 where the committee states as follows: “The UCC is performing functions that are supposed to be spearheaded by the ministry.” Madam Speaker, UCC was set up before the ministry and it has been performing those functions. The ministry just came into being recently. Who is trying to grab whose function? (Laughter) I think it is the ministry which is trying to grab functions that are being performed by UCC because it is older than the ministry. (Laughter)

Secondly, last year plots of POSTA Uganda were advertised all over the country and people tendered. Later on, the tenders were cancelled. The committee should have found out and reported here about these plots. The talk now is that the tenders were cancelled because wrong people were going to get the plots; that the plots are now being sold privately to certain individuals. We would like clarification from the minister on this. What happened to the tenders?  

Madam Speaker, I would like ICT to really roll out but this idea of rolling out is not beneficial to some of us. Normally, we start rolling out from the centre and by the time we reach the far flank - the Kobokos, Kotidos, Kitgums of this world - we will have waited for years. Why don’t we start from far and then rollback? In the centre we already have services; I think we should really give affirmative action to some areas so that we are more or less comparable. The rest of the country is third world and the centre is first world as far as this country is concerned. So, I think we should really favour rural areas so that the children there can compete with the children in the centre. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ham Mulira): Thank you, Madam Speaker, honourable members, the chairman of the Committee of ICT and the members of the ICT committee. First of all, may I start by thanking the committee for the report and the chairman for his presentation, and also the honourable members for the various inputs and issues which they have raised, which no doubt will help in improving the report and the ICT sector and the nation in general. Yes, we did have extensive discussions with the committee, the ministry, the institutions attached to the ministry - that is, UCC, POSTA Uganda, UICT - and even some of the other stakeholders like the operators.  

Madam Speaker, before I proceed to the responses to the numerous issues, there is one particular issue which I would like to start with and with your permission, I want to request my colleague to come and fill in. Hon. John Odit in his presentation stated that there is a programme which is going on under auspices of the ministry. He stated that there seems to be conflict of interest between the minister’s role and the company, which is carrying out this. This seems to have indicated that the minister or one of the two ministers had a private company, which was dealing with functions which are state functions and therefore there was a conflict of interest. 

I presumed he was referring to the programme which was conducted by my colleague, the state minister, even before the ministry was established. He used to receive computers as donations from the USA and then he used to distribute them to schools in the various places and then the ministry was formed. He continued with that by receiving donations of computers including volunteers from the USA who would come every summer every year to assist him in establishing this. This is not a ministry programme. It is a private arrangement, which is a volunteerism by the minister of state, and in the broader sense it fulfils part of the mission and the vision of what the sector is to do.  

I think hon. Odonga Otto also brought an issue which is related to that. I am going to request my colleague, the state minister, to come since he is the one dealing with that. Thank you. (Laughter)

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) (Mr Alintuma Nsambu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. By the way, I feel very thrilled because since I joined the Cabinet of Uganda, this is my first opportunity to speak in the House. (Laughter and Applause) So, I am very thankful to the honourable members that have presented questions that have prompted by default that I come to speak and make a few clarifications, which I am ready to make. 

As my senior minister has mentioned, there have been a lot of initiatives in the ministry of ICT, which largely depend on the situations as they come. The first situation is that we are tremendously competing with not only other nations but our neighbours whom we really want to out compete. So, any vision that comes to show first of all our presence as a ministry and certainly myself as state minister is welcome. At one point I wish also to present our relevance within our sector so that is why you see so many initiatives that come. 

One of the initiatives is trying to make the people, especially within the public service, aware if they did not know or to remind them that today if you do not put an element of technology within your work, you can hardly compete or even perform. At one point in our desperate way, we said, “how can we bring something tangible that people can touch and feel the power of technology?”; tangible in a way that it is different from a fancy mobile phone which is a very common thing for everybody to own. We thought of a but a computer where a person not only learns how to hold the mouse and to use the keyboard but one where someone knows that if I have my data and I have a document to produce, it is only and only mine. 

Today I can guarantee you that very often people have very interesting projects that they come up with and put on paper. Those projects sometimes, God forbid, could even be government secrets and they end up in the public market. Someone can go with a flash disk to any internet café and plug it into the computer. The person then just runs away with a hard copy forgetting that the soft copy could have remained at that very place where the person has been using the computer. 

So we said, “Why don’t we work hard and get someone to help each of the members of the Public Service to own a computer of their own?” We started a long journey. I do not know whether it is on record anywhere, but I remember even asking His Excellency the Vice-President when he went for UNAA in the United States last year to accompany us and add more weight to see companies such as Dell, Acer, Microsoft and HP. When we went to those people, many of you know typically the American will always say, “How can we help you?” they indeed helped us because they talked to us but they never took action.  

We wanted a company that would be interested in providing the Government of Uganda or helping in a way of partnership in giving us this hardware, which we would give to the public service. Anyway, at the end of the day, we needed money. Even when we needed to cover just a quarter to see our vision realised, even when we needed to provide a quarter of what it takes for the public service to be covered, we needed more than US $10 and we obviously did not have that money. So, we said still the idea is not bad so we have to do something. By the way, we do not even need to go far –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alintuma, the issue which was raised on the Floor is that, one of you ministers is using his company to do business with the government and that there is a conflict of interest. Just come straight to the point. What is going on? Where are the computers coming from? Who is paying for them? Where is the company? Who owns the company? That is what the members want to know.  

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I understand and I am not going to run away from the question. As I said, I have the answers. However, the thing is, if I just answered, it would be unfair because giving the background of the whole thing is the ultimate goal so that the person probably does not have to ask the same questions. We can answer, but still the question will not be properly answered if I do not give this minor background. I am just getting to the answer.

We went to all these companies, by the way including the World Bank; there was time where we engaged the head of the World Bank to finance this project but it also failed. So, we said we are now going to ask individuals because after studying the industry as it is, if you need a computer or a laptop or even a phone, you have to pay cash. There is no manufacturer on earth, be it HP or any company, who can let any computer leave their factory before you give them cash. So, Madam Speaker, this is what I did.

A friend of Uganda said, “We cannot believe it that there is a country where members of the public service do not have computers.” Today, by the way, even students have one. There is almost no country where we went where a computer is a new thing; it is common. It is an important tool to use. So, the person said, “Okay John, you can go and tell your colleagues in Uganda that we are going to earmark US$ 150 million to help you pay the manufacturer and when the computers come to Uganda, this is what your office has got to do.”  We had to make sure that those computers are not stolen, because when they come here, they are in our hands. To that end, I was personally responsible to make sure that from what those Americans sent here, nothing gets lost.  So, that is actually the role we are playing.  

Secondly, they said, that for every laptop that comes to Uganda, they want five dollars as profit. So, the computer leaves the factory at a cost of US US$ 680. Madam Speaker, I am on leave but it would have been very interesting to lay on table the documentation from URA to prove that actually there is nobody that makes money. By the time the laptops are at Entebbe, they are at US$ 680 and the American wants US$ 5 from every public servant that touches it.  

There comes the other issue of the bank. The bank collects every penny that the public servant pays and they send it back to the Americans. Now, it is Stanbic Bank which does that. On the question of who makes money or not, I know one person who makes money and that is the person who provided the US US$ 150 million which never in the first place comes to Uganda. It goes straight to the manufacturer and the manufacturer sends the laptops here. So, at the end of the day, the laptop ends up at the cost of US$ 690. However, the bank is also charging this American for remitting that money back to him; it takes US$ 10. So, when the public servant walks to that distribution centre, he has to show up with US$ 699. 

Incidentally, I am using some of these laptops; they are here and I can raise one for members to see. There is no laptop that comes without a name. The laptops we have are called Tropix. Tropix is a company owned by somebody who makes money. There is nobody who is going to put up a company without making money. In the case of Uganda, they reap US$ 5 off each public servant and that company is owned by none other than the very American who owns it jointly - I think on this one, I have to admit because under the law I understand he had to venture with other local Ugandans before he can be allowed to open that company. So, I do not think there is anyone within our ministry that is part of the company or owns the company.  I am very active there to make sure we keep the word which I am personally responsible for as State Minister for ICT. I want to make sure that the American gets his money through Stanbic Bank. That is the level of explanation I can make, Madam Speaker.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, honourable minister, for giving way. I want to thank you for your initiative to coordinate Ugandans who would have not easily afforded such laptops. I know your efforts; at one time we were with you in Gulu launching a rural internet café in Lacor.  

Notwithstanding all those good initiatives, honourable minister, the clarification I am seeking from you is one: Are you aware that using the name of the Ministry of ICT is creating an impression in the village that it is a government policy? In fact, the civil servants from Pader were calling me that the CAO and Town Clerk told them that there is a government policy that every civil servant must have a laptop. So, your product is being passed off like it is a government policy. That is a clarification I am seeking from you. 

Two, it is amounting to an unfair trade practice because someone is here marketing Tropix to all civil servants of Uganda yet Dell, HP and other appliances could have also been formally tendered to provide services at a lower price than that. So, the US$ 150,000,000 you signed with that generous American, was it a government document or it was your personal negotiation with them? These are serious issues and we may even at an appropriate time ask for a commission of inquiry into this thing. So, you better take the question seriously.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I heard the substantive minister properly, he did say that his minister of state joined government with this business; he was already doing business. He said that before he joined government, he was doing the same thing. The question is, before the minister of state joined government and he was doing this business, was he getting any profit or any other benefits? What we should establish is: does the minister of state get any benefit out of this trade while in government? 

Madam Speaker, we are hearing many things. We read about the sell of land to NSSF at blown-up prices. We read about this. It is all about ethics. I tried very hard to really follow what he was saying but in the end I asked myself, “what has he told us?” I think he should tell us that, “I am not getting anything at all. I am not benefiting.” If he is benefiting, then that is a very serious matter because the purchase of this laptop is compulsory to all civil servants. Somebody is actually getting money by force from the civil servants. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to fail to understand that –(Laughter)- the Minister of State in Charge of Information Communication Technology is technologically advanced and wants to advance the technological knowledge of Ugandans? Is he in order to imagine that this is a bad thing when in fact the ministry is out to develop our consciousness of technology? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issue which was raised here before we suspended the House for lunch was whether one of the ministers in that ministry is using his position to trade with the government. That is what we want you to explain. Is it a government programme? Who is funding it? Please, just explain that to us and members will leave you alone.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, thank you for putting more light on this. I thought making a preamble in an explanatory way was making some sense but now if some members prefer me telling them the actual facts, they are as follows: The laptops do not belong to the government at all. They belong to the individual. These individuals who are members of the public service are not expected to return these laptops when they are no longer in the position they hold. 

I used the government name for two reasons. The first is that the mandate allows us to promote ICT. So, if we go to HP and tell them, “we need laptops” and HP tells me US$ 1,500 for the same laptop I can get for US$ 700, I have to guide and say, “No, as minister of state or as a ministry, the best way to go for the public servants is this.” So, whether we like it or not, at one point we have to use a company, whether HP or Dell, they all make the same. This one ends up being a Tropix brand; actually for your information, the manufacturer who makes Tropix is the same manufacturer who makes Photoshiba. The reason why we in Uganda here have got Tropix is because the less the name is known, the cheaper the product becomes. That is the world of technology. So, that is why I prefer using a cheaper –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Alintuma; really we have asked you a question. Just say you are not doing business with the government. That is what the members want to hear.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I am not doing business with this project. As I conclude, I think I will continue to do this because it is important. Thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the clarification he has tried to put across, but it would appear that the matter is quite elaborate and it is a bit difficult for some of us who are getting the information for the first time to follow the sequence of events. Would it not be in the interest of all parties that the minister is maybe given time and he comes out with a written explanation so that we properly follow and be guided on what to do next?

MR PIRO SANTOS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. He is saying that he is not doing business with that programme he has put in place but I would like him to clarify on the computers he supplied to Members of Parliament together with his chairman of the committee of ICT, some of which are fake. I am one of the victims; for the last one year, we could not get these computers replaced. Hasn’t this been business? He should clarify why they have divided business with the chairman of the sessional Committee of ICT since that time and he has started a new business on his own. How is he going to replace these computers once they get spoilt, especially those for the civil servants which he is supplying in the rural areas, yet he has failed even to replace the computers in Parliament that have got factory errors for the last one year? I thank you so much. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought when the Ministry of ICT was set up, one of its responsibilities was to popularise and advocate the use of modern communication technology in the management of government affairs. I thought it is the mandate of the minister and his team to ensure that they enable government through advocacy at Cabinet level to ensure that the right policies to promote this system are advocated for. I thought it is also their duty to ensure that sufficient money is voted for to ensure that this is fulfilled. 

I want to find out from the Minister of ICT whether his continued promotion of this side project or parallel promotion does not interfere and prevent them from making the necessary advocacy for the budget and the policy in favour of a private gainful opportunity which they are undertaking. No wonder that the ICT budget seems to be the smallest in government and also the biggest component only comes to pay tax. Can he clarify whether these two cannot prevent them from doing the right thing?

DR BARYOMUNSI: When the senior minister for ICT made his presentation, he gave an impression that government had nothing to do with the computer project. However, as the hon. Alintuma Nsambu explained, I got an impression that somehow government is involved. I would like to support what hon. Tashobya has suggested, that maybe we give the ministers time to bring a written statement giving us clear information. 

The programme to give computers to civil servants is taken as government initiative. Some of us receive calls from the CAOs and civil servants to pick computers for them. So, we need clear and accurate information about it. We can probably give them two weeks or so and then the minister comes with a written explanation which can satisfy all of us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I too have many things I will want to understand about that programme. So honourable ministers, can you come with a separate statement on that particular issue? We are giving you two weeks. Now you can respond to the other issues raised. 

DR MULIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before starting, I need to clarify the point which I made earlier. The honourable minister of state has concentrated his submission on the laptops for civil servants project. The project which I was talking about is the computers for schools which hon. Odit brought up and it is separate. Therefore to hon. Baryomunsi, that is the issue which I mentioned when I was on the Floor, but the state minister was talking about laptops for civil servants. The two are completely different. The first one on computers to schools is voluntary, which the honourable minister had even before the Ministry of ICT was established, and it has nothing to do with the laptops.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alintuma has got a passion for computers we all know. He even one day demonstrated by undressing at the airport when they wanted to tax his computers and I do not think that was a government project.

DR MULIRA: The computers for schools are totally different. The ones he has outlined are the laptops for civil servants. The computers for schools’ project is a project that has been going on long before the ministry was even established and children come from the USA.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was being done by who?

DR MULIRA: By hon. Nsambu.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then it is not a government project. 

DR MULIRA: That was not a business; these are donations and are not bought.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the donations are not the issue. You are now confusing us even more. What is your ministry responsible for? I think that is what you should tell us.

DR MULIRA: On those two projects, our ministry is not responsible for computers for schools. That has nothing to do with the Ministry of ICT. It is hon. John Alintuma Nsambu who has been doing it for several years now. Although the laptops for civil servants as he has explained was his personal initiative, he linked with the overall vision and policy of ensuring that there is access to IT services to all people in society. That is why they even started with the Members of Parliament and with the chairman of the sessional committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you leave those matters. They will be explained in that statement.

DR MULIRA: Okay. Thank you very much.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I agree with your ruling that we need a very clear statement; more so that apparently this country was committed to a tune of US$ 150 million without consent from Parliament to run some business. We need that explanation and the two ministers seem to be hiding something which will involve the role of the IGG to investigate. This is a very serious matter but if they can bring us an impressive statement, then we would debate from an informed position. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not speculate. We have agreed that the minister is going to come here in a fortnight to bring a comprehensive statement on that matter. Do not speculate anymore.

DR MULIRA: With that, I wish to categorically state that I am not hiding anything. Once again, if I may go back to the report of the committee, it was extensive and portrayed the progress of the ICT sector both within the ministry and the associated institutions. 

Without going into too much detail, I would like to start by pointing out a few areas and then responding to members’ issues. If I may start on page 4 of the report; it outlines key achievements of the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. Also for the record, on the Order Paper it is written as “Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology” but it is the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. 

I wish to point out that there are some other submissions on achievements which were inadvertently not listed here. We submitted the achievements to the committee and I think I would like to add a few on this list as part of those that were submitted to the committee. One of them regards the cyber laws as has been stated. I am glad to mention that the three cyber laws - computer misuse, electronic signatures and electronic transactions are now ready for gazetting and I would like to table a few documents: one, a letter from the First Parliamentary Counsel indicating that these Bills are ready for gazetting. I would also like to table a document, that is, a letter from the First Parliamentary Counsel reference e-commerce Bills, Cabinet Minute No. 315 CT 208, which refers to the fact that these Bills are now ready for gazetting.

Madam Speaker, when we interacted with the committee and stated why some of these achievements were not listed, they said that maybe it was because some of the documentation to back up the statements, which we had written had not been received by the committee. Therefore, I would like to use the floor to indicate that one of these is the Draft National Postal Policy, which we had listed as having been achieved and I would like to table this policy here. I would also like -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why didn’t you table them before the committee met?

MR MULIRA: The committee did not ask for them at the time but then in the report, they said that because they didn’t see them physically, they had not been listed in the achievements.

I would also like to table the draft telecoms policy, which is being reviewed and which has been mentioned in a number of places. It is the telecoms policy review. 

I would like to also table the draft IT Policy, which has been mentioned but it hasn’t been there. The draft IT policy is ready and it is here. 

There was also mention that there is no management. The reason I am tabling it is that it will help in some of the future discussions on the presentations and responses. It was said that there was no management planned for the backbone. I would like to mention that this national backbone issue is an area, which many countries especially developing countries are moving into to provide connectivity in terms of data, voice and video across the entire nation and Uganda is one of the countries in the forefront of doing this. 

Support from World Bank and other donors is the best form of management for such a national project. Therefore, we established a team to work out the best possible options of managing a national backbone of this nature. I would like to table this; the executive summary of that report for the study, which we did. 

I would like to also mention that there has been talk in the report and from Members and we shall include hon. Byandala and others, that there was no supervision in the national backbone. This I think, like the honourable chair stated in the report, that there were some typographical errors here and there because I would like to table the contract agreement between the Ministry of ICT and Com Consult Limited for supervision, excavation and reinstatement works for the National Data Transmission Backbone and E-Government Infrastructure and the terms of reference are given. There was an independent consultant on this project. I would like to table the contract.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am getting puzzled. If it was one document that you were tabling, I would not mind but you are tabling substantive documents. Why were they not ready when you were meeting the committee? You are making our committee look as if they did not know what they were doing. How come all these things are coming now?

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am also surprised because these documents that are being laid here are of policy nature and I thought that they would be more useful to the committee because Parliament spends most of its time in the committee and the committee are basically our technical advisors. I don’t see how Parliament is going to access some of these drafts because some of the papers being laid here have been stated as drafts. Now, of what value would a draft be to Parliament? I thought drafts would help to inform a committee that something is being worked on and the committee can then take the opportunity to follow up but to lay a draft on the floor of Parliament, I find some difficulties.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, when we are going through a budget process, we are talking about the performance of a sector and that is why we require policy statements. The relevant committees go into details concerning the ministry organisation and their performance. We are not talking about money allocations only. This was the time for the minister to avail the committee all those documents and then the committee would come up with recommendations after reviewing them. What happened is that, the minister denied the committee that opportunity and the committee has already laid its report. When are we now going to study those reports? 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As hon. Katuntu has said, those documents would have laid the basis for the report of the committee to this House. If the committee did not study those papers then I cannot consider the report to be authentic because those documents are missing; they did not have the chance to study them. With all due respect, I think the committee should go back, study those papers and bring us an authentic report.

MR IGEME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to differ slightly from my colleague. It is not that the report is not authentic. It is authentic because we have put in exactly what we went through. The minister is laying on Table those policies that we did not go through and that is why they are not in the report. However, the document is authentic and we had agreed that later we would have a workshop where we would meet with the ministry, go through all these reports and actually understand each other. 

I implore the House to accept the report because the other policies - what we are looking at are the achievements of the ministry and what they did not achieve. We didn’t include the achievements because we had not internalised the policy reports. It has nothing to do with what we had gone through as a budget process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the work of this committee is work for the whole plenary but delegated to our people in that team. Now, if they are denied information and they write a report, which is incomplete, we are at a disadvantage. That is a delegated function we gave them to discuss the budget and the policies and come back to us. Now if this is not there, we are disadvantaged as a House.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the rules of Parliament, our basic working document when we are analysing budget policy statements is the policy statement from the ministry and this is what we used. 

Now, among the achievements of the ministry, there was a litany of achievements. When the committee considered these achievements, we were at a loss because most of them were draft policies which were not provided to the committee. We dropped them as achievements of the ministry. That is why we came up with the achievements that we have presented to this Parliament. So, I do not think it would be right for the ministry to bring documents that were not provided to the committee. 

For example, there is the UBIST document, the mode of managing the transmission backbone. We agreed in the committee that we need time to internalise that document before it can be put as an achievement. Now, the minister seems to be insisting that things that have not been finalised be put as achievements of the ministry. We differed with him on that. So, the report is authentic; we considered all the achievements that were given to us and we came up with what we have provided to Parliament.   

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification on the authenticity of the document. I remember trying -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which document?

MS AOL: The report of the committee. According to the chairman of the committee, the report is authentic and according to the minister, he brought in more documents. Some of us queried some of the items in the document especially the tax which is not yet completely explained and now we find that there is a lot missing. We need that clarification. Does that mean that you have done the best to make sure that you scrutinise and demanded for documents which should help you come up with a concrete report to the Parliament so that we do not query gaps? It looks like there are a lot of gaps in this report. That is why some of us think that we need something more to that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I do not want you to question the authenticity of the report. I think the committee reported according to what they received. They could not speculate what they did not receive. The problem I can see is that, the minister is now introducing new documents into the House when our committee has not had opportunity to look at them.

DR MULIRA: Madam Speaker, as a point of information, the committee did not receive these documents as you rightly say. But that is not because the ministry did not give them to them but because they were not asked for. I will quote a letter which I will Table, 11 August 2008, which is addressed to the chairman of the parliamentary committee which includes all the achievements, all the issues which we have stated in the different sectors in the ministry and many of these including for instance - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable, you are talking about August. We asked you for these policy statements at the end of June. Were those matters included or are you adding other things in August?

DR MULIRA: No, the committee requested for some additional information continuously like they do. We gave our policy statement and they requested for additional information. This is the information which we submitted and which I am saying that after submission, some of it is here but there was need to produce the other documents for additional information on the areas which had been omitted in the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok. Let me hear from hon. Masiko

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I am also Masiko -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not the chief whip. (Laughter) I mean hon. Winifred Masiko. Let us hear from hon. Winifred Masiko.

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that. I am of the opinion that since the documents have been laid on Table and they were brought in willingly from the ministry but might actually not be in the right place, I imagine the right place would be the committee since they are policies. So, I would imagine that perhaps if you referred them to the committee which is responsible to look at them in future it would save us going for more information and haggling about the report because according to the committee, the report is authentic and that is what they discussed and that is what they came up with. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I think nobody is contesting the authenticity of the report of the committee. I think the committee presented a very good report. It covered a wide area and they were fortunate that they dwelt more on the policy statement. But the fact is that, at the committee level the committee can access more information. Now, this is not the end of the committee work. This committee is tasked to stay in office for one year, reviewing from time to time the policies, the performance of the ministry and some of the documents being laid here I think would be more relevant for the committee to help the committee continue to review its work. I would therefore suggest that instead of the minister laying this on Table, the minister withdraws these documents and takes them back to the committee and we continue with the debate. Nobody is opposing the proposed budget. Everybody is happy with the report of the committee at this stage but with the view that the committee will go and look at this detailed report to help the ministry perform better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Kabakumba the Chief Whip - (Laughter)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Princess Kabakumba Labwoni Masiko, the Government Chief Whip. Madam Speaker, we do appreciate the effort made so far by the ministry of ICT and it is along those lines that they brought extra documents to this House. But even the committee chairperson did agree that they did not have enough time to internalise all those documents that were presented especially since they came in at a later stage. 

I do suggest that we do discuss the committee report and actually adopt it because the minister was now responding but as they agreed between the minister and the committee that they will have enough time maybe in a workshop or seminar to consider all the documents and internalise them, I do agree with the Members who have suggested that after we finish this budget process, they can go back and look through the documents. If they find any information that they think Parliament should have access to, they can write a report to Parliament to enable a discussion to take place at a later stage. So, hon. Minister, you could respond to the Members’ concerns, but let the extra information be discussed at a later stage. I beg to guide, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know my difficulty is that, I don’t know whether that was extra information or he was just trying to fill gaps in his budget statement. Let them tell us whether they are filling gaps or not.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister laying these documents on Table, but I do not think they will change the view of the committee and the report at this moment. So, they are not filling any gaps.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the shadow minister.

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the ICT Committee. These documents were not availed to the committee and in my opinion I do not see their relevancy. So, I propose that the minister withdraws these documents and submits them to the ICT Committee. I am saying this because, as a committee, we have written our report and it is already before this House. So, it has nothing to do with that report. By laying these documents on Table, he was just trying to justify that they have had so many achievements.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is that it could be a blessing in disguise that this House has received these documents unsolicited. I believe that it is very unwise to say that the minister withdraws them. I strongly propose that these documents be referred to the committee. The committee at its own pace will look through them and come to advise us. 

I am saying this because even without going through them, when I read through page 14 of the committee’s report, the conclusion of the committee is asking Parliament to approve the budget. So, even without those documents, the opinion of the committee is that Parliament should go ahead and approve this budget. We should help the ministry to have funds, but notify the minister that we have received the documents.

Madam Speaker, I would rather suggest that you refer the documents to the Committee of ICT and at an appropriate date the Members can bring us a comprehensive report. This is important because we do not know whether these documents will not change on the way as they are being withdrawn in transit to the committee by any other person, if they are not committed by you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but first of all they cannot be withdrawn; once they are laid, they become property of the Parliament. Anyway, hon. Minister, I think you just respond to the issues raised by the Members and do not lay any other documents, please. (Laughter) The committee will handle the matter later in the ordinary course of its duties.

DR MULIRA: Thank you, for the guidance, Madam Speaker. I still had a whole set, but I will not lay them.

Madam Speaker, I wish to now, with your permission, go straight to page 11 Section 6.1 on the relationship between the Ministry of ICT and UCC and this question has come up multiple times. In our view, there is no discrepancy between the roles of the UCC and those of the Ministry of ICT. UCC was established by an Act of Parliament. In fact, it was in 1997 and not 1998; there is a small correction there. This Act of Parliament set up the UCC to be a regulator of the telecoms sector including the postal services. Within there, part of UCC’s role is for instance, to monitor the telecom sector, allocate spectrum frequency for communication companies and radio stations. It is also supposed to monitor and regulate these to ensure that the standards, and as stipulated in the Act, are followed.

The roles of the ministry – and these are stated in the functions of UCC in Section 5 of Uganda Communications Act, 1997. The Ministry of ICT is mandate, as listed in objectives and functions of the policy statement, to act as an overall overseer of the ICT sector. The ICT sector is composed of telecommunications, postal services, information technology and broadcasting technology infrastructure. Therefore, the UCC is an implementer of policies, which is the responsibility of the ministry just like the Broadcasting Council, in the broadcasting sector, is the implementer of policy, which is the responsibility of the ministry. So, in our view, there are no conflicts, but if the committee feels that there any conflicts and need to rationalise some of the functions, it would be helpful for it to come out clearly and indicate in which areas is there conflicts and contradictions.

Moving on to Section 6.2 on the establishment of a communications tribunal, again here as mentioned, in April this year, hon. Dennis Obua brought up this issue and as we stated at the time, Cabinet had come up with a decision to transfer the Broadcasting Council because of technology convergence, from the Ministry responsible for Information and National Guidance to the Ministry of ICT. But while that was going on, there was need for further consultations and the Rt hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister who was dealing with the committee that was reviewing the need for that shift of the Broadcasting Council into the Ministry of ICT gave some information. 

When hon. Obua brought it up, the Second Deputy Prime Minister stated that part of Cabinet’s recommendation was that in doing that, the two Acts, which establish the two bodies, that is the Electronic Media Act, which establishes the Broadcasting Council and the Uganda Communications Act, which establishes the Uganda Communications Commission, be harmonized. In that harmonization, one of the areas was the establishment of this tribunal because the first tribunal in the original Act had been established for the telecom and postal sector only. But now that broadcasting had been included, there was need to have a more omnibus function for the tribunal rather than just for the telecom sector. 

I am pleased to indicate to the Parliament that this was completed two weeks ago! The Broadcasting Council responsible for regulating the broadcasting sector of the country has been transferred to the Ministry of ICT. So, that issue is now behind us and now we can move forward with the harmonization and establishment of the tribunal.

On tightening the procedure for exporting copper, I think this was welcome, but the ICT sector is just one of the users of copper. So, it is not in its mandate to decide on what procedures there should be for exporting scrap copper. But as the chairman mentioned, because the telephone lines use copper, so it is one of the biggest users of copper. But I think the mandate on what policy and procedure they should be on is not in the limit of Ministry of ICT, but we have had discussions with the relevant authorities. 

National digital backbone is 6.4 on page 12. It was observed that there was no independent expert as I have mentioned. The contract of the independent expert on that contract - the company is called Home Consult Ltd. It was obtained through proper PPDA procedures and it emerged the best. 

With regard to there being no Ugandan subcontractors, I think the chairperson mentioned that when he was on the floor, but I think, for proper record, having changed in 6.4 on page 12, the last line where he said: “The committee further observed that there were no Ugandan subcontractors” he said that we remove the word, “No”. But that means that even the section in bold, which is the committee’s recommendations which says, “The committee further recommends that subcontracts should be given to Ugandan citizens. However, he had withdrawn and said that the Ugandan subcontractors were given. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not get clearly what the minister said because he said that they were procured through the proper means. Hopefully he is talking about this Highway. My query is why is there no supervising consultant on this job?

DR MULIRA: Madam Speaker, I think the history of the national backbone came to the floor and it was discussed. Highway Technology was not procured by Government of Uganda because it came through the Chinese Government contracts and agreement. The procurement which I was referring to is of the independent consultant to supervise the works on the national data transmission backbone and that is the one which I tabled, not of Highway, but the Uganda company which independently supervised and oversaw the phase one of the backbone. The contract is here; it is being tabled. 

6.5 district business centres. 

This has been noted and we are going to be working with the committee itself on identifying the districts because we are moving in phases – the regional balance in rolling out the district business centres. 

Building of the home for the ministry

That was noted but we also note that the point which was made by hon. Byandala about the need to rationalise and come up with a clear policy of housing government ministries and institutions – the ministry is young and maybe it should not be the first one to think of building a home when there are other ministries which have been in existence for a long time which are also in the process of renting. 

The current domicile of the ministry

There are two other ministries which reside in that building and it further re-emphasises the point of having a government-ward policy on housing ministries. But the point is noted. 

On 6.7, the transfer of Uganda Institute of ICT - This has been done. It was transferred from the Ministry of Education to the Ministry of ICT and I think I will link this up with the governing council because according to the law, there was still need for the Ministry of Education to have a hand in establishing this governing council. I am pleased to report that now the governing council for UICT is already in place. 

Regarding the legal frame work, the laws – the Bill was tabled as indicated and the letter from the First Parliamentary Counsel has also been tabled. 

Regarding POSTA Uganda’s liabilities; this is a broad issue which has come up in multiple questions that have been raised. As the committee recommends, I think there is a need for intervention in the system for POSTA Uganda to come out of the financial issues which it is going through currently. The liabilities that Posta has are not purely of its own making as of now. Some of them are inherited from former Uganda Post and Telecommunications Ltd. These include taxes to URA, the pension fund for those who have been laid off and others. But we have been consistently seeing how best to manage this and one of the ways we are looking at is government intervention in terms of capitalisation of Posta as the committee recommends. 

On the area of reserved business of 350 grams – the point has been noted and it came out again in questions. 

The issue of the license for Posta is in its final phase; it expired but there has to be due diligence on the part of the regulator which is Uganda Communications Commission. This due diligence has been finished and we are in the final stages of issuing a license to Posta. 

On the Postal Act, we have already submitted documents, although it is in draft which will eventually come out as a Postal Act. 

The exemption of taxes on telecoms is an issue that has come up in tax issues. And if I may link this into the conclusion and also pre-empt some of the responses to other honourable members - if I link to page 7 where we have the budget proposal and conclusion, it talks about the taxes of 8.4 billion. These taxes are for the phase two of the national backbone infrastructure. In phase two, there is equipment of different types. Some of it is telecom equipment which is technical telecoms and IT equipment. Some of it is the normal equipment: air conditioners, vehicles and others like that. So when we look at this global figure here, it includes issues regarding the honourable minister of finance’s statement – it should fall under the telecoms schedule of exempted taxes. 

Nevertheless, if we look at the kind of equipment we are talking about now, this is fibre optic backbone equipment, switching systems. We sought clarification from Finance and also presented it to the committee on 11th with a schedule. That schedule does not specifically include  the kind of equipment we are bringing now, the reason partly, is that the schedule came out sometime back and the kind of technology we are looking at is always involving. So, there is no direct mapping of the kind of equipment that we have now most of it to the schedule of exemption in ICT sector as per –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Now, the budget includes the taxes, but I just wanted to know whether the money for the implementation of the national digital backbone project phase II is included in the budget which is here. Is it going to be spent off budget and they have only accommodated the taxes or the money for the implementation is also part of this budget which we are approving?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In the ordinary budgeting process, if you have put a sum of money, say it is for a vehicle, Shs 60 million it should be inclusive of the tax; such that if finance gives you this Shs 60 million, you buy the vehicle and pay the taxes.  How do you get the prices differently from the tax? Assuming later on, due to non-performance of the budget - they might even release the money for the vehicle, for example, and the money for the tax will not be there, what will happen?

DR MULIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Starting with hon. Baryomunsi’s question, the tax component is not a resource; this 8.44 is not physical money which is given to the ministry, it is a book entry and yet the loan itself, that prior to its being approved by Parliament cannot be included as part of the budget policy statement. That is the advice which was given to the ministry, and that is why the tax component is reflected because it is not physical money and yet the actual loan, until it is passed and approved by Parliament, cannot be included directly as part of the budget.  

Now, if it is a vehicle, I think the tax component comes in after CIF - say to the port, in this case say Entebbe or wherever and the tax component comes afterwards. So the quotation cannot include tax for equipment which is coming in from outside like most of this fibre equipment is coming in from where it is manufactured, mainly in China. So, the tax component comes in after the equipment arrives and that is why we include it as has been done.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I agree with the minister that the taxes come later. But now, we do not have quotations for the equipment you are going to buy, but we are providing for the tax now. What if when the equipment has arrived you find that the money provided for the tax is inadequate, are you going to run back here and say we did not know the price so we estimated the tax.

MR TOOLIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Before the equipment arrives here, you should have known the operation, the value of the equipment because URA will levy the tax on the basis of the value of the equipment and I do not know the basis on which you arrived on this figure of 8.44 billion. If the documents are there, please can you lay them on Table?

DR MULIRA: Madam Speaker, as you directed and guided that I should not lay the documents otherwise, the documents are here. But on a serious note, this project did not just start out of the blue, it is not like we go to the shops and start looking for quotations. This is a project which was carefully planned; there is a systematic study which was done right from the beginning for all the phases which we call the National Backbone E-Government Infrastructure Study where every tiny detail right down to the smallest item is indicated. And as we said, we have already rolled out phase one. So, we have the experience on what equipment is required exactly where and how much it costs and therefore regarding the estimates, they are clearly stated and they are in the document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, how long ago was this study made, are you saying there is no alteration for fluctuation? Is that study static from the time it was done up to now?

DR MULIRA: Madam Speaker, the company which is implementing is Highway Technologies and they are the manufacturers of the equipment. And when the study is done and agreed upon - and in fact in ICT terms, if at all there are any fluctuations, it might actually be a fluctuation downwards because technology prices keep moving that way. But the prices as quoted in the bill of quantities by Highway Technologies is what was used in drawing up the feasibility and an economic study of this project has been taken care of.  

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, the entire expenditure on this other project must be part of the resource envelop of the Government of Uganda, whether it was a loan or a grant or something else. I was of the view that it would have been included into the budget of the Ministry of ICT and the various taxes would also have been included so that we could know exactly how much of the resource envelop is going to ICT ministry for purposes of us knowing the deployment of all our resources throughout this year - if the project was supposed to run for this year. 

So, I was imagining that the 8.44 went into paying taxes or provision for taxes for the entire project. I do not know whether you are trying to say that. So the best should have been to tell us exactly the whole story. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are not assisting this House and you are the chair of the Budget Committee.

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, from the document, I get a feeling that we have not yet got this loan. So, how can you start budgeting taxes for a loan you have not got? Suppose you do not get the loan? In that case, we have not yet got the loan, so we should not budget taxes for it otherwise, what are you budgeting for when you have not yet got the loan?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So the taxes are counterpart funding and we have not got the donor component.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Following the response from the chairperson Budget Committee, since you found it not necessary to include the loan in your estimates, why did you find it necessary to include the taxes for that loan which has not even been procured?  

Secondly, the issue we were talking about, Madam Speaker, is that the telecommunication equipments were exempted from taxes, and now we are seeing this big figure of Shs 8.0 billion. We want the minister to give us the list of those items, according to him, which he thinks are not exempted so that we can know clearly how much goes to those items. 

DR MULIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As I mentioned that the telecommunication equipment should be exempt of tax, but there is a schedule of what that equipment is from the honourable Minister of Finance and in that schedule there is a complete list of items which are exempted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the schedule?

DR MULIRA: It is here. Madam Speaker, it is a schedule which is attached to a letter to the Chairperson Parliamentary ICT Committee, which was seeking clarification on these taxes, and we referred to the meeting of 17 July 2008 between the committee and members of ICT, and issues on tax where we sought and got clarification from the Ministry of Finance. And they gave us the schedule, which is common in East Africa. It is the East African Community Customs Union Common External Tariff and there is a section or a category which is 84.71, which has a list of all the items which have zero tariff, and the list of these items does not include the kind of equipment which we are now getting. That is the point I mean; that because of the evolution of technology, the kind of fibre optic switching systems, which we are getting now are not included in here. But as a recommendation and as per discussions with that, maybe what can be done is for the honourable Minister of Finance to adjust or to amend the schedule to include some of these newer technologies which are coming up. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I wish to Table this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I want you to read the list of those things which are exempt.

DR MULIRA: I will read them. In 84.71, it talks about “Automatic data processing machines and units thereof magnetic or optical readers; machines for transcribing data onto data media in coded form and machines for processing such data not elsewhere specified or included.”

The first one is analogue or hybrid automatic data processing machines. The second one, which deals with computers specifically, portable digital automatic processing machines, weighing not more than 10 kilogrammes, consisting of at least a central processing unit, a keyboard and display and other digital automatic processing machines.  

The next one comprises, in the same housing, at least a central processing unit and an input and output unit whether or not combined. The second one, either presented in the form of systems, digital processing units other than those above whether or not containing in the same housing or not, etc.

Within here, areas like fibre optic switching systems which are the majority of the requirements of the list in the tax bracket which we were looking at cannot be embedded in this categorisation as we have it here. There is only one area in this tax where there are computers and those ones are covered in here, but that is just one out of the entire list.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ngabirano, you wanted to say something.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just had one recommendation that this is a forthcoming loan and in this Parliament, we have passed loans whenever they have come, and Parliament is still here. Why do you rush to pass taxes before we get the loan? I think we shelve the taxes here and the taxes will come as components of the law and we shall pass the whole project together.  

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I do not want the minister to be presumptive of us; that he will bring the loan here and it will be passed, no. It is possible, you will come seeking this loan and it will not be passed so what will happen? Let us have the loan passed and then we talk about the taxes. But talking about the taxes before even the loan is passed, you are taking this House for granted.  

MR IGEME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to beg to differ. Unfortunately, there is no Minister of Finance here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually I do not know where he has gone. He was sitting there.  

MR IGEME: And I think this is their disregard of ICT. Because the Minister of Finance should be here so that we sort this out here but unfortunately - I think he is on his way. But, Madam Speaker, what I wanted to say is that this is a provision for taxes, it is a non-resource; it is just a provision for taxes in case the loan is passed. If it is not passed that is not money that is going to be there waiting to be used – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why do you want to have this money kept somewhere even before the loan comes to this House?  Why?

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Assuming that the loan is going to be disbursed within this financial year, it is important that there is a provision for tax. How about if you passed and there is no provision? Will you now have to go back and ask for a supplementary? The procedure has been that if you are dealing with the loan which is going to be disbursed in the financial year, there is a provision for that, and that is what we have been doing. 

We are now estimating what we are going to spend. For instance, this is the budget which you are going to pass here; it must include the provision of tax if the loan is going to be disbursed in this financial year. If it is going to be disbursed after the financial year, that is not acceptable. But assuming that this loan is going to come within this financial year, you must provide for the tax.

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, this particular loan requires that Government of Uganda provides counterpart funding of 5.7 billion but they have not provided for it in the estimates. Why are they rushing to provide for taxes when they have not even provided for counterpart funding?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you see my difficulty now? You do not even have counterpart funding but you are looking for taxes on something we do not know.  

DR MULIRA: The point has been made by multiple Members, including I think hon. Nabeta, who is a Member of the ICT committee, he has made it categorically. The taxes are not a resource, it is a book entry. The counterpart funding is actually money, which has to be disbursed from the Consolidated Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I want to read to you what the report says: “The committee recommends that Parliament do approve the following amounts for Vote 020, Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, for financial year 2008/09.

Recurrent expenditure: Shs 2.244 billion; development expenditure, Shs 4.260; taxes Shs 8.4; total Shs 14….”  

Please, you want to take us for a ride? This is what they are recommending and these taxes are included. 

Anyway, honourable members, I think we have reached a point where we are stuck and we want the Minister of Finance to explain this budget. So, I will reluctantly again adjourn the House to 10.00 O’clock in the morning. I was hoping to have finished this matter this afternoon but we will adjourn to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow and the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance must be here. We are discussing the budget; they cannot afford to be away.

(The House rose at 5.32 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 August 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)
     

