Wednesday, 16 August 1995

The Council met at 2.30 in Parliamentary Buildings, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)


(The Council was called to order.)


THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  I am sorry for the delay hon. Members, but there have been some problems which we did not sort out.  So, everything is okay now, we can proceed.

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, in accordance with the recent established procedure of this House, the NRC Standing Sectoral Committees have been for some time debating the Ministerial Policy Statements and estimates of government expenditure for the Financial year 1995/96 and the Committees are now ready to present their reports.  I, therefore, beg to move that the Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the purposes of one: enabling the chairmen of the Standing Sectoral Committees to present their reports on the Ministerial Policy Statements and (2), considerations and approval of the estimates of government expenditure for the Financial Year 1995/96.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister is too heavy to stand up. (Laughter)

MR ADRIAN SIBO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I beg to present for the Council’s consideration and approval of the report of the Standing Sectoral Committee of this council on Local Government, Public Service, Mass Mobilisation and the Districts.  Mr Chairman, Sir, you have received and read the statement of the Minister of Local Government which sought that the council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply in order to consider and approve UShs 1,992,662,000/- for Recurrent Expenditure and 8,283,900,000/- for development expenditure.  I am happy to report that my Sectoral Committee supports the Minister and recommends the approval of the proposed expenditure.  During the financial year 1994/95, the Sectoral Committee made and this House approved a number of recommendations for the Minister to implement during the same year.  Some of the recommendations were objective to be achieved over a period of time.  Others were and the rest were action-oriented.  The Minister reported on every recommendation to the full satisfaction of the Committee.  

I wish to comment to the House the Minister’s full cooperation with the Committee in our effort to serve our people. (Applause)  As and when we make further observations and recommendations, we are sure they do not try to be a fear.  The Minister’s objectives have continued to be improved service delivery, increased popular participation, improved financial performance and increased managerial efficiency.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my Colleague holding the Floor of the House on a very important Ministry of Local Government second to the Prime Minister’s Office.  It should be understood that the Ministry of Local Government, that the greatest effort must be made in increasing rural development through Local Government not just talking in papers. (Laughter)

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, Sir, if the hon. Member could be patient and listen, he will find that all this has been done.  The sphere of operation to attain these objectives has been and will continue to be in the current financial year, decentralisation, rural feeder roads, health services, primary education and refugees.  In the delivery of these services, a high degree of plan integration, plan projection, evaluation and supervision was required.  It was in the light of this requirement that in our last year’s report, we stressed the need to address the problems of infrastructure, logistical requirements, equipments and personnel.  

Decentralisation.  The Committee was appraised of the success of decentralisation in most of the districts which had been decentralised.  A lot of popularisation and sensitization have taken place within those districts.  The system of decentralisation which was adopted has paid dividends.  The Ministry has been able to handle a few districts at a time - training, supervision was adequately undertaken.  27 districts have now been decentralised.  The last 12 are now in the firing wage.  Our observation which generally applies to all the decentralised districts is that they all lack adequate funds and block grants which are calculated on previous expectations.  The block grants are not commensurate with decentralised responsibilities. The previous central government responsibilities on decision making and supervision have not been reflected in block grants neither have these responsibilities been financially catered for.  There is a general feeling that decentralisation should have been accompanied by a special grant - Entandiikwa in recognition of the assumption on greater powers and responsibilities from the central government.  Then there are poor districts which need to catch up with the others in the basic services and infrastructure, special services and manpower.  These need equalisation grants.  A lot has been said about these grants but no disbursements have taken place.  

There is a third category of new districts which have been created out of the  They had contributed a lot to the development of infrastructure, social services and the district headquarters of the mother districts.  Normally they would call for sharing of the assets.  These also need Entandikwa either from their metropolitan districts or from the central government or both.  There is a lot of fund raising by these district administrations for infrastructure at the expense of voluntary social services.  This public spirit must be encouraged but there should be a limit to which fundraising as a public policy should be encouraged as a source of funds for public expenditure.  At least we should demarcate areas for which fund raising may be necessary and areas for which taxation will be called for.  

The Committee noted a number of decentralised districts have had a false start.  Indeed, we have heard of efforts to replace district executives for misuse of office, misallocation of resources and other miscellaneous corruptive practices.  these may be only bringing troubles.  Nevertheless, we would like to exalt the Minister to take early corrective measures to ensure the desired development.  All corruptive practices should be investigated.  District Service Committees and District Tender Boards are supposed to be independent although appointed by the District Resistance Councils.  Some Members of the appointing authority have tended to expect certain favours from these Committees.  This is a dangerous development.  These Committees including those of government accounts Committees must be free and independent otherwise instrument for management and control becomes ineffectual and people may be disenchanted with their decentralisation.  Members of Parliament should be called upon to get involved and participate in all efforts of mobilisation, sensitisation and training programmes in their districts.  The Committee noted that a good deal of effort had been put into training manpower to assume responsibility for financial control.  Financial regulations and accounting instructions in form of accounting manual have been prepared and distributed to all districts.  Tender Board guidelines and procedures are in place.  Local Government Commissions have been appointed, District Administrations are now in a position to enforce accountability.  We have previously emphasized on the necessity for development plans.  Each district is supposed to have an economist or planner.  His planner responsibility is to produce his plan and supervise the implementation.  Marshalling of the necessary resources must be based on this plan.  Ad hoc decisions on development projects will only lead to what side of development at the base.  We are aware that production of this plan is a responsibility of District Resistance Councils.  But the Ministry’s supervising powers should include demand for this plan. 

Feeder roads.  Government considers infrastructure as one area of priority project areas.  This is so because infrastructure promotes production.  Consequently, government proposes to cover eleven hundred kilometres of the feeder roads in their education programme during the financial year.  Some of this distance is to be maintained only in terms of new areas to be opened.  Adequate maintenance of equipments has been acquired and distributed to cover most districts.  The equipment is however being utilised to only 30 per cent capacity.  Most of it is left idle for long periods for lack of operational funds.  This has become a serious problem for many districts.  the feeder roads rehabilitation programme started in 1989.  In this programme, 100 kilometres in Kabarole District under GTZ, 420 kilometres in Busoga under Gycalan and 697 in South Western Uganda under IDA were completed successfully last financial year.  But these roads have to be maintained continuously.  

Therefore, new schemes and new programmes must be worked otherwise these roads will go to waste.  This has not been provided for under this financial year.  District Administrations should cater for this but the capacity is extremely doubtful.  It will be noted that the available equipments in districts is only utilised to 30 per cent capacity as I have said.  But this is only in respect of 8,500 kilometres out of 21,300 kilometres which has got to be rehabilitated.  The balance of the road network has not been rehabilitated.  Moreover there is great demand for increasing the road network.  Let us hope that decentralisation will solve this problem with local initiative.  Under Gycanwan, the road rehabilitation programme in Busoga is said to have been completed with the foreign aid companies discharged.  The equipment is still in the district.  It requires servicing and maintenance.  The provision of Shs. 325/- billion in the budget will be for that purpose only.  Operational funds will be required as originally requested.  

The Ministry is advised to permit a request for supplementary provision later on.  The proposed provision for Kampala and other urban roads under is also needing some repairs on the equipment that is getting old.  Spare parts are required to keep it on the road.  Urban authorities have been unable to contribute effectively.  The equipment is likely to become idle I think.  The equipment was purchased with foreign aid to be used by all urban authorities but it appears to have been monopolised by Kampala and Jinja alone who also have often failed to provide operational funds.  Other towns should also have access to this equipment.  The provision of UShs 219 million is inadequate.  Here again supplementary provision could be solved under USAID provision or any other foreign donor.  

We have mentioned above that our rehabilitation programmes cover only 8,500 kilometres out of which 1,100 kilometres is covered by this financial year.  Hon. Members may wish to know the areas covered by this 1,100 kilometres.  206 kilometres are in Mukono, Mpigi, Mubende and Kiboga, 440 kilometres are in 11 districts, 95 kilometres are in Mbale, Tororo, Pallisa and Kapchorwa, 150 kilometres are in Kasese, Bundibugyo, Hoima, Kibale, Masindi, Kabarole, 208 are in Mbarara, Ntungamo, Bushenyi, Rukungiri, Kabale and Kisoro.  Those districts which are not in this are covered in other road programmes.  All the units of road maintenance equipment has been distributed to all the districts and will need regular servicing and maintenance.  An appropriate maintenance workshop has been built at Bugembe for this purpose with funds provided by Japan as a present.  Uganda Government was required to match up the grant of 1.45 million dollars with UShs 257/- million for local cost.  Unfortunately, the proposed provision from government for this year is only 48 million shillings.  This will not cover the contractual contribution to local costs.  The grant therefore, may not be utilised.  This workshop is extremely necessary otherwise, the road maintenance equipment around the country will soon be demobilised for lack of servicing and maintenance.  

The committee entreats the Minister of Finance to reconsider his dangerous decision and provide adequately for the construction and operation of the workshop.  The Committee would like to associate itself with the Minister’s appreciation for the contribution from the United States Agency for International Development, DANIDA, GYCA, GTZ, IFAD and UDB for the development of the network.  For these donors, we have our sincere thanks particularly as most of this is straight road.  

Rural Head Services.  The Minister of Local Government has also conceived a bright idea of destroying slums by providing infrastructure similar to that in the urban areas.  The project is to carry out a study aimed at planning the urban areas which are usually slums so that they are provided with planned roads, planning water, sewerage sanitation, drainage, schools and health clinics.  These services should be provided at the level which can be afforded.  The study should show how these services will be subsidized and of course, oriented to the financial capacity of the areas concerned.  This pirate project will initially cover the towns of Masaka, Kabarole, Lira and Mbale.  

The Minister has another new development project called coordination, communication and advocacy.  This is a project which will be executed by UNICEF and it is intended to sensitize the councilors at RCIII and RCV in the issue of basic health for mothers and children, and on basic education for children particularly. These councilors will be taught to appreciate problems of mothers and children so that they, the councilors can more easily try to find solutions to these problems. The key projects are about further steps, new strategy to provide preventive, promotive, rehabilitative and curative health care services to every person in Uganda.  Health reliance again is of emphasis in this direction.  

Primary Education.  The Committee noted that planning for universal compulsory primary education is a responsibility of the Ministry of Education.  Furthermore, with decentralisation, the implementation of primary education policy is entirely left with the district administrations.  The Ministry of Local Government is left with sensitisation and mobilisation of parents to fully appreciate their responsibilities in providing education to their children.  In providing this education, the Ministry recognises the necessity of increasing the quality and scope of school buildings required for primary education by the year 2003.  Towards this, the Ministry assisted by Japan has a programme to provide cement, iron sheets and nails to some selected schools throughout the country.  

Refugees.  The Committee was informed that this service removed the settlement of landless nationals from over populated districts.  The Committee would like to exalt the Minister to work out a comprehensive policy in resettling these landless citizens.  The Committee does not accept that anybody should be a refugee in his own country.  Citizens should not be herd in resettlement camps as if they were refugees.  Proper arrangements should be made in such a way that people transfer from their old homes to new homes.  They should be assisted to construct their new homes however humble these homes may be.  Normally new settlers in an area also give tools like hones, pangas, transport for their digging materials.  They are allocated adequate land for cultivation.  Seeds are provided free of charge, they are also exempted from graduated tax for a period.  These are only examples of what should be provided.  Resettlement is a problem which is likely to occur very often.  It is therefore necessary that a clear acceptable policy be worked out and initiated.  It may also be necessary to cover such facilities under a legal provision.  As regards foreign refugees, the committee would like to express some serious concern for the security involved in allowing refugees to wander around the country unauthorised.  We have heard of refugees who have entered into their new homes of exile with arms.  We also hear of others being employed in the economic like of this country.  We are not against bonafide employees who have been cleared.  Any employer who wishes to offer employment to any refuge should first clear with the appropriate authority.  

I would like to turn to Kampala City Council.  Mr Chairman, the committee would like to express its deep concern over the disastrous failure of the City council to plan for the heart of the Pearl of Africa.  This city is being chocked with palaces springing up daily side by side in Makindye, Rubaga, Lungujja, Kawempe, Makerere and Mulago.  Tank Hill and Muyenga are beyond rescued and have been condemned as a rich man’s slum.  Planned sewerage system here is a thing of the past, reserve for Nakasero, Kololo and Bugolobi, perhaps lately joined by Naguru and Ntinda.  Thanks to the late East African Community.  Other developers in the city must be content with septic tanks.  Extension of water pipes, telephone and electric wires are major puzzles to the controlling authority on these services and property developers.  People are building in road reserves where roads exist.  Daily traffic jams need no mention.  Things are not improved by the impatient and incompetence of our drivers of the numerous often unlicensed, mechanically dangerous taxis.  Does one need to mention the waterlogged roads with floods for lack of drainage?  No wonder road maintenance in Kampala is expensive. 

As to garbage, we have stopped complaining.  The traffic lights last worked on the day they were installed.  The new residential areas have no services like shopping centre, schools, health clinics.  There is no way street lighting can be planned.  One wonders what these intelligent and wider elder men of the city do when they meet.  The committee has heard explanations are serious problems; others are excuses.  The committee was told that both councilors and technocrats are relatively new and that public officers were not originally responsible for the appointment of officers and therefore could not discipline them.  That land authorities are many and that land management policy is not clear and it is not harmonised.  They also said that the population growth exceeds the plans and financial resources.  The necessary legal powers to plan and implement have only been very recent.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Sibo, I do not see that in your report.  Where are you getting it?  It is not in your report.  You are adding on your own not from the committee.

MR SIBO:  It is from the committee.  Mr Chairman, I confirm that this is from the committee.  What is most serious is that the City council is working from a structure plan of 1971.  They do not have a detailed plan of roads and services.  The maps are obsolete.  They have only recently started with mapping agents.  They also complain that big gangs of the society are interfering with the implementation of their plans.  The traffic terminals plan to provide parking space is on the drawing board.  There is a shortage of urban planners.  They are only eight of them in the whole country.  Around in the city is as follows: 10 per cent Uganda Land Commission, 27 percent the Kabaka of Buganda, 25 mailo land, 15 percent Kampala City Council, 3 percent freehold.  On traffic lights, the committee was informed that the city council had obtained a grant of traffic lights required in the city, traffic that the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning who are responsible for a formal negotiation and conclusion of such technical cooperation agreement rejected the request on the ground that it was not a government priority.  I would now like to make recommendations in respect of the Ministry of Local Government.  It is clear that decentralisation entails greater responsibility on decision-making resulting in greater financial burden on the districts.  This greater financial burden should be accompanied by an initial special grant -(Entandikwa)- to start them off.  Two, the agreed equalisation grant to the poor districts should be paid at an early date.  Three, the new districts which have been recently hived off from the mother districts which did not share any common assets with their daughter districts should be given Entandikwa in compensation for what they lost.  Four, all corruptive practices by whosoever should be investigated and punished.  Five, Members of Parliament should be involved in all programmes of mobilisation, sensitisation and training.  Six, district development plans must be produced and form the basis of all development programmes.  Seven, supplementary financial provisions should later on be requested and approved for operational funds under GICA one.  Eight, supplementary financial provisions should be approved for operational funds under GICA two.  Nine, a national maintenance workshop at Bugembe should be adequately financially provided for to ensure continued operation of all the road maintenance use in the country.  Ten, an acceptable appropriate policy to resettle landless nationals from over-populated districts to other districts should be formulated and enunciated accompanied by necessary legislation.  Eleven, the government should engage the services of a private firm to update the 1971 plan of the City of Kampala and to produce a detailed plan with roads and services in the city as a matter of urgency.  The committee believes that funds can be negotiated for in form of grant or loan.  The government –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Sibo, I do not see 11 and 12 here.

MR SIBO:  There are three recommendations we have arrived at this morning when we met the City council.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, are you going to consider this report or you have another report there?

MR SIBO:  No, Sir.  Mr Chairman, this is part of the report.  We met the City Council really this morning.  So, after meeting them, we came out with these recommendations.  The government should renew and request the German Government for a grant of traffic lights in the city.  Last, consideration should be given to enacting law to rationalise land ownership in urban areas.  A satisfactory formula could be reached between the City Council and the land owners.  That is all.  

I now turn to mass mobilisation.  The committee recommends that the budgetary proposal of Shs. 1,728,616,000 be approved.  The department of mass mobilisation which drives its mandate on Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 is charged with political mobilisation and sensitisation of the nation to ensure that every citizen is aware of his political rights and obligations.  This is an important assignment which needs all the resources, human and financial.  The mobilisation of masses is undertaken at both national and local levels.  The content of discussion covers the historical, social and economic problems of the society.  

During last financial year, three courses last three months each with an attendance of 600 students each both men and women were conducted.  Many seminars and workshops of short duration were run at district levels.  Some of these eventual and others were not eventual.  Many more courses were conducted at local level by CGRs assisted by cadres.  Leadership courses for youths were also very popular.  The department could finance all these courses and workshops.  People contributed to the expenses by bringing their own food.  Nevertheless, candidates should be given enough time to acquire the necessary logistics.  Other courses were fundraised for.  People are willing to subscribe to these courses financially in other words.  Similar courses, seminars and workshops will be conducted next financial year.  The admission to these courses is by application.  Only those who apply are admitted.  Because of popularity of these courses, many are turned down.  The selection is based on the order of the fit of application.  At the national level at Kyankwanzi, some organisations sponsor their own candidates.  Indeed many more organisations are encouraged to send and sponsor candidates.  Despite these financial constraints, the committee would like to commend the secretariat of NRM.  

Last year, the committee noted the financial reduction by 23 per cent over the previous year.  Similar reduction of six percent has been imposed the department’s provision this year.  A cut is in the area where the department was participating in programmes jointly organised with other institutions like women, youths and workers organisations.  The department will have to depend on others.  On capital expenditure, the department submitted a request for six units of Suzuki vehicles to replace the old ones which are consuming more money for maintenance.  The Minister of Finance did not consider the proposal feasible.  If it is true that more money is being spent on maintenance of the old ones, it would make sense to purchase new ones.  

Now, allow me to turn to the Ministry of Public Service.  The committee recommends the approval of the Minister’s budget proposals of the Recurrent Expenditure of 7,270,720,000/ and development expenditure of UShs 5,143,100,000/.  I may add here that this development expenditure includes the donor funds.  The government portion of it is only 175,800,000/.  

My committee last year in its submission to this august House noted the accusation of inefficiency to responsiveness, corruption, lack of transparency and the general poor performance within the civil service.  But the committee also underlined a public high demand for delivery of service and modern oriented management.  The committee was and is still aware of the structural reforms and rationalisation which the civil service is undergoing.  The status report we have received indicates that most of the reform is completed.  Retrenchment is over; the Ministerial review was undertaken, recommended and approved.  We now hat the right number of Ministries and the right combination of Portfolios.  We are just about to have the optimum size of 150 civil servants to our present portfolios.  The technical monitoring board has reported.  

Nevertheless, the ultimate success of the reform programme and expected return on the substantial investment for lasting benefits for the citizens will depend on an ability to pay attractive, motivating living wage for these civil servants.  This living remuneration raises the greatest challenge to government.  I will revert to this problem later.  Last year, the committee made and this august House approved a number of recommendations to improve the public service.  Unfortunately, the Ministry seems to have ignored these recommendations.  Those which were implemented were those which were in their own programme.  

We would like to believe that the decisions of this House are binding and that the Ministries are expected to implement them.  We therefore wish to appeal to the Ministers to take note of the approved recommendations for implementation.  If Cabinet finds a problem with any of our recommendations, such recommendations should be referred back to the Sectoral Committee for reconsideration.  

Retrenchment.  In retrenchment, to reduce the civil service from an establishment of 320,000 in 1990 to 140,000 in June, 1995, a total of 180,000 civil servants have been off loaded.  I may add that these 180,000, some of them joined the private sector and others were employed in parastatals.  Not all of them are really on the land.  Most of these were young men and women who still want employment.  Retrenchment package was often too small for already accumulated necessities of life.  In any case, it was liquid which easily drained up.  They were ill-equipped for land exploitation.  They now constitute a serious social problem which has assumed very serious bad proportions.  People in government have been attacked, high way robberies are taking place, homes have been broken into, idle and disorderly persons has been rounded up in towns.  We are not suggesting that all those involved in these crimes are necessarily former civil servants.  But certainly a good number are involved.  In any case, this is an insecurity problem which must be solved.  Government must share the hardship of these retrenchees.  We feel resettlement schemes to engage these redundants including the urban idle and disorderly should be established.  We should open expansions of land for cultivation of fruit and vegetables for processing and export.  This is an investment in which these Ugandans could have a stake.  We recommend a study should be carried out for this purpose.  

Living Wage.  It is understood that government priorities as expressed in the terminology of the Minister of Finance namely PPA (Project Priority Areas) and primary education, primary health care, security, judiciary, water, rural feeder roads, agricultural research and the auditor general.  You will notice that the living wage for civil servants is not included.  That being the case, we must agree that the civil service has done very well if you consider that since 1986, government has been revising salary upwards.  The wage bill has moved from around UShs 40 billion in 1990/91 to the present UShs 160 billion and the percentage change of recurrent provision has moved from 8 percent in 1989/90 to the present 34 percent in 1995/96 although still maintain that the percentage of recurrent living wage should be 45 percent.  This is a remarkable achievement.  The Minister of Finance has projected government’s ability to pay living wage in 1997/98 or even hopefully in 1996/97.  A living wage is defined as that pay which not only provided goods and services needed to keep the body and soul together but also meets other social costs like health, education, transport and appropriate clothing.  That is why housing and transport will now be included in the salary package.  

Nevertheless, the minimum living wage was calculated by the Civil Service Review and Re-organisation Commission in 1990 to be UShs 70,000 per month.  That minimum salary in U8 at the bottom should be UShs 70,000 per month instead of the present instead of the present 34,210/- in schedule A of the Minister’s Policy Statement.  And if there was plan of a compression ratio of 1:30 which has been agreed, we would get figures of 2.1/- million instead of 189,545/-.  This means more than doubling a current wage bill in one year or even two years.  That is likely to be a tall order of the Minister of Finance unless a living wage is included in the list of PPA of the government.  Indeed that is why and how the civil servants in Judiciary have arrived there.  We strongly recommend that all civil servants should be on that salary structure.  We have been saying so for the last two years. We repeat the same this year and we shall not tire to repeat the same thing.  

Monetisation of Fringe Benefits.  Monetisation of fringe benefits is supposed to have been effected in 1994/95 but it appears only political leaders and senior civil servants received the monetised benefits.  We were also told that certain categories were also paid 25 percent of their housing allowance.  It is also not clear why political leaders like Ministers would have been paid housing allowance.  Ministers are entitled to housing and should continue to be housed like judges.  Indeed, we should have institutional houses for Ministers and Judges.  The security of senior members of our government is a very serious consideration. If we allow Ministers to sleep anywhere, we are likely to spend heavily on their security. (Applause)  Some of which will be on improvement of private properties.  

The dignity and status of our Ministers and Judges must also be maintained.  As for civil servants, the rate of those monetised benefits is not clear.  It was originally proposed that housing allowance would range from UShs 300,000 per month to UShs 20,000/- per month for U1 to U8 respectively and indeed 50 percent was being paid on this rate.  Transport allowance was supposed to be UShs 22,000 per month all through from U1 to U8.  This has not been paid except to entitled officers who eventually received a much better package.  The point to bring out here is particularly in respect of the lower paid civil servants in salary scale U8 who now receive the total of Shs 34,000 per month, UShs 12,000 of which is for housing instead of the original proposed Shs. 20,000.  The vehicles in which they were being transported to office and back home are being sold.  Why is he not being paid his transport allowance?  The payment of a consolidated salary package was partly to discourage proliferation of allowances which are paid according to the discretion of an accounting officer.  As we reported here last year, there were 76 different types of allowances.  They have now been reduced to 40.  Why do we have to keep these allowances.  The committee has not been convinced that all these allowances have to stay.  Those allowances are payable should be written out in Standing Orders.  The rates and categories who are eligible for these allowances must be spelt out.  As the Minister said, transparency in remuneration is an accepted principle.  

Corruption in the Civil Service.  The Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission identified low remuneration as number one contributory factor to corruption.  Is it true that there are other factors which can be causes of corruption such as agreed and ambition to acquire wealth.  But it is true that low salaries make it impossible for the majority to make their daily needs.  Therefore, the sooner we pay our civil servants adequately, the sooner we shall save the billions of shillings we are losing.  In any case, whatever the cause of corruption, we must take all measures to eradicate this scourge for the all-important institutions in the fulfillment of our mission.  You have heard of billion shillings lost in the Ministry of Agriculture. They are yet to establish the extent of corruption in that Ministry.  

From a recent examination by the auditor general, we received from Japan a sum of UShs 27 billion over a period of seven years from 1987 to 1993 for importation of agricultural inputs.  These inputs are said to have been distributed throughout the country for sale to farmers at two thirds of the prices.  All these inputs were imported and distributed.  We were able to recoup only about one billion over that period.  The rest of the money went into other people’s pockets.  This is only one example of colossal losses of public funds.  We have to address this problem squarely.  A debate in this House on the subject is called for.  We can no longer give it a cold shoulder.  The public is crying for an action.  

Incentive Policy.  Donor funded incentives constitute a substantial proportion of the remuneration of the civil servants who receive it.  Indeed, not only have these incentives created distortion in the salary structure but they are also a source of jealousy and bitterness.  In any case, the overall performance of a project does not depend only on those who are indirectly connected to the projects.  Donors should be persuaded to compute all these incentives and allowances and given them in a form of grant to government to be added to the wage bill for all civil servants to participate in the salary improvement.  The alternative is to withdraw these civil servants from the government’s establishment and payroll and second them fully to the projects.  

Disposal of Assets.  We have previously suggested that the proceeds from the sale of government pool houses should form seed money for housing mortgage scheme for civil servants.  Similarly, we also believe that the proceeds from the sale of government motor vehicles should also form seed money for a motor vehicle hire purchase scheme.  We think it is wrong to liquidate capital and eat it up.  That seed money will obviously be too inadequate to make the proposal serious.  We believe it is possible to negotiate a soft loan for both schemes in the interest of facilitating civil servants for better performance.  

Capacity Building.  Last year, we were told that the primary engine for civil service capacity building over the coming several years will be the idea of funded institutional capacity building project; which was due to start in 1995.  This project is not provided for in the current financial year; we had advised, I am told this has been provided for under the Ministry of Finance.  We think really this was wrong - is the wrong hone, it should be under public service.  The reasons for this are known to both Ministries and this in turn - sorry, we had advised that this project will depend on our ability to recruit, train and retain good material on the civil service; and this in turn will depend on our ability to pay adequately.  This is still our opinion.  We know that studies in eight key areas have been identified and we are due to be undertaken.  We would like stress the necessity of involving local firms and personnel for purposes of subsequent follow-up work in institutional capacity building.

Job Evaluation.  The Committee was happy to hear that job evaluation exercise has been completed and that the manual on job evaluation is available.  Last year, we expressed a hope that the completion of job evaluation will lead to introduction of result-oriented management.  But apparently, that oriented management is one of eight studies to be undertaken in preparation for institutional capacity building.  The Civil Service Reform Secretariat seems to be inadequately manned.  As the Minister said, it is supposed to provide expert advice and consultancy on management issues in addition to preparing and introducing these reforms. It is also supposed to conduct seminars and workshops to familiarise and sensitise  civil servants of these reforms  We must start on these techniques of modern management.  If the personnel in this department is inadequate, let us recruit and train; these reform projects must come to an end if we are going to benefit from them in time.

Pension.  The Minister says he has set up a committee to study the best way of implementing the provisions of the new pension. I am told this committee would like to advice the Minister that management of pensions has been a total failure; pensioners take months and years before they receive their monthly pension.  I can say this because I am one of those who has suffered from this, some have given up on these pensions, I did give up.  We had advised that those whose pension is too small to make trips - to collect from Post Office or District headquarters, should be paid in a one-year lump sum in advance.  The remittances of these pensions to the pensioners should be subject of the discussion between our committee and pension authority to find the best way of ensuring that payments and pensions are received in time by payees.

Recommendations.  A study should be carried out with a view to assisting former retrenchees to open up expanses of land for irrigated plantation, cultivation of foods, vegetables for processing and export.  

(ii) The living wage for civil servants should be included on the list of PPA that is, Project Priority Areas of the Ministry of Finance to enable payment of adequate remuneration next year.  

(iii) Appropriate institutional housing should be reserved for Ministers and Judges to ensure their security and preserve their dignity status.  

(iv) Transport service should continue to be provided to lower paid civil servants until transport allowance is included in their monthly salaries. (Applause)

(v) All allowances should be consolidated in a monthly salary and if they must continue to be paid separately, they should be written out in the Standing Orders indicating the type of allowance of categories of legal officers for these allowances.

(vi) Corruption must be punished whenever identified and where money is involved, it must be recovered.  We strongly recommend a debate on the subject in this House.

(vii) Negotiate for donor-funded intensive and allowances to be included in the over all wage Bill for all to share.  Alternatively, remove the recipients of such incentives and allowances from the government establishments and second them to the project.  

(viii) The proceeds from the sale of the government pool houses and the government motor vehicles should be used as seed money to start housing mortgage and motor vehicle hire purchase schemes respectively; for civil servants.

(ix) Local firms personnel should be in old in the proposed studies on institutional capacity building projects.

(x) An acceptable mode of pension payment must be agreed to ensure prompt payment and of pension.  

With regard to Votes 50 to vote 88, the committee recommends that they should be approved as they are; we have generally commented on them under decentralisation.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question - with those in favour of the report presented by hon. Sibo, say aye to the contrary nay.

(Question put and agreed to).

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

CONSIDERATION OF ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1995/96

VOTE 005:  PUBLIC SERVICE

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that the total sum of Ushs 7,270,072,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service be provided for.

PROGRAMME 01

MR ELYAU:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, some of us did not actually get the copies of the Report which is very important.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Eh, I do not get you.

MR ELYAU:  I am saying that although we are tackling a very important issue which is Local Government, we have not got the report which was being read and we are really afraid that, if you take us in that way, we might not follow properly.  So can I ask that - so is it in order for us to continue?  Secondly, we do not have a quorum now.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Insist on one; are you talking about the report or the quorum?  

MR ELYAU:  Both the report and the quorum.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We are quite in order; we put the question and you accepted and we are proceeding.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Thank you very much.  The hon. House is not in position to discuss Public Service when it has no quorum.  There is no quorum in the House now; there is no quorum.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We are going to count people.  Order, let us ring the bell whether we have the quorum or not.  Order, please.  It is not in order to proceed when we do not have the quorum.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

AN HON. MEMBER:  I beg to move that the Council do resume and the committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I adjourn the Council for five minutes.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I am sorry we have failed to form a quorum and therefore, I adjourn the Council to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 4.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 August 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)












































































































































































































































                                                   		


