Wednesday, 14 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in the Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you very well know that under the plan for modernisation of Parliament, we set up the department of OPPD. Its main function is to help us to improve on our capacity as legislators, to be able to discharge the various functions that the Constitution and the public expect of us.  Because of this, you have seen in the past a number of workshops, seminars and conferences being organised, and the main purpose is to give you information to improve on your capacity.  

I want to thank those who were able to attend the conference on HIV/AIDS, which was concluded yesterday. I think we benefited a lot and we will be able to mobilise people so that we fight this problem. 

Pursuant to that policy, another workshop has been organised by the Budget Committee and Bank of Uganda, again for us, but this will be on Monday, 19th.  I urge everybody to go and attend so that in future, should we have reason to say something about Bank of Uganda and to question this and the other, we shall do it from a point of knowledge. 

This is the same thing with being able to analyse how government policies are formulated. Otherwise, if you do not know, you make decisions without knowing how things are done. So, I encourage you to participate in those workshops. 

I believe, honourable members, you have seen this circular about the programme of completing the Budget process. As I have been telling you from time to time, we are now working, going by the Constitution and also by the Act, which for the first time has come into force with this particular Budget. So, we have to complete this process by the end of this month.  

We complete the process by passing the Appropriation Bill, passing the Supplementary Appropriation Bill and by passing the Finance Bill, which ties up the taxation process. You have to get the money and then appropriate it, and the command of the Act is that we have to complete this by 31st.  

It will be necessary for us, at least to comply with the law, to be sitting on Fridays for the two weeks until the end of the month.  So that is why you have seen on our schedule Friday has been included. But for the purpose of the record, and to alert the members of the committee to diligently attend their committee meetings to finalise whatever is before them, I want to read out the Schedule as it is.  

Today we will be dealing with the sessional Committee on Natural Resources. Tomorrow, we deal with Works, Housing and Communications. Friday, we deal with Finance, Planning and Economic Development. On Tuesday, we deal with Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Wednesday, we deal with the Sessional Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. Thursday 22nd, we deal with Public Service and Local Government.  Friday 23rd, we deal with Trade and Industry, and on the 27th, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  Wednesday 28th, we deal with Defence and Internal Affairs and 29th, Social Services. After that we start the Appropriation Bill and then the Finance Bill. 

Because we are in the Committee of Supply, I would urge those who are preparing the reports, instead of concluding by supporting a lump sum for a ministry or ministries under them, they should break their approvals for recurrent and development expenditure. That is how we deal with the Committee of Supply. And today, we shall definitely be a Committee of Supply by approving the estimates falling under this particular ministry so that when we come to the appropriation, it will be a question of adding up and then putting it in a legal instrument.  That is the law.  

Lastly, the honourable Minister, Kezimbira Miyingo, has requested me to inform those who may be old boys of Namilyango College that you have a meeting at Namilyango College on Sunday.  Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, since mid June 2002, there has been a resurgence of attacks by LRA rebels, thus wrecking havoc in the three districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, with a spill over into the districts of Apac, Lira and Adjumani. 

There have been almost daily insecurity incidents right from villages, trading centres, camps and road ambushes which have resulted in either killing of civilians, injuries, abduction and massive destruction or looting of property.  

There has been an increased displacement in the north estimated at over 50,000 persons.  Additionally, internally displaced persons have been further displaced to the existing camps, urban centres and hospitals.  The estimated IDP population hitherto has been put up to 490,000 persons. 

There are reports of imminent malnutrition in the IDP population; numerous schools have closed due to the prevailing insecurity and fear of abduction of the children. Displacement is spilling over into the neighbouring districts. Nebbi, Lira, Adjumani, Kotido have so far been reported with an influx of displaced people from Gulu, Kitgum or Pader. Already there are over 212 registered children (unaccompanied) in Kotido district, mainly from Kitgum and Pader.  

The insecurity has greatly hindered movement of IDPs to their gardens and this may extend to the second season, which has begun, thus disabling the IDPs from meeting some of the food requirements and increasing their food insecurity.  Consequently, IDPs will solely depend on Government and World Food Programme food relief.  Despite the increasing needs, humanitarian agencies sometimes are unable to reach the targeted population with humanitarian assistance owing to pressure on the UPDF.  

Government and World Food Programme are addressing food relief. These are the identified needs now for the affected people. The first requirement is need of food, which is being addressed by the Government and the UPDF and the World Food Programme.  

Shelter Materials: (plastic sheeting and tents) 

UNICEF is reported to have distributed tents to Lacor hospital in Gulu and Kitgum general hospitals. Details on quantities of tents and other locations are not yet available.  

Whereas hospitals in the three districts need drugs, and after an assessment by the Ministry of Health and WHO team, WHO is planning an intervention alongside Government by providing 10 medical kits to each of the northern Uganda districts, and to Kiryandongo Refugee Settlement for the refugees who have been re-located from Acholi Pii. 

Government also, through Ministry of Health, is being requested to extend medical kits to the neighbouring districts of Apac, Lira, Nebbi, Adjumani, and Kotido to support the IDPs in these areas.  

Other interventions to address the needs in hospitals include high protein milk and other supplementary nutrition in the Therapeutic Feeding Centres (TFC). These are from NGOs like ACF in Gulu and GOAL, which has on-going support to the maternity unit in Kalongo hospital in Pader. UNICEF has provided 450 cartons of high protein milk to GOAL and will provide some to ACF-US.

Water and sanitation: 

The urban areas/trading centres that   have received an influx of the displaced need temporary water and sanitation facilities. 

Non-food items (NFIs) like jerry cans and household utensils: Some items have been received by Gulu and Kitgum but are inadequate.  

Government Flash Appeal for Assistance:

I recently met donors to have flash appeal for humanitarian assistance on behalf of government for internally displaced persons in northern Uganda to the tune of Shs38.790,6889,720. (US$21,550,383)    

I am glad to inform the honourable Members that in the response to the appeal, USAID has contributed an additional US dollars 5.2 million in food aid resources for World Food Programme distribution in northern Uganda.  USAID had already contributed US dollars 8.9 million in food aid to World Food Programme for the year 2002.  The contribution consists of 35 million US dollars of food aid through USAID Food For Peace Programme, and 200,000 US dollars for food produced in Uganda.  

I have been assured by USAID that they would be exploring other potential avenues of even further additional humanitarian assistance.  Please join me in thanking USAID and other organisations for this very kind humanitarian gesture.  

REFUGEES SECTOR  

Attack on Maaji Refugee Settlement:

On 8th July 2002, the LRA attacked Maaji refugee settlement in Adjumani district.  This camp has a refugee population of 10,500 persons.  They burnt 154 houses, killed three refugees, one a national and two LDUs.  They burnt down one grinding mill and looted Zoka Central Health Unit.  They abducted six people who have since been released.  They also looted foodstuffs and burnt down the crops. 

As a result of the above incursions, Government has deployed more soldiers as well as patrol units to protect their settlement as well as the nationals in the neighbourhood.

Attack on Acholi Pii Resettlement:  

Acholi Pii refugee settlement was reactivated in 1993 to resettle Sudanese refugees who were fleeing the war between the SPLA and the Sudanese government troops.  Over time, the population of refugees had reached a figure of 23,000 persons.  The resettlement has been in a state of alert since the re-entry of Kony rebels into northern Uganda in mid June this year.  The attack on the resettlement was carried out on 31st July 2002, and was successfully repulsed by the UPDF.  On 5th August 2002, the LRA once again attacked and they were overrun. 

The Impact of the attack:  

As is always the practice of the LRA rebels, they made sure that they left behind a trail of destruction in the camp.  It has been confirmed that over seven refugees were killed, but we are yet to establish whether the number was higher.  The rebels made off with over 130,000 metric tons of food, including drugs.  They also destroyed five vehicles belonging to both the office of Prime Minister and the implementing partner, the International Rescue Committee. They further burnt down houses, including office and warehouse infrastructure.  

They also abducted five Ugandan staff of the International Rescue Committee, one of whom is a doctor and other logisticians. A policeman was also abducted.  The good news is that the five staff members of IRC were released on Sunday, 11th of August. They are now here in Kampala and one policeman is also safe in Padyer.  The rebels also made away with a satellite communication gadget, which they are now using to communicate with the implementing agencies and BBC.  

Relocation of the Refugees:

In consultation with all the stakeholders including UNHCR and World Food Program, it has been decided that it may not be tenable to guarantee physical protection of both the refugees and personnel of the humanitarian agencies in Acholi Pii Refugee Settlement.  To this end, therefore, the settlement has been effectively evacuated and closed. 

A decision has consequently been reached to re-locate these refugees to other existing settlements, as well as new settlement sites. These include, Kyangwali Refugee Settlement in Hoima where close to 8,000 refugees will be resettled while the balance of 15,000 refugees will be re-located to new settlement sites in Madi-Okollo in Arua district and the former Ikafe Refugee Settlement in Yumbe district.  

Operational Plan:

The Office of the Prime Minister jointly with UNHCR and World Food Program has already set up a task force to work out an operational plan for the re-location of refugees and to execute it. Already, other humanitarian agencies like the Red Cross and UNICEF have been mobilized to lend their expertise to the operation.  Food, drugs, shelters and so on have been put in place to respond to the basic needs of displaced refugees.

As an emergency measure, transit sites were opened at Lango Cultural Centre and Ngeta Farm Institute for the refugees fleeing Acholi Pii Refugee Settlement. Immediate assistance in terms of food and medical care were extended. 

By Friday the 9th of August 2002, all the refugees in these centres had been transported to the reception centre, which has been opened in Kiryandongo Refugee Settlement. It is planned to start re-locating the refugees to the aforementioned new settlements within a period of one month. 

In conclusion, the criminal attacks on the innocent population in Northern Uganda, including refugees, is as regrettable as it is contemptible, and I would like to call upon honourable Members of Parliament to join me in condemning LRA for the perpetration of these heinous acts.  Furthermore, honourable Members, I would appreciate if you went further to sensitise your constituencies and all peace loving Ugandans about the effort Government is undertaking to restore peace in Northern Uganda.  

Let me also take this opportunity to thank whole heatedly both national and international agencies that have supported Government in meeting basic and entire needs for both the refugees and the entire displaced persons. I call upon them to continue to support us in this regard.  

Finally, districts in the north have had an extra burden of providing assistance to the entire displaced persons as well as hosting refugees.  Government cannot end thanking them for their qualified support.  Thank you very much.

MRS NANSUBUGA NYOMBI  (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for that good statement, but I want to raise one issue with the Minister.  I have a case in Ntenjeru north concerning Sudanese refugees. 

I have been with Sudanese in my constituency for a long time and they are Ugandans, but now as I talk, there is a development whereby the local Ugandans want to fight with the Sudanese because there is an influx of foreigners from Sudan who have come in to join their relatives in Ntenjeru North, and this is causing trouble. I thought I should raise this because it might turn out to be sour and disastrous.  

So, hon. Minister, has the Government got any framework about the foreigners who come to this country, in this case the Sudanese as I have reported in Ntenjeru North, or else the locals take a violent approach which will really end up causing our people to be internally displaced as the case has been?  Thank you.

MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to thank the Minister for at least coming up with a statement on the humanitarian situation in the north.  However, I would like to make some few observations. The most important thing I expected to come from the Government is the policy on how to handle the internally displaced persons. I think we should go a little bit further away from Government just lamenting on the situation taking place, and reach a situation where we have a proper policy framework for the internally displaced persons. 

As we are talking now, there is nothing. That is why, if you observe very carefully, the Minister’s statement is talking more about some donor groups like the World Food Program and the NGOs coming out to help the people, but there is no proper framework in place.  I wish honourable Members could help to pass such a policy that will help our people.  

Mr Speaker, I must appreciate very much also the humanitarian organizations who are toiling there in the field, trying to make people have a living.  However, I will appeal that more security should be provided to them so that they can reach out further than they are at the time doing, because they are many areas which are not currently inaccessible and therefore need security to be provided to the organization. 

Mr Speaker, I must also mention one thing that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness should try to reach the field.  It has been on record, and I still go on record that in my constituency, which is the most affected, the ministry officials have never reached there physically.  I always go to check the visitor’s book; there is nothing about the Minister of Disaster Preparedness reaching down on the ground, including other Ministers.

Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister himself passes through my constituency every time but he rarely stops at Pabbo to check on what is taking place, and yet we always provide for at least some expenses on travel in the budget and so on. Even if you are going empty handed, I think my constituency will be very happy to see hon. Moses Ali coming and saying, “Sorry, we are trying to do something.”  That would be much better.  

Finally, I would like to urge honourable colleagues in this august House and elsewhere in the world who can, to lobby for more humanitarian assistance to be provided to the disadvantaged people in the northern part of Uganda. The situation is very pathetic! 

For areas like Gulu, you can have some data because of communication, but you find more difficulties in even getting data from an area like Pader; the situation is even worse in Pader District. We even have difficulties in getting information from Kitgum because we do not have communication systems! There is a big communication gap. I would like to end here, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also add my voice to those who have thanked the Second Deputy Prime Minister for his statement. 

I would like to inform this House that early this year, about 30 Members of Parliament who have refugees within their constituencies went to Mombasa, and we even had the Minister of State for Internal Affairs with us. Some of the concerns raised have not been addressed.  

The first concern was that we have no revised law on refugees. What we have is the Control of Aliens Act, and this law is draconian and oppressive. It does not conform to the international conventions we are signatory to.  

My previous colleague has touched on the second issue that was raised: We have no policy for internally displaced persons. The other even more important issue that was raised is that we have no policy on urban refugees. And in some cases UNHCR gives better facilities to the refugees than the host people, therefore causing friction, which we have noted in the case of the Sudanese in Kampala.

I am asking the second Deputy Prime Minister to throw some light on how far the Government has gone in rectifying this situation. The law on refugees has been pending for a long time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Erute North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for the statement about the disaster situation in the north.

I wanted to observe one thing about northern Uganda. When we talk about northern Uganda at many fora, it seems northern Uganda comprises of Acholiland, that is Gulu, Kitgum and Pader only. Even the disaster preparedness offices just take these three districts seriously.  

Mr Speaker, Apac and Lira districts are equally in the same disaster situation. During the time when the exodus of the refugees from Acholi Pii to Lira took place for a week, the people of Erute North did all in their capacity to welcome the refugees who were walking on foot from the camp to Lira without food. They did provide water, some food and so on and so forth. They lost four children and the people helped them bury them. So, I want to request the Minister to take northern Lira and Apac, which comprise of about six constituencies, that is Oyam North, Oyam South, Erute North, Kole, Moroto and Otuke to be included in their disaster preparedness whenever they are talking about northern Uganda.

As I speak now, my people are sleeping outside their houses, and we are expecting famine next year definitely, because they have not been able to participate in economic activities actively. The schools in Erute North, especially in the two sub-counties of Orumo and Ogur, are completely closed.  We are trying to transfer two secondary schools to Lira town but the logistics have been very difficult. However, we have already submitted our request to the Second Deputy Prime Minister’s office for some assistance, which we hope will be forthcoming.

When I went to see the situation on the ground, I found out that the road which has been used in trying to repatriate these refugees, especially the Lira-Kitgum road, especially the part from Lira to the refugee junction, that is about 28 miles, is impassable. Unless the Minister of Works and Communications takes it up, it is not possible to drive smaller cars on that road unless you are driving trailers. With trailers, the wheels can cover any hole, but with small cars like ours, when I tried it was impossible. So, the situation really demands for assistance from the Ministry of Works.

Another issue I wanted to observe is that when we are talking about northern Uganda, especially when we are talking about the war in northern Uganda, time is coming when something is going to be given to the north. The North will expand beyond its limit. At the moment, we are talking about a northern Uganda programme and it now covers the area up to Pallisa. 

Imagine, when the problem is there it is restricted, but when food comes, it is distributed everywhere in the name of the suffering people! I hope this will be put right, because there is a minister even for Karamoja and there is one for Northern Uganda. Unfortunately, even that one for northern Uganda from the Prime Minister’s office, we have observed very carefully that when the animal-restocking programme came, it was compensating those who lost their animals. The Iteso were served and then the Acholi were served, but our sub-region was left out completely. This has been a very serious complaint, and that is why I think there is need to define northern Uganda again if we are to succeed. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

JOHN ROBERTS AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Second Deputy Premier for the statement that he has made to this honourable House. I would also like to thank him for taking great concern about the pressure by the internally displaced persons on the neighbouring districts. 

Right now as we talk, the people of Jie County are hosting over 300 children from Pader District. I am well aware of the circumstances under which Karamoja is engulfed. We have continued making statements to Government and to the office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness that there is looming famine in Karamoja, but while making his statement, the honourable Premier did not highlight Government plans over the looming famine in Karamoja. It is a serious matter! So far now there are about eight serious cases of people who have died because of eating wild fruits and wild leaves in the wilderness in Karamoja, but this statement has not brought this out very clearly. We know that this is very terrible, especially now with the pressure of the internally displaced persons because of Kony, the problem is even worse -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Aachilla for giving way. I would like to inform my honourable friend and this House that Moroto Municipality is now flooded with the refugees from all the sub-counties and counties surrounding the town who are looking for food in town. So, we also have internally displaced people who are looking for food.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you for that information. It even becomes tougher when the only municipality in Karamoja is even inflated by the population of its own Karimojong who are looking for food and they survive on residues. Thank you for that information.  

I want further clarification from the Prime Minister, and I would like to get actual assurance. He has categorically stated that Kony is a security liability, and he is a source of disaster himself. I would like to seek clarification; are we really sure that we are containing Kony within our country? Are we in control of him or is this man multiplying and becoming even stronger that we should not look at it as a disaster and declare the place an emergency area so that we deal with this person even more seriously?  

Furthermore, I would like to thank Government through the Prime Minister for the partial lifting of the ban on the sale of cattle in Karamoja. This was going to be a very serious matter. People have nowhere to get sources of income because they rely on only animal products for sale. But last night my political assistant informed me that the ban has been partially lifted. 

Even with the lifting of that ban on the sale of cattle in Karamoja, there are so many refugees. There is an influx of refugees from Southern Sudan into Karamoja, especially to the sub-counties of Kapedo where my honourable friend Ark represents in Dodoth, Kathiele, and my sub-county of Kachire. 

These people have no food and Kotido District Council at one moment had resolved that a resettlement scheme for refugees be established so that Government has something budgeted to protect and safeguard the refugees, and even to avoid the increasing scrambling over the little food that we have in our granaries. 

What has Government put in place to take care of these refugees, who appear not to be known to the honourable Prime Minister, but in actual fact these refugees are there? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I too wish to commend the Minister for Disaster Preparedness for the report he has given. I just want to inform him that in Kitgum District, even those who are not displaced in camps are equally affected, and the humanitarian aid would obviously have to cover them. 

It seems this year the gods even connived with the rebels to make the weather very unfavourable. And as I talk now, there is no food that we can talk about in the gardens to be harvested. So, the total population of Kitgum of 257,000 people would need humanitarian assistance in terms of food aid and other items  

The people who ran from Mucwini sub-county where rebel atrocities were carried out and those in Amokora are over 10,000 and they are camped in Kitgum town. The chairman of Kitgum District Council has been right here in Kampala for the last one week, and he has been lobbying to see the Minister to see how the situation could be handled. Even if you talk about the assistance of World Food Programme, it seems the food they have given is so little. Obviously, the Minister and the Ministry will have to do something. 

I would have also expected the Minister to suggest the issue of a supplementary budget for his Ministry. We know that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has little funding, and I would have thought that the Minister would have, maybe, included in his statement the need for a supplementary budget to cater for these additional needs for the people in camps, and those who have been displaced because of rebel atrocities.

I also want to inform my colleagues, Members of Parliament that Ugandans’ hospitality has been and is still being grossly abused by some of the refugees that we host within this country. Last Monday, as I boarded a bus to Gulu, we had I think some Sudanese refugees - because I heard them speak an African dialect, which is not included in our Constitution. I saw some bold, long tribal marks on their cheeks and when I asked I was told they were Dinkas. 

Right from the bus park from Kampala here - most of them sit at the back of the bus and from Kampala they took two loaves of bread from these vendors, they never paid for that bread. When we reached Kigumba they took some sticks of muchomo and they never paid for them. They took an ofwono bottle of soda, they never paid for it and they hid behind the seats and really chuckled and laughed about their exploits. I think this is contentious. I did not know hon. Lukyamuzi was right until I saw what happened –(Laughter).

Honourable members, this is not a laughing matter, considering the level of poverty that we have in this country and the manner in which our people have to struggle day in and day out.  It does not have to be in my constituency, but it pains when we know that the hospitality of Ugandans is praised all over and yet we know that the visitors that we host abuse even the little. They do not even appreciate the little that we are giving to them! 

So, I appeal to the Minister to let it be known to whoever is concerned with these refugees to observe some minimum standards of rules and respect for the nationals. We welcome our refugee brothers because we can even be in a similar situation, but they should not continually abuse our little hospitality. 

Last but not least, as I sit down, I would wish to record, with commendation, some of the activities of our own UPDF soldiers. We know they have problems but at certain times they have succeeded. I only appeal to the authorities, much as we are talking about humanitarian aid, the motivation of soldiers should be a priority for them to succeed.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for his detailed statement on the disaster and refugee problem in the north. His statement is dwelling more on lamentations and agonising about refugees and disaster. To me this is really a symptom, and he is leaving out the root cause of the problem, which is the security crisis.  

The Prime Minister it talking as the right hand part of Government that there is a big crisis in northern Uganda which started 10 years ago with only Gulu and Kitgum. Now he is saying it is spreading all over northern Uganda to Karamoja, Nebbi, West Nile, and I am sure he says it is going down.  

My dear brother in the Ministry of Defence, hon. Amama Mbabazi has been consoling us and saying that, “you know, Kony is not a big problem, we shall soon contain him; it is a matter of time”.  Now, if the right hand of the Government does not know what the left hand is doing, Ugandans are at a loss! I am very worried; are we safe? Is this country safe?  

If really these people had been routed out of Southern Sudan - and we were meant to believe that Sudan cooperated with the Government and, therefore, we see that without a base in the backyard they would not be having a lot of strength and support! I heard the minister saying that these people are using very sophisticated weapons; these people have become so daring that they even attacked the Gulu Headquarters.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable Member, I think you should understand the capacity under which this statement was made. I think the Second Deputy Prime Minister was not addressing this issue as a Minister of Defence. He was dealing with what he is doing in his ministry on crises created by security matters, to help people who have been affected. So, his not having addressed you as a Minister of Defence should actually be understood in that light.

MR BAMWANGA:	Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was not actually putting the blame on the Second Deputy Prime Minister. I was saying that he was talking on a point of his refugee and disaster problem, but I think the root cause is really the security crisis. That is why I was saying that having routed out the Kony rebels from Southern Sudan, having scattered them, I expected the Minister of Defence to tell us whether these are the last strokes of a drowning Kony with his men. And if it is not, we also want to know how people like hon. Reagan Okumu and his peace mission managed to go and meet the brigadiers. 

I read about four or five Brigadiers inside Uganda, and now that the rebellion and insurgency is spreading, I am worried and I need a statement from hon. Mbabazi. These people may soon reach Mbarara, Kabale and Buganda. Then the hon. Deputy Prime Minister’s crisis of refugees and disaster will become even bigger! That is why I expected the hon. Minister of Defence to help the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister from agonising and lamenting by giving a statement that can console all of us. I thank you.

MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable Second Deputy Premier for his statement on this issue of displaced persons.

Mr Speaker, by the time I reported to the Ministry concerned, the number of displaced persons from Nwoya County in Gulu district, who have now taken refuge in Jonam County, was about five hundred. As I talk now, we have in excess of 700 displaced persons, and we have not yet received any support to look after these people. These people have no food, shelter and utensils. They are in dire need of medical attention, and the situation is pathetic. These are Ugandans resident in Uganda. They have moved away from their usual place of abode. It was not wilful; they were forced by circumstances and we believe that wherever they have been received, like Jonam County of Nebbi district, they should be looked after.

On Friday night, 9th August, there was very strong wind that blew over my sub-county of Panyimur in Jonam County destroying 70 houses in the area, leaving over 350 people without shelter. All the grass-thatched latrines have been destroyed. These people are without food and medicine.

As we will recall, our place in Panyimur recently suffered from cholera. Out of the 700 people who were displaced from Nwoya County, about 200 of them are residing in Panyimur.  Now you have those whose houses have been destroyed numbering about 350. If you add 200, you already have over 500 people on the streets, and yet we have the problem of cholera, shelter and food. Most of their utensils have been destroyed. Unless the government intervenes, the people of Jonam have gone beyond what they can do for these people who are desperate.  

The Ministry concerned is already aware of this and we are only feverishly waiting to see that these people are given immediate attention. Worst of all, if this is not done immediately, the cholera that had been effectively arrested by the Ministry of Health through their intervention may come back again. The area does not have grass; there have been very, very strong dry spells, which have destroyed all the grass that the people could easily use to reconstruct the latrines. But as it stands now, there is no way; it is only government intervention that can assist us in this episode. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for making this statement. I want to observe, however, that statements of this importance should have been circulated to Members for them to follow properly, and secondly, so that it forms part of our records. It is unfortunate that we are discussing this statement without some of us having read it carefully and understood the import. I hope in future, Mr Speaker, you will not allow Ministers to come here, make statements without giving Members the opportunity to read those statements themselves.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, you will recall that when hon. Kahinda Otafiire made a ministerial statement on African Union, I stood up and made the exact point hon. Ben Wacha is making. You informed the Cabinet that the procedure is that they should circulate the ministerial statements before debate so that the House can follow. So, I do not know what advice or ruling you can now make, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I was not aware that you did not have the copies. So I took it that the copies were available. But let us proceed since the statement was made without copies; we proceed with it. Next time we shall ensure that copies are available.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir. Refugees obviously need assistance; they will continue to need assistance. It is unfortunate that we cannot stop people who are fleeing from their abode to come into Uganda. It is also clear that we cannot stop disasters from occurring within our country. However, how prepared is the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness? How seriously does government see the role of this ministry?  

Mr Speaker, somebody stood up and said that the Ministry needs a supplementary budget. Supplementary at this point! That means, obviously, he does not have enough funds. I would not talk about a supplementary budget; I would rather say that the ministry needs to be properly funded. Do we have any food reserves? Are we coming out with any policy for food reserves in this country? Don’t talk about the North; don’t talk about refugees.  Supposing something drastic was to happen to Uganda, where would we get the food? Whenever something nasty happens and we need assistance, we have to run to donors, for handouts from donors! I can state with no fear of anybody contradicting me that the ministry now has nothing in its reserves. Nothing in its stores! 

I had the occasion to interact with hon. Butime when four of my parishes were burnt and people had nowhere to go. They had no food and no shelter. The Minister sent me to the stores, but I only found polythene sheets. Polythene sheets!  No food, no blankets. I bought blankets with my own money. What happened to our food silos? Some government which was thought to be non-functional in the past had wisdom to have food silos. Where are they now?  Even if you gave hon. Moses Ali money to buy food, where will he put it? It is shameful really. It is shameful!  We do not have the capacity of looking ahead. A government made up of nothing -(Laughter).

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I know that people can be angry, I know they can have very low opinions of others, but is it in order for hon. Wacha, who knows very well that this government is made up of people of equal or even better substances than others, to stand up in this House – I am deliberate in with-holding that -(Applause). Yes, in fact the hon. Member had just talked about silos.  Actually this government built the silos he is referring to. But he knows that it was a deliberate policy of the government to liberalise the economy. The choice had to be made and this House is aware of that. If hon. Ben Wacha wants us to go back, he is free to bring that to this House or to any competent authority and we go back. But is it in order for him to say that this government is made up of nothing? Is he in order? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you must appreciate the circumstances under which this debate is being held.  These are circumstances where people are displaced and I think their leaders think they have not been helped. I do not know whether it is true. So you must have what we call thick skins in some of these circumstances. I do not think he was referring to you. I think he was criticising a policy; he was not attacking individuals. I think it was a question of policy - (Laughter and Applause).
  
MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir. If I were to be asked to choose certain areas in the policy of liberalisation where we should not liberalise, I would have chosen - I was not here - I would have said that areas, which deal directly with our humanity, with our own people, people’s concern, should never be touched. Even the United Kingdom which is a mother of liberalisation, there are areas it does not touch because it affects directly their own population.  

Sir, today we are talking about problems in the North. I sincerely hope it does not spread. I would rather we went to the root cause of these problems and tackled them effectively. It is because of this that I really appreciate the moves taken by hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Ocula for risking going and talking to people who are said to be “un-talkable” to. It is unfortunate though that while these honourable Members and the Bishops have thought of even convincing the President that Kony is not so much of a demon and can be talked to, some people are still making it impossible for this move to reach a conclusive end.  Why should a minister stand up and say, ‘we are not going to talk to Kony’ when the President is saying we are going to do it?  Why? People are suffering, Mr Speaker. People are suffering! 

If it was possible for some of us to handle guns and go and fight Kony and we thought that was the only solution, we would have done it. But the reason why we come here and say try another move is because every year we have seen one move being taken not being conclusive. Go to the root cause, you will not be any lesser of a woman or man if you talked. Just talking!  

I appreciate the moves being taken by my elder brother, the Second Deputy Prime Minister, but for whatever it is worth, I would advise that he goes back to the drawing board and live to the name of his Ministry. I thank you, Sir. 

MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My constituency offered temporary accommodation to those refugees before they were transported down south, and for that reason I have three areas of concern. 

One; Ngeta Farm is now an agricultural research development centre, which is undergoing intensive rehabilitation. Now such a quick influx of people that came and settled in this centre must have caused some damage to the repaired infrastructure. I hope that the Deputy Prime Minister responsible, also the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, will prepare appropriate intervention, including the repair of the damages that must have been caused by the settlement of these people. 

Two; a month ago, when I was travelling upcountry to my constituency together with my Colleague hon. Alex Okot, we spent some 30 minutes at a place called Bweyale in Masindi District. There are already 10,000 Sudanese refugees staying there in a camp in Kiryandongo. But there arose conflict between two tribes from the Sudan who are living in this camp as refugees. And some of them were believed to have been armed with guns, bows, arrows and spears. 

In the course of the fighting the weaker tribe was defeated and their camp commander was chased away. He was actually being kept by the Police at Kiryandongo Police Station, having burnt down ten houses at the camp. Amazingly, the tribe that had defeated the weaker one was now trying to chase those people who had sought refuge at the Police Post, wanting to get them and maybe even kill them! We witnessed this situation. The Police was reinforced with UPDF soldiers, and the situation was restored to some calm. But even then it remained tense. 

My worry is that the original group that has lived there for some time now was already quarrelling among itself. I do not know whether bringing another group into this situation will not create more disaster. I think the hon. Deputy Prime Minister should be able to prepare for such a situation, with enough force to calm down any aggression.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I know that some of these refugees were brought in on lorries from Lira down to the Masindi area. Some could however have come down to Kampala, and it is actually already known that some Sudanese are already here in Kampala. Whether they are refugees or businessmen, I do not know but does the hon. Deputy Prime Minister still regard these people, who are here in Kampala, as part of the people whom he should help? 

I am saying this because even those who stayed for a week or so in Lira sold off some of the relief items that were given to them. Brand new saucepans that were given to them were sold off in Lira, blankets were either left behind or sold off, and I know that they also sold some goats and chicken. Are you trying to find a way of sensitising these people so that they are aware that they are people in need, and should keep the little that they have? 

Those are the areas that I thought I could seek clarification on so that you respond to them. When asked, we should be able to inform those concerned accordingly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to remind the Third Deputy Prime Minister and also inform him that in Kapchorwa District we have chronically displaced persons. These have been there for almost 30 years now. These are people who have been displaced by cattle rustlers originating from Karamoja region. The majority is in my constituency, in camps like Atari, Seretyo, Chepsi-Kunya, Zundeti and Ngenge itself. 

This area of Ngenge where these chronically displaced people are, also suffers chronic drought. So they have food insecurity. In the year 2000, there were others who were staying in Kakwata Forest Station. When the Uganda Wildlife Authority displaced them, they found themselves near the park on rocky area. And the worst part of it is that as the World Food Programme supplies mainly the Karamoja region with food, they pass through Kapchorwa District, or in particular Ngenge sub-county, which is chronically in drought. 

So, chronically people are in camps because of cattle rustling. Food just passes through the sub-county as they go and supply the Karimojong who will only get stronger and come and rustle in Kapchorwa District more. Well, we have made a lot of efforts to ask for food so that as they go to Karamoja they could drop some in Kapchorwa District but that has not been done. 

So, s I said, I want to remind and inform you that as World Food Programme supplies Karamoja, they should also supply these chronically displaced people who are also chronically faced with drought. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION (Mr Agard Didi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because the portfolio of Northern Uganda Rehabilitation was also mentioned in connection with the statement of the Deputy Prime Minister, I wish to say the following. 

One; to those who were saying that perhaps the Deputy Prime Minister should have come with a comprehensive statement, I believe that this routine briefing about crisis management of the situation is really welcome. For example, as disaster managers they have given us the little that they have tried to do, which should be encouraged. If debate follows from that to encompass a more comprehensive policy on disaster, I think that is a welcome debate. So we should thank the Deputy Prime Minister for this information. 

Secondly, I want to say that as I had mentioned earlier, disaster is not a phase where Northern Uganda Rehabilitation is involved. We are to do with development. We have been talking with donors and other stakeholders about how to assist the situation in the north, and until March, there was a lot of consensus with donors as to what could be done about the situation. But when the government decided on “Operation Iron Fist”, naturally with the security guarantee being one of the requirements we need for development, we wanted to see how this phase would go. 

I want to thank hon. Ben Wacha, for the crux of the matter is how we can dedicate ourselves to solving the root cause of the problem. When people like hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Ocula join the Bishops, the traditional leaders and the chiefs of Acholi sub-region in talking peace and rallying the population for peace, then we are headed in the right direction. 

I can tell you that with the overall regional situation contained, the Sudanese will get a peaceful settlement very soon. Therefore, this situation will be for us Ugandans to contain here. Although I cannot put a time frame on that, I believe this phase will not be too long. I am ready to consult with Members from the region to also participate and we see how best our region can be brought out of this current phase.  

I want to assure Members that the time will come for the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme to come out more forcefully with programmes of its own. But we are not a complement. The role of development is a role that government, through the Local Government development programmes, should play. There is also a lot of donor interest but we are also going to supplement it. That is a deliberate agreement between the government and the donors. 

Since some of these districts in the north have been identified as the poorest of the poor, we are to give them this extra. Managing that extra does not constitute the main responsibility, so it will be the responsibility of government. And since we are representatives in Parliament, let us all rally together and see how both government and subsidiary programmes can be implemented. I thank you.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Brig. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank colleagues for their concern and expressions, which I would call lamentations. I have been accused of lamenting but indeed this is a situation to lament about. And all they have said is also lamentation, so we are all lamenting. 

I will deliberately confine myself to disaster, as I did not put the hat of the Second Deputy Prime Minister on today. Therefore I should be seen as such and the information I brought to you should be taken in that capacity. Perhaps some other colleagues will assist with areas like Defence; I am glad the minister is here for that. 

Secondly, I did not mention many other places that are also affected by disaster, for example Intendero. Since disaster is continuous, I invite all my colleagues to find time to come to my ministry so that we can discuss and see how we can solve some of these problems 

About giving security to humanitarian agencies, I think the Ministry of Defence is already doing their work, and food is reaching the people. 

My colleague from Kilak said I do not visit the people in Adibi; I do. You see, if you were I, you would also not have made yourself very available because you recall that on 24th December I was almost killed by the very people he was talking about in Kilak County. So once bitten, twice shy. I would rather be accused of –(Interruption)

THE SPEEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the point I heard is that he checked the visitors’ book and you had not signed it - (Laughter).

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Sir, in most cases I fly over to Adjumani. Even the last time I went to Gulu I flew over –(Laughter)- so I had no opportunity to sign the book. Next time I go on foot I will ask him to accompany me so that we go in there and sign the visitors’ book - (Laughter).  

What I want to assure colleagues about is that we have a Disaster Policy Bill on its way, the Refuge Policy is on its way too, and the policies on internally displaced people and resettlement will also be here soon. At least four documents are on their way to the Parliament through Cabinet. That information was given by some colleagues, and I think it is pertinent.

Somebody asked whether we have a budget or not. Right now the Prime Minister, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, the Minister of Finance and their relevant Commissions are with his Excellency the President in Gulu trying to give the response of government to this situation. So budget or no budget, action is already being taken. For Parliament’s information however, the Ministry of Finance insists it is going to see the Disaster Policy through. When it is an Act, then the situation will be made clear. But the situation is okay to me. Should there be any emergency, like this one, then the Ministry of Finance gets the money from wherever it gets it from, because a disaster has to be attended to.

Colleagues should bear with me for I do not think it is going to be possible for me to address each and every question raised. I rather ask colleagues to come and we talk about each of these problems in my ministry. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House and the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister that when you give me permission, I intend to give a full Ministerial Statement about the security situation in Northern Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall accommodate you in our schedule.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, about these people who have been in Kapchorwa for 30 years, I think they are no longer displaced. These are no longer disaster really –(Interjection). I think these people have surpassed, they are no longer -(Laughter)- displaced for 30 years.  This is a lifetime displacement. So, this is no longer disaster really.

THE SPEAKER: You are saying it is a permanent state of affair?

BRIG. MOSES ALI: This is a permanent state of affair.

MS KULANY: I want to inform the Deputy Prime Minister that the people who are staying in these areas hon. Yeko talked about are living in places which are not their homes, and they are waiting for Government to guarantee them security so that they go back to their homes.  So, as far as we are concerned, they are still displaced.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the point he was making is that for over 30 years, this has been a problem. Now, if it is a problem that has been going on for 30 years, it is no longer a disaster. You have to put it in your permanent plan to deal with it - (Laughter).

MRS KULANY:  Mr Speaker, it is the negligence of Government. They have never gone there to see the situation.  So, the problem is not the people of Kapchorwa, but the negligence of Government.

THE SPEAKER: Nobody said it is negligence of people of Kapchorwa, but we are saying that is outside his Ministry of Disaster Preparedness because it is known.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: I just want to conclude by making a remark on the inter-tribal war in Kiryandongo, which has been commented upon. This matter has been solved.  It happened, I think, one or two months ago between the Lotuko - the Lotuko are a tribe in Southern Sudan in Torit. Their capital town is in Torit, just directly in the same line from Kitgum.  If you head for Southern Sudan to Torit, you go from Kitgum.  These Lotuko had a conflict with the Acholi of Sudan and we solved that problem.

Now, the people we brought for temporary reception in Kiryandongo are going to be resettled, as I said, in three other places within one month. If my colleague has any other information of potential conflict again, he should again come.  We shall discuss it in my office to see how we can take measures to stop it.  Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I would like to stop here, and if I did not talk about matters you raised, we can do it in the office.  We have time -(Laughter).  Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Ndawula Kaweesi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable members. This is a report of the Committee on Natural Resources. 

In pursuance of Article 90(3) of the Constitution, and Rule 124 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Natural Resources has critically examined Government recurrent and capital budget estimates of ministries under its jurisdiction, and it is ready to report to the House for general debate.

The Committee’s mandate covers the policy proposals and budget estimates of two ministries namely: 

· Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, that is Vote 12 and Vote 112.
· Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. That is Vote 29 and 129.  

Mr Speaker, allow me to start with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. This Ministry has got a structure that consists of a technical directorate and a department that provides support services. Basically it has got two main sectors, the energy sector and the mineral sector.  

Mr Speaker, the Energy policy is to meet the energy needs of the Ugandan population for social and economic development in an environmentally sustainable manner. There are several Government interventions in support of the policy. The interventions include:

· Power sector reforms to encourage private sector participation.
· Independent power producers.
· Strategic energy development projects and
· Petroleum supplies reforms  

To expound on these interventions, we can look at the projects in this particular Ministry.

Both private and public sector sponsor the on-going projects in the energy sector.  The privately sponsored projects are mainly in the generation of electricity by the independent power producers (IPPs). 

The projects, which are currently on going, include: 

Kiira Power Station:
 
In the implementation of Power IV, units 13, 14 and 15 of the station shall be commissioned this fiscal year bringing the total generation capacity to about 400 megawatts.  

Bujagali Hydro Power Project:
  
The project is on course. Compensation for land, resettlement of the affected people, and technical survey for the transmission line are completed.  Progress of the project show preliminary construction has started.

The Karuma Hydro Power Project:  

Negotiations with the independent power producer (NOPARK) are scheduled to be completed this fiscal year.

Kakira Co-generation Project:

Negotiations with the IPP (Kakira Sugar Works Ltd) for the 7-megawatt capacity are to be completed this fiscal year.

Nyagak Mini Hydro Power Project:

The bids have been evaluated and construction is scheduled to commence this fiscal year.

Kisiizi Mini Hydro Power Project: 

The technical surveys and studies are being done, and this project will benefit from the Energy for Rural Transformation support (ERT).

The Strategic Energy Development Projects:

The Committee considered that this intervention is to promote the rural electrification strategy and plan. It was the concern of the Members that many parts of the country lack electricity and advised the Ministry to follow a criterion in approving electrification schemes. The criterion is “Rehabilitate the electricity supply network, install transformers in townships where the grid exists, extend the grid to district headquarters, schools, healthcare centres and any other community points of interest, and extend the grid to viable commercial load centres to stimulate development.”

Energy for Rural Transformation Project:

The project is intended to increase rural electrification through a combination of delivery mechanism with private sector investment. It shall include Government grants and reasonably priced capital to reduce the cost for investment by the private sector.

Energy Advisory Project: 

This is meant to encourage the private sector to develop independent networks in the countryside. 

Alternative Energy Resources Assessment Study:  

The project is to define a feasible, socially and environmentally sound and sustainable, least cost alternative energy resource development.

Uganda Photovoltaic Pilot Project for Rural Electrification: 

This project is intended to establish a foundation for a sustainable use of PV technology for rural electrification in areas not forecasted to be accessible by the national grid in the near future.

Power Sector Reform as an intervention:

The sector reforms belong to the unbundling of Uganda Electricity Board into successor companies that is, the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company, the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company and the Uganda Electricity Generation Company. The process to concession the generation and distribution companies is expected to be completed this fiscal year.

Petroleum Supplies Reform as an intervention of Government: 

The Committee noted that the petroleum products are of outstanding importance to the economy of the country, hence its significance. The Ministry has carried out a research, which has indicated that actually the petroleum products are overpriced. The price of petroleum products in Uganda has stood on the higher side.  The Committee received the figures of the taxes in Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda.  The explanation for the high margins in Uganda was that Uganda suffers due to a small market and it is landlocked, so transportation costs have got to be considered.  Kenya on the other hand enjoys a big market and has got a coastline. Rwanda enjoys the European Union subsidy. The Ministry hopes that the increased competition in the petroleum supplies sector due to liberalisation will eventually bring down the fuel prices. 
 
Mr Speaker, there is another project called the Kenya – Uganda oil pipeline extension project.  The pipeline will go a long way to reduce transport costs, pilferage and smuggling of petroleum products. The Ministry, however, delayed its implementation.

The legislation:

The legal framework regulating activities in the Energy sector is enshrined in the Electricity Act, 1999.  In the said legislation, the Electricity Regulatory Authority was created, and by definition, it enjoys the overall authority on matters of electricity and related issues. It sets the standards in the sector and issues instruments of effect on electricity tariff. 

The regulatory supervisory role in the sector is well covered under the Act, however, there is a total absence of consumer councils and as such there is a gap in that legislation. Consumers are not well protected.  The Committee was informed that the Rural Electrification Board has been put in place. This was established as one of the institutions under the electricity Act. 

For the Petroleum supplies reform to take effect requires an enabling legislation.  The Minister contends that Cabinet passed the principles underlying the petroleum supplies bill in February 2001 however, the draft bill from the First Parliamentary Counsel reached the Ministry in April 2002 for submission to Cabinet.
 
The recommendations of the Committee:

The Committee recommends to this august House that: -

· The Ministry of Finance or any other responsible organ of Government should affect the transfer of ownership of Amber House from UEB to the Ministry responsible for Energy.  This is in a bid to avoid now that chronic arrears of rent, it is standing at Shs359 million.
  
· The Ministry of Justice, which is responsible for staff of the First Parliamentary Counsel, should get more personnel to level with the workload.

· The Electricity Act of 1999 should be amended to provide for consumer councils, and should apportion responsibility for delivery of electricity to the premises of the consumers. 

·The concessioning of UEB successor companies, that is the three, should be expedient and transparent.

Mr Speaker that brings me to the next sector under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the minerals sector.  The mineral policy is to attract investment, build capacity for acquisition and utilisation of geo-data and increase mineral production for social and economic development of Uganda. 

In pursuance of that policy, the Government has instituted a number of interventions. These include: enhanced petroleum exploration and production, geological and geophysical mapping countrywide, and implementing a mineral investment programme.  

Petroleum Exploration as an Intervention:

A production sharing agreement was concluded with Heritage Oil and Gas Limited, and their schedule for drilling will start this fiscal year.  There is another company, Messrs Hardman and Energy Africa, who have also received a product-sharing agreement. They got it in October 2001.

Geological and geophysical surveys of the Pakwach Basin were completed. Similar surveys commenced in Rhino Camp Basin, and it is expected to be completed this fiscal year.

Geological Mapping:

The Committee learnt that the southwestern, western and mid western region have been mapped however, the central, northern and eastern regions are scheduled to be completed this fiscal year.

The projects:

Support to Petroleum Exploration Promotion: 

This project is to promote petroleum exploration, build capacity through training personnel and developing infrastructure, and design of models for production sharing agreements.

Mr Speaker, there is another project on national seismological network project. The project enhances the country’s ability to detect, manage and evaluate the seismological effects due to earthquakes.  

Lake Katwe Salt Industry:
  
The harnessing of salt in lake Katwe has been found hazardous and has attracted sympathy from society. Women and children harness salt in a very unprofessional manner and without protective gear, exposing themselves to health hazards. 

Kilembe Mines Limited:

The company is still a going concern and the entire corporate infrastructure is standing and operating commercially.

The legislation:

That is the legislation enabling the mining sector.  The current legislation is the Mining Act, 1964. It is outdated and cannot match the obtaining situation. It is the considered view of the Committee that the Minerals (Amendment) Bill should be tabled so that it can be in consonance with the obtaining environment.  Review of petroleum legislation has been done and the Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Act (Amendment) Bill has been submitted to Cabinet.

Recommendation:
  
The Committee recommends that the revised legislation address the concerns of people’s safety in the salt harnessing at Lake Katwe. The above legislation shall cause confidence and increased investment in the mineral sector.

Conclusion:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on Natural Resources has reviewed the 2001/02 performance and current operations of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and recommends that the House approve the Ministry’s Budget of 3,294,341,000 under vote 029 as Recurrent Expenditure, and –(Interjection)- honourable Members, actually the figure you have there is a wrong figure.  You need to correct it. The right figures run as follows: The figure for Recurrent Expenditure is Shs3,294,341,00 that is under Vote 029 and Shs32,191,467,000 under Vote 129 as Development Expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/2003.  I beg to move.

Mr  Speaker, allow me to continue and report on the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.  The approved management structure of the Ministry consists of two Directorates, two service departments and three statutory bodies.  

Mr Speaker, the Committee looked at the mandate of the Ministry and made these observations:  

• Recruitment in the Public Service based on merit criteria which seeks to attract the best candidates for the post by opening up to the public must be evaluated.  As much as this may attract competent people from the private sector, it may at the same time discourage those who are already in service.  

• Avenues for promotion become distant and funds spent in capacity building and training may be lost as employees leave the service.  

• The ban on recruitment of staff by Government has led to inadequate staffing in the Ministry.  

• Ministry of Public Service has not provided transport for ministers as required.  

• There is a complaint by the Ministry that funds collected through aid are not ploughed back to the Sector proportionately.  The Committee has decided to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance.

• The applicability and relevance of Result Oriented Management and the sector-wide approach should be fully internalised and evaluated.  Without the above, it may end up being mere semantics and achieve nothing.

THE WATER SECTOR

Mr Speaker, this Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has got three main sectors: the Water sector, the Lands sector and the Environment sector.  

Allow me to report on the Water Sector, Mr Speaker.  The key water sector institutions responsible for implementation of Government programmes are: the Directorate of Water Development, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation and local governments.

Rural Water and Sanitation:

This is the direct responsibility for the Directorate of Water Development.  The existing facilities in the rural areas include 19,467 protected springs, 18,013 boreholes, 5,127 shallow wells and 134 gravity flow schemes with 4000 public taps.  This makes a net effect of service coverage to move from 53.2 per cent to 55 per cent.  

The Committee made observations on this:

• Service coverage is still very low nationwide.  

• “Protected springs” and shallow wells are actually contaminated and seasonal.

• Maintenance of boreholes has become too complicated and expensive for the locals. 

• The cost of borehole drilling is too high for communities. 

• Boreholes are non-operational partly due to poor technical work during installation.  

• Distribution of water sources in the districts has been erratic with some areas having more than others.

• Communities have been made to pay unaffordable amounts of money as a form of community contribution.  

The Committee wishes to recommend, Mr Speaker, that: 

• The Ministry should review the phenomenon of community contribution. 

• Provision of water should be a preserve of Government and its agencies.

• Major repairs of boreholes should be carried out by the Central Government.

• Existing water sources in districts should be mapped to avoid imbalance in water distribution.  

• Cheap water sources like gravity flow schemes should be fully utilized.

• All necessary hydro geological mapping should be done before any boreholes are sunk.

Urban Water and Sanitation:

62 out of the 78 towns in Uganda have piped water systems Only 12 towns have sewerage system serving less than ten per cent of the estimated town population.

Observations:

• Many towns do not have access to piped water.

• Availability of clean water is still a problem. 

• The cost of clean piped water is unaffordable by the urban poor. 

• Water kiosks are being vandalized in many towns. 

• Sanitation is lagging behind and is a major health hazard to urban residents.
  
• Out of 801 springs in Kampala, only one is uncontaminated.

Recommendations:

 • The Ministry should immediately address the issue of proper sanitation.  

• Unclean water sources should be condemned and closed.  

• Government should provide alternative sources in cases affected by the above.
  
 • Management of sewerage should be viewed as a priority of the Ministry.  

• Provision of water service to the urban poor should be looked at as a social mission to be supported by Government.

• The Physical Planning Department should ensure that upcoming urban areas are properly planned to enable them receive water and sewerage services with ease.

• NEMA and the Wetlands Division should intensify monitoring and inspections to make sure people do not settle in areas, which are environmentally and hygienically hazardous, like swamps.

Water for production:

This is still within the responsibilities of the Directorate of Water Development.

The Cattle Corridor:

The Committee was informed that the corridor covers 24 districts.  It is diagonal from the Tanzania border, through Bukanga and Isingiro, through Luwero, Nakasongola, and Soroti up to Kotido.

The Committee was disappointed that the area is defined climatically using rainfall of 700 millimetres rather than by major activity, which is cattle rearing.

Members were informed by the Ministry that the definition was provided by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The Committee recommended that the criteria used to define the corridor be reviewed to include all cattle rearing areas.

Dams and Valley Tanks:

This is under water production.  

Kailongo Dam:
 
The Committee was informed that the dam failed on April 29th 2001.  The contractor was requested to prepare a proposal for revampment, which he failed to produce.  As a result, United States Dollars 102,065 will be paid to Government as compensation against flood damages.  The contract with Terra Tirma was terminated.
Observations and Recommendations:

• Government has lost time and money due to poor technical work by the contractor.  

• Monitoring and evaluation of contractors should be intensified. 

• Increased participation of the district authorities should be encouraged since this can substantially contribute towards sustainability of the delivery of services.

Water for Irrigation: 

Mr Speaker, this is still under water production, which is under the auspices of the Directorate of Water Development.
 
The Committee observed that the sector has been fully ignored.  Irrigation schemes initiated in 1960s have been abandoned.  

The Ministry should make an effort to revamp the sector since it would go a long way to solve unpredictable climatic patterns, which have caused drought in many parts of the country.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation:

By March 2002, the corporation had made an extension of 109km of mains.  Income for the year totalled 22,054 million, unaccounted for water reduced from 43 per cent to 40 per cent.  The corporation had in its staff reduction of 206 employees.  

Observations and Recommendations:

• Unaccounted for water of 40 per cent is still too high, it should be reduced.  

• Performance contract targets between Government of Uganda and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation set by the Ministry in consultation with the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment are not ambitious enough; they should be reviewed.

•  National Water and Sewerage Corporation has debt collectors for both Government and Non-Government collection of its debts.  The Committee was interested to find out why a private firm should collect money from Government and earn a juicy percentage. 

• Government should make adequate provisions for utility services.

• Debt swaps should be encouraged where possible; that is between Government and the parastatals bodies.  

• The Minister of Finance should ensure that utilities are paid for since accumulation of arrears still undermines the corporate plan to expand and improve services.  The corporation is still paying for VAT on invoices billed and not money collected.  The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment should take on this matter with the Ministry of Finance.  Which means that all the debt that is still with Government, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has already been paid; this greatly eats into their corporate plans.  

• Prepaid meters should be initiated to reduce theft.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to touch on the Environment Sector.  

Forestry: 

The Forestry Department is earmarked for divestiture and the process has reached advanced stages.  

The Committee noted that natural forests are being depleted nationwide.  Further, people are settling in forest reserves in many parts of the country.  

The Committee was informed that 860 forest workers were retrenched and no replacement has been done.

Recommendations:

The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Public Service recruit staff required to manage forests as a matter of urgency.  

Forest reserves should be mapped and illegal settlers evicted to avoid future wrangles.  

Deforestation:
 
The Committee noted that the strategies put by Government to promote afforestation have not yielded much.  Pit sawyers and saw millers are not replanting concession areas they have harvested.  

The National Tree Seed Programme should provide adequate quality seed for national afforestation programmes, and the interventions should include school tree planting programmes through collaborative partnership ventures.  

Procedures for harvesting trees should be well laid out.  

Forestry Officers in districts should co-operate with local authorities to promote the sector.

Policy and Legislation: 

The Committee noted that the Forest Bill is long overdue and should be presented to Parliament without further delay.  


National Environment Management Authority (NEMA):  

The sustainability of NEMA remains a main challenge; NEMA still does not have a vote in the Ministry.  Ministry of Finance should seriously look into this matter.  

Wetlands are being destroyed countrywide.  

Communities should be educated and mobilised about sustainable wetland management. 

The difference between environmentalists and managers of the environment should be clearly brought out by undertaking formal and non-formal environmental education.

The Meteorological Department:

The Committee was informed that the service of this department would be improved by increasing the number of stations monitoring climate in the country, adopting dynamic models and increasing the operational budget by at least 50 per cent to ensure daily information for weather analysis.

Mr Speaker, allow me to report on the Land Sector.  

The Land Act Implementation: 

The Land Act 1998 created land management institutions, which were found to be so many, and putting them in place was expensive.  Proposed amendments to the Act are currently before the Committee.  The Committee has discussed issues with the relevant authorities but has not made any conclusions as yet.  A detailed report on the Act will be presented to the House in due course.  


Lands and Surveys: 

The Committee observed that during the 1994 restructuring exercise, the School of Lands and Surveys, the Meteorological School and Institute of Physical Planning were transferred to the Ministry of Education.  The Schools have however since been abandoned.  Ministry of Education should reactivate these schools since they produce technical personnel relevant to the sector.  

Geodesy, Surveys and Mapping Divisions: 

The Committee was informed that some sections of the Kenya-Uganda boundary have been demarcated while others are yet to be surveyed.  The problems surrounding the Tanzania-Uganda border have been resolved.  Some areas on the Uganda border with the Democratic Republic of Congo have not been properly demarcated.  

The Committee observed that proper demarcation of Uganda’s borders is necessary. Modalities to complete the demarcation should be established.  

Land Regulation and Valuations: 

Only 12 per cent of Uganda’s land is surveyed. Land Regulation should be computerised to ease storage, retrieval and management of land information, including detection of forgeries and fraud on titled land.

Physical Planning:

The Committee observed that urban centres are mushrooming without proper plans. The Town and Country Planning Act should be hastened to save the situation. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is keen on the development of this country.  I beg that the Ministry’s budget of Shs8,235,973,000 under Vote 012 as Recurrent, and Shs159,710,120,000 under Vote 112, as Development Expenditure for the fiscal year 2002/2003 be passed.  I beg to move Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.  First of all, I must say that you have been the first Chairperson during this financial Year to present a Committee Report on the budget- (Applause)- and I must say it has been very impressive. (Applause). You have been able to explain to us the 23-page report, and I have no doubt everybody has clearly understood the policies that you have directed the ministry to follow.

We had a general debate when we met with the Minister for Finance. Now the committee must have written this report taking into account what was said in the two general debates. I believe anybody who had a point to bring up with these ministries attended the meetings of these committees. So, he is asking us to approve this report. 

This report was intended for the Committee of Supply for purposes of the Budget. It could as well be that there are some policy matters and recommendations in this report that we need to extensively debate, not in a Committee of Supply but some time. 

The arrangements are that if there is a committee and the committee’s recommendations are that they be allocated some time to extensively deal with certain issues, this we shall do. But principally, our aim today is to deal with the estimates, and we have to complete the estimates of these two ministries today. So, if you have any pressing matter or point of clarification, you may make it. Otherwise, it is not our intention to have a general debate on the matter.

REV. HAMLET MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a point of clarification on power schemes under the rural electrification programme. There has been the Ishasha hydro-electricity programme, which was in the ministry’s plans, and upon which the people of Kanungu District have built their hopes. Their hopes were built for the development of tea, in which Government is vesting quite a lot yet Kayonza tea factory continues to run on diesel. 

There is a new district, Kanungu, which is not connected to the national grid, and the hope has always been that Ishasha would be the solution to all these problems So, I wanted to be clarified as to why it has just disappeared from the plans.  

You know that when there is darkness, even cults can come up and destroy people. So, I would be interested to get clarification as to why the other year we got a license approved by the Electricity Regulatory Authority for the Aga Khan Foundation and the International Finance Corporation. Seeing it vanish from the report does worry some of us. And so, I beg your clarification on this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Minister is also here, so the Minister will make some of the clarifications but let us get these clarifications so that the Minister can deal with them at once.

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the entire personnel of the committee for the well set out committee report.  However, I seek clarification on page 18 where they say, “the forest department is earmarked for divestiture and the process has reached advanced stages”, whereas on page 19, the committee notes that the Forest Bill is long overdue and should be presented to Parliament without further delay.  I am seeking clarification. Under what policy framework is the divestiture of the Forestry Department being implemented? I thank you very much.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I quite agree with you that we should not spend too much time debating this. I also only want to seek clarification with regard to Bujagali hydropower project.  

As you know, Mr Speaker, this is a major project, a project of an investment of 550 million dollars, and the committee is telling the House that the project is on course. I am not sure whether the committee is keeping informed about the promoters of this project, because internationally, it is known that AES is facing grave financial problems  In fact, the value of its shares has really tumbled, and it is liquidating some of its fixed assets in order to finance its operations.  Really, it is under threat of actually being insolvent!  

With this information, which is available on the Internet and everywhere, I do not think that the committee should simply say the project is on course, when in fact they know very well that even in Uganda, the project is under investigation.  The IGG is investigating cases of corruption relating to this project.  So, I would like the chairman to really give a proper picture - if he knows it - of actually what is happening to this Bujagali project.  Thank you.

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for the good work. However, I would like to seek some small clarification. 

On page 16, there was an issue on dams and valley tanks and there was the issue of Kailong dam. The committee was informed that the dam failed, and I do not know how the dam failed. Then there is money to be paid; is it refunded? The report says it will be paid to Government as compensation against flood damages. Are these anticipated floods or floods that occurred? I just wanted some clarification there.  

However, I would like to emphasize the recommendation on page 18 of this report in relation to the forests. In my constituency, I have part of Mabira forest and we have a problem. The forest rangers only work on weekdays. During the weekends, the pit sawyers come and start felling all the trees in the forests, and it is becoming a dangerous situation for us. Even the weather is gradually changing.  Maybe the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should encourage domestic tourism so that people go and see what has happened to areas where they have had deforestation.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MINDRA JOYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the committee for the report, but I seek some clarification from the Minister concerned with energy, on the issue of rural electrification.  When I look at this report, there are projects like Nyagak mini hydro-electric power, which is a bit too far from Moyo, my district, and then even we do not know when the Karuma one will start. 

I remember very well in an earlier debate in this House, I presented the issue of Moyo electricity, which is being supplied by a generator. By that time - I think it was in the last session - the Minister for Energy did say that providing electricity through a generator is too expensive, and that they would seek for alternative means of providing electricity for places like Moyo. So, may I be clarified about this Uganda photovoltaic pilot project for rural electrification mentioned on page 5? Have they got any specific district where they are going to start? As we are too far from all these other projects, if they have not yet made any decisions as to where they are going to start, I think I would be very glad if Moyo could be put as a priority. We could then benefit also, and that would help us a lot in development. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much for granting me this opportunity to speak. On page 21, on Lands and surveys, I am seeking clarification on the abandonment of the School of Meteorology and Physical Planning. 

I wish to know from the committee or the Minister concerned whether they exchanged information between this Ministry and the Ministry of Education, so that they mentioned, “the schools have however since been abandoned.” 

I take this as a big statement, and the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Natural Resources should explain to us why they abandoned the school, because these schools are important to the nation and the people. The information that is given by the schools is really required by even individuals.  

So, I would like the ministry concerned, which has given us this information, or the Ministry of Education to tell us why the schools were abandoned. Should the activity be too big for the Ministry of Education to take over, it must declare to us that it cannot manage that activity and that this activity should go to the concerned ministries.  I thank you.

MRS JANE ALISEMERA BABIIHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also extend my gratitude to the Committee on Natural Resources for the work well done, however, I would also like to get clarification. 

While they were looking at the borders of Uganda, Kenya and Congo, why didn’t they look at borders within the districts? Bundibugyo was formed in 1974; other districts that were formed last year have got boundaries. Last week I was in my district and the chairman said the boundary for Bundibugyo/Kabarole has been a problem. Surveys are carried out every time there is going to be an election, and it seems that the Bundibugyo/Kabarole border issue has been hotly politicised.  

I want to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Lands and Surveys to ensure that our people get their boundary, because they are getting a problem. They are threatening not to go for the census because they do not know where they belong. If a district was formed and we know that a sub-county “X” belongs to this district, why can’t we have the demarcation? You do not have to take surveys when we have a village, a county that was demarcated long ago!  

I do not know why our district, Bundibugyo, has continued to be marginalized in all forms, let alone the roads and everything! Even with the district boundary, we feel disadvantaged. We feel we are under-serviced by the Government. The people of Bundibugyo are already preparing their signpost; they are going to put up that signpost where they know the district boundary is –(Laughter). So, I am telling this august House that for us we know our boundary and we are going to put it there before the census time.  

I would like to thank you so much, and I would like to thank this august House. This is what we are going to do. Let Government not think that we are rebelling but we are doing what we think is right for our people, and the people are doing what they think is right for themselves.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine are quite a few. Number one; I would like to know the exact policy for rural electrification. I do not know which places are going to be covered, because we are hearing some are by the private sector, some by those companies that have been formed. Do we have a clear map on which areas are going to be handled so that I know whether my place or other places are covered?  

Two, I see no reason why we should recommend to transfer Amber House because of a debt of 530,000,000/= to the Ministry. Isn’t there a better way of handling this other than saying because of a debt, you should transfer something which is worth a lot of millions?

On water points, mentioned on page 13, they have talked about the points as having been checked and so on. I am finding it very difficult to comprehend this. There is a report I saw somewhere that some water points had been worked on, but on the ground they do not exist. Are these ones here the ones that the Ministry has verified as those that really exist, or there are those that we hear about and those you have seen?  

On de-forestation, in our place it is a disaster. If there was a deliberate policy by Government to tell all wanainchi that they should plant trees and they put carrots and sticks, who could do this? So, maybe, when you bring your bill, do something. 

On a sad note, NEMA does not have a budget but it is doing well. Who is paying it? According to page 20, NEMA does not have a vote; what about the money we borrowed from the World Bank to work on NEMA, under which vote is it? I hope it is somewhere.  

On AES, 52 weeks ago, according to the financial markets, the shares were 59 dollars; today when I was checking the market, it is 0.59 dollars per share. What chances do we have that AES will handle that big project we are talking about? And a committee comes here with a flower saying the project is on course! Is the committee going to fund it? 

Under minerals, can we also have the copy of this production share agreement that was signed in October? It could also turn out to be like AES!  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS WINFRED MATSIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on the Kisizi Mini Hydro Power Project. I doubt the accuracy of this statement that the construction is scheduled to commence this fiscal year. It is true the presentation should be brief, but I think to a great extent, it should be accurate, so that we put down something that we are very sure of, and which we can explain to the population.

Apparently, I know very well that the hospital as an institution has not actually even negotiated with any bank to borrow the money. Though they would have used the grant, I think it is the policy that they borrow money as a soft loan, but they have actually not gone ahead to get that. Therefore, I find it quite strange when the statement says that the construction is to begin.  Therefore, I would like the minister to allay my fears and my doubts on the accuracy of the statement.  Thank you.

DR ESELE JOHN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the major causes of accidents on our roads today is petroleum tankers. One way to save these lives is to transport the fuel using oil pipelines.  But I note on page 6, the committee observes that the ministry has delayed the implementation of this project. Could I know why the ministry has delayed the implementation of this project?  Thank you.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, mine are a few points. I see on page 14 that it is noted that availability of clean water is still a problem, and that the cost is unaffordable by the urban poor. Recently we got information that water was one of those items about to be privatised. When this issue was raised, we also commented that in Ghana, for example, where it was privatised, the incidents of cholera and guinea worm were resurrected. Therefore, I would like to hear from the committee whether water will indeed be privatised, and what the impact of this will be on the budget.  

My second point is very short and touches on many towns, which do not have piped water. One of these towns is in my constituency, and this is Kyenjojo Town. I would like to hear from the committee whether schedules have been put in place to ensure that piped water is given to these towns within the shortest time possible, because we do not have toilets. Water is life; in essence, we do not have life. Thank you very much.

MR ALEX ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to invite the people of Bundibugyo to come to Arua for sensitisation. We want to sensitise them - much as they are also marginalized like the people of Arua - so that when the right time comes, they will know what to do. 

In the heat of the last Presidential elections, the Ministry of Energy went to Arua and they started construction of power lines without the source of power itself. In fact, they just thought they could easily play with the psychology of the people of Arua and win elections for the “No Change” candidate. But we stood our ground; we abandoned whatever tactics they wanted to introduce in Arua and we voted wisely. 

On page 3, the committee states that five of the pre-qualified bidders have confirmed interest, visited the site and submitted their bids, and bid evaluation has been completed and the construction shall commence this financial year.  Ours is a perennial problem. 

I know that one time the hon. Migereko was like me, a Backbencher, but these days I see all of a sudden he has all the knowledge about that Ministry, telling us a lot of things which he is yet to fulfil.  So, I want to appeal to him this time round and the ministry in general, that we are no longer interested in words; we want action now. If there is no action, as we continue to monitor the situation, and as indeed I told the President when we last saw him in State House, we shall behave accordingly -(Laughter). Thank you.

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, and possibly continue where my colleague from Maracha has just ended. Every time we come for elections, there are many promises given to us and to our people, and this does not exclude Buyaga people in Kibaale District.

Since 1995/1996, they have been promised electricity, “Kagadi you are getting electricity next year.” Today is 2002, there is no electricity yet, and I do not know whether I will also go for advice to Maracha -(Laughter)- so that we can be sensitised!

The criteria used by the Ministry for extension of power is that it goes to the district headquarters, but when you go to Kibaale, a district that has been in place for the last 10 years, there is no electricity. Electricity was extended from Mubende to Kakumiro, one of the trading centres in Kibaale district, but it did not reach Kibaale district headquarters.  So, the question is, when will it reach that place so that it can also reach Kagadi in Kibaale district?

Also, some time back we had been told that surveys were going to be done on River Muzizi to establish a hydro station there. I do not know whether it has been put on the shelf, because I do not see it anywhere in this report. I do not see it in any of these policy statements.

I would also like to look at the settlement policy in relation to land use in this country. You will remember that we went through some small turmoil in Kibale district over land issues and its usage. As I talk, there is a lot of encroachment on forest reserves, I think because of lack of a policy on land settlement, usage and the rest. So I want clarification; when does government intend to bring about a settlement policy in this country? I think if I get some clarification, I will raise the other issues on land when we have gone through the Land Act Amendment. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, these points were raised when the chairperson presented the report but fortunately, all the ministers concerned are here. I think some of the questions that were directed to the chairperson would be better answered by the ministers concerned because the committee was using the information from the policy statements and technical staff. So, I will ask the ministers to answer the questions they can. If there is any for the chairperson, then he can answer them. Let us start with the Minister for Energy.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairman and members of the Committee on Natural Resources for this report and the support they gave to our ministry as is clearly manifested in the report and the recommendations they have given. I assure this august House that our ministry will make every effort to follow up on the recommendations and implement them within this financial year. I would like, on this note, to comment very briefly on some points raised in the report in form of recommendations, and I will start with Amber House. 

When my ministry appeared before the committee, the committee recommended that the matter of Amber House be taken up with the Ministry of Finance. Since we appeared before the committee, my ministry has written to the Ministry of Finance, putting forward the points raised by the committee, and I am happy to report that the reaction of the Ministry of Finance is so far positive.  

The other point, which I would like to comment on arising from the report, is recommendation number –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, this is just for matters of general policy. I gathered that the government set up a company called Uganda Property Holding, which is taking over government buildings, particularly those which are being left behind by parastatals that have been privatised. Indeed, according to reports submitted to our committee, the go-down in Bugolobi, which used to belong to Coffee Marketing Board was taken over by Uganda Property Holding, which is a government company owned by the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service, I think. Why can’t the same company take over Amber House like they have taken over Coffee Marketing Board go-downs, rather than give it to the Ministry of Energy, which will have no capacity to maintain it?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the question should have been  - because he never elaborated on what agreement they reached. Maybe you would ask him, ‘what is the position?’ Proceed, you can answer that question in respect of Amber House.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, we presented our case as Ministry of Energy in respect of Amber House, and all we did was to present the proposal as given to us by our committee which actually made a lot of sense to our ministry. The issue was that considering that other ministries like that of Health and that of Foreign Affairs were also going to own buildings, why couldn’t the Ministry of Energy be allowed to own a home? As I have indicated, so far we have received positive response. The matter is still under negotiation. From the preliminary response, I can report that the response we have received so far is positive. Mr Speaker, I cannot go beyond that at this stage.

The other point, which is raised in the report, is in regard to amending the Electricity Act such that consumer councils can be catered for. The position of the ministry is that we are looking at the entire Electricity Act and I think at an appropriate stage, we shall be in position to capture the recommendation of the Committee. We shall be discussing this with the committee in the process of considering amendments to the Act.

The other recommendation is in regard to concessioning of UEB successor companies where the committee calls upon government to ensure that the concessioning is undertaken in an expedient and transparent manner. Our reaction is that by opting for concession as opposed to selling of the UEB properties, we are indeed being expedient, because we are in the process of retaining the assets, these important and valuable assets for the country. 

So, in as far as being expedient is concerned, I think we are on the right track. When it comes to being transparent, the concessions have been advertised internationally and competitively. As I speak now, bids have been forwarded - in fact we have opened the technical proposals and they are being analysed before we get to the point of opening financial proposals. We shall keep the committee informed of the developments.  

In the report there is also a recommendation concerning safety of miners in the Lake Katwe Salt Project area. Our submission as a ministry to the committee, which I would like to reiterate here, is that we are in the process of considering a new mining law. This law will enable us to deal with safety and health issues in the course of mining. Our proposals as a ministry in as far as this is concerned will be contained in the Mining Bill, which will be discussed by the committee.

Mr Speaker, individual honourable Members of Parliament raised certain important issues. Rev. Kabushenga raised the issue of electrification of the Kanungu-Rukungiri-Bushenyi area, and that the Ishasha Hydro Power Scheme was not captured in the report. I think this was simply an oversight because we reported on this particular project when we appeared before the committee. 

The present status of that project is that the Uganda Rural Electrification Company and the International Finance Corporation (IFC), together with people of Rukungiri formed a company with a view to develop the Ishasha Hydro Power Project and to electrify the areas that are not reached by the national grid in Kanungu, Rukungiri and Bushenyi districts. They have sought a license from the Electricity Regulatory Authority and at the moment discussions are going on between Uganda Rural Electrification Company, which is part of the Agha Khan Group, IFC and the people of Rukungiri, with the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited so that they can be in a position to agree on a Power Purchase Agreement.

Why discuss with Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited? There will be surplus power generated when the Ishasha Hydro Power Project is developed, and the surplus power must be marketed to someone. The only people who will have the capacity to procure this power will be Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited so that they can enter this into the national grid and sell it to other parts of the country that will be in need of power. 

These discussions, it is true, have been going on for some time, but I would like to assure the committee and hon. Members here that we would like to get this matter to a speedy conclusion. As a ministry, we are investing our time and resources in order to ensure that the PPA can be concluded and Uganda Rural Electrification Company Limited can be in a position to start on the work in as far as developing Ishasha Hydro Power Scheme is concerned. 

I think even the issue of Kisizi River – this was raised by hon. Masiko – we have procured funding under the Energy for Rural Transformation as a country, negotiated by Ministries of Finance and Energy. Some of these funds are going to be applied to the development of Kisizi Hydro Power Scheme and the Ishasha Hydro Power Project and other projects, which are enumerated in the report of the chairman of the committee.

True, the process has been slow, but I assure you that as a ministry and as government, we are determined to ensure that these projects reach implementation stage so that these parts of the country, which have factories, but are in dire need of power, can be served with power, which can be generated from within those areas. This will also help us to address unemployment in those areas.

There was the issue raised by hon. Mindra Joyo of Moyo, concerning the extension of power to Moyo or developing of a power source in Moyo. The crux of the matter is that under our criteria for Rural Electrification, district headquarters receive first priority.

Under this arrangement, we have been sourcing for funds to electrify both Adjumani and Moyo district headquarters. I want to assure you that our discussions are moving on very well. But obviously, I can understand the frustrations of the people of Moyo in that most of the schemes that have been presented, like the one for West Nile, obviously may not be able to serve the people of Moyo. What we are considering as a ministry is to develop a power source that can serve the people of Moyo as we await grid connection to Adjumani and Moyo.

There are diesel generators in both Adjumani and Moyo. It is true they have been running only for four hours and this sets a limit to what can be done with only four hours of power availability or accessibility. Now depending on how we progress on the discussions we are having with some financiers, I am sure the problem you have raised will be attended to. Mr Speaker, there was –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, your priority to the district will affect the Kibale issue?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, you are right. In fact the Member of Parliament from Kibale, hon. Besisira, is very much aware of the efforts that the ministry and government has so far undertaken in regard to ensuring that power reaches Kibale and Kagadi. I wonder why he wants to go and borrow some notes from Maracha when actually his solution does not call for borrowing such notes - (Interjection). I am being reminded; you may get poison in the process.

Hon. Mafabi also raised the issue of rural electrification for Sironko, and I want to say that equally, hon. Mafabi is aware of the work we are doing in Sironko. We cannot reach every part of the country at the same time. But I assure hon. Mafabi just like he is aware, that the power lines will reach the point where he wants us to take them.

There was the issue of power for West Nile where power lines have been constructed from Arua to Bondo. As I speak now, power lines are being constructed from Bondo to Nebbi, and I think this is not a bad arrangement at all. To say that, “you have not developed our local source of power, therefore you should not construct the other power lines” is a wrong way of looking at things, honourable member. 

Our understanding has been that as we await the development of Nyagak Power Station, some areas of West Nile should be supplied with power from diesel generators, because really, at the end of the day when power gets into the transmission and distribution system, you can never tell whether it has come from a diesel generator or a hydro power source. We are in position to upgrade the capacity of the diesel generators so we shall do so. 

We have secured money for the Nyagak Power Station under the Global Environmental Facility and Energy for Rural Transformation. Currently, contractors want to make sure that they take advantage of the equipment in the region, which is working on the famous road. I visited the area and know that they want to reach an understanding and put the same equipment to use in the construction of Nyagak Power Station. 

Mr Speaker, if there is any project that is receiving attention, even without the kind of prompting that is being suggested, it is West Nile Electrification Scheme. So, I want to assure hon. Onzima that in the Movement, we are not promising air - (Laughter).  

Mr Speaker, hon. Esele raised the issue of the Kenya-Uganda Oil Pipeline, which was also captured in the report. The Ministry of Energy of Uganda has not caused the delay in the implementation of this project. It is in fact coming from our counterparts in Kenya. When our President visited Kenya recently, the issue of the oil pipeline was a subject of serious discussion between President Museveni and President Moi. Currently, new instructions and directives have been issued to our Ministry, the Kenyan Ministry for Energy and the Ministries of Finance in Kenya and Uganda, to get back to the round table and ensure that work on this project does not stop. There is demand that the project be implemented.

The last issue I would like to talk about is one raised by hon. Mwandha, concerning the Bujagali Hydro Power Project. The Bujagali Hydro Power Project has been moving. Work was done on site. The people who were affected by this scheme have been compensated by AES. Two; resettlement of those who were displaced has been done. Three; actual construction work, including earth movement, has also been taking place. 

It is true that AES, like all big energy companies in the world, has been faced with problems Anybody who reads newspapers, anybody who surfs the Internet is aware of this. After the collapse of ENRON, after the fall of energy prices in Europe, and after the economic volatility in Southern America where big American companies had invested heavily, all energy companies that had invested in that part of the world and in Europe have been faced with problems This one you can see when you log onto the Internet and access their stocks. 

There has been an oscillation in the value of stocks. Today they go down to US $2, tomorrow they go up to US $4, and after a day they go down further to US $1.5. In trading of stocks this kind of thing really happens, given the background I have just given here.  

MR KUTEESA: Mr Speaker I would like to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor that while it is true that AES stock has fallen dramatically, the transactions that have been put in place to affect this project are as follows:

The approvals from World Bank for loans have been made. AES itself has deposited its equity funds of US $130 million already. It is possible that they may be selling their assets elsewhere and their stock is falling but they have already put on account US $130 million, which is their equity participation. 

The outstanding problem is - and it is true what hon. Mwandha said that the investigation by the Board of the World Bank relates to guarantees made, and the political and economic risk. That is where there is still a problem. Approval has not been obtained because of investigations relating to corrupt practices but otherwise EAS has itself deposited its equity participation.

THE SPEAKER: So you are saying that a bigger part of the fund has been secured?

MR KUTEESA:  Yes.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From my simple accounting, I know very well that if the equity is falling, that means you need to borrow more money or to sell all the assets to be able to maintain your creditors and other obligations. The Minister of Finance is saying that they have deposited the equity. That means it could be acting as a guarantee somewhere over some liabilities. How sure are we that the equity is not a pegged asset?

THE SPEAKER: No, those are details. We are interested in knowing whether the thing is moving or not. He has told you that a substantial amount, the bigger percentage of the money, has been secured but there is a percentage on a simple political guarantee that is being negotiated. Is that not something? Yes, proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank the Minister of Investment for that information. What we really need to tell the House is that as a government, as managers of this economy, we are doing whatever it takes to ensure that this project takes off successfully. That is what we are doing at the moment and I think for the majority of Ugandans, that is the most important thing.

Mr Speaker, I have tried as much as possible to attend to the recommendations raised in the report, and to the clarifications that have been sought by the Members of the House. I would like to thank them for the support they have given to the Chairperson of the Committee and to my Ministry in handling this report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We thank you for adequately responding to the inquiries.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me, on behalf of the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, to compliment the work that has been done by the committee in producing a concise and clear report. The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has noted the recommendations of the committee, and will endeavour to implement them. We will constantly keep in touch with the committee to discuss the modalities of doing this. 

I will answer the questions that have been raised on the environment sector, and my colleague, hon. Mutagamba will come in and answer the questions that have been raised on the water sector. She will also address the questions that have been raised about the land sector.  

Hon. Kasamba raised the question of divestiture of the Forestry department. The law about it is also being demanded by Parliament. Actually, the two are going to go hand in hand. Soon, the new Forest Bill will be tabled before Cabinet - this week perhaps. This is being done in order to revive the law that is very old. It was put into force in 1964 and it is now out-dated and is causing us problems in managing the forest sector. 

Under the same law, however, we are coming up with the divestiture of the Forestry Department and the formation of the National Forest Authority. This organization is mainly going to take care of the central forestry reserve, which many Members have noted and continue to tell us are being encroached on by people settling there. We also have deforestation all over the country. This will be addressed too. 

The report did mention that over 800 employees of the Forestry Department in posts of forest guards, forest rangers and patrolmen were retrenched. At the time, an attempt was being made to decentralize them and send them to the Local Government for management of forest reserves. When this failed, we tried to bring back the employees that were looking after the forests, but it has not been possible. Now we are saying that with a National Forest Authority formed, we will be able to manage the central forest reserves all over the country well. The Authority is going to be carrying out the serious business of looking after the environment, on top of managing the forest reserves. What is happening right now will cease and we shall revamp the sector.

Hon. Mugambe did raise an issue about Mabira Forest Reserve. The answer is almost the same as above. The rangers that we have are few, and you find that it is possible that over the weekends they do not work. But we have put particular effort into especially policing Mabira Forest Reserve. 

First of all, you are aware that most of the encroachers that had entered Mabira were evicted and the forest is regenerating. What should be understood is that this is a natural forest and normally the forest sector allows natural conditions to regenerate the forest. This is a slow process because most of the natural trees take very many years before they mature. So progress is not seen very easily, but it is taking place. 

We are aware of some of the illegal activities that have been going on in many forests, including Mabira. In taking action we have removed the District Forest Officer who was in Mukono District, whom we thought was negligent with his duties. We also removed another officer who was repeatedly reported to be mismanaging those forests. 

I want to inform honourable Members that as the committee has recommended, we will use private sector participation in revamping some of the forests, especially plantations. Our policy is that we want to give out land to people who are willing to plant trees, including individuals who can be able to justify the plan they want to follow in planting trees. Honourable Members are also free to apply and be allocated land to plant forests. With the help of the European Union, we have some funds that are coming in to support the private sector in tree planting. This money will be given out at good interest rates so that individuals interested in planting trees can borrow it. 

Also, when we come up with a law, we intend to put in a section that will oblige Ugandans to plant trees. We should select a few days during the year, which are called “tree planting days”. And if we can be able to get seedlings enough to supply around the countryside, then this practice will go on. We hope that that way we shall be able to increase our forest cover. 

You should also note that we have the National Tree Seed Programme with a station in Namanve. It is producing high quality seeds, which can be accessed and used for planting in different areas of the country.  

I want to say that people who settle in forest reserves are not doing so because of lack of a land use policy. These people move onto this land well aware that this is a forest and is therefore a no-go area. Although I will talk about the land policy, I want to emphasise that these people intentionally move into the forests.

Hon. Magoola mentioned the issue of the School of Meteorology. In 1998, government restructured itself and decided to bring areas of commonality under relevant ministries. The Ministry of Education is responsible for education issues, and the School of Meteorology was educating meteorologists. It was transferred to the Ministry of Education along with many other schools, including Nyabyeya School of Forestry. Unfortunately, the School of Meteorology did not receive a budget or funding during the years that have followed the above restructuring. We have had, and are still in constant talks with the Minister for Finance so that this school is revived. We need it and are going to see to it that it begins operating again soon.

Now on the issue of the NEMA Vote, we cannot say that NEMA does not have a vote in actual sense because NEMA receives money, which enables it to operate.  But this money is borrowed money; it is money from donors or from our partners in development. What I think the Committee meant is that should this expire, let there be some money that Government itself has committed from its own resources. This is what they mean, that Government should commit from its own coffers some money which can be supplemented by whatever we get from outside. 

Then on the issue of land, there are two issues to be settled. The land policy, which is in the making -and I think within 6 or 8 months, we are going to have a policy already drawn up so that we can put it together. We have to coordinate with many other ministries in order to be able to come up with a full policy. So, it will take us a bit of time to discuss and coordinate with the different ministries.  

The other one was the survey of district borders.  This is the work of the Ministry of Local Government who may seek support from our Ministry but the survey service is a privatised survey activity and, therefore, the Ministry of Local Government can be able to carry out that without really referring back to us, although our Surveys Department can guide them. I do not want to advise the honourable Member from Bundibugyo to do it unilaterally, but let the local government communicate with the parent Ministry of Local Government in order to have this done. Mr Speaker, I think these were the issues that were raised.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much!

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were four questions raised on the water sector. I also want to add my voice to thank the Chairman and the Committee for having guided us through, and we hope we will be able to follow the recommendations. I also want to invite the Committee and Members to continue guiding us as we implement these decisions. 

Now, Mr Speaker, the first question was raised on Kailong dam by hon. Mugambe.  Kailong dam failed on the 29th April 2000, and this was because of the exceptionally heavy rain that continued for three consecutive days.  In fact, Kailong was about to be handed over, but when the rains came, it was swept away. We have been through serious negotiations to get either the contractor there to do the work or they refund the money. Good enough, we have succeeded in getting the insurance to pay for the damage. So now we are in the process of contracting a new contractor. 

The second question was raised by hon. Mutebi, about the water projects that are being shown in the report. These water projects we get the verifications from the districts. Each district has got a district water officer; it has got a minister responsible for water and works. These are the people who give us the verification. But we have gone further to institute an audit.  Currently, the exercise is going on to make sure the physical structures that are in place are actually there. But what we are saying is that most of these physical structures, once we have put them in place, then it is the responsibility of the districts to maintain them. You find that some of them have collapsed because of poor maintenance.  But as for our records, we are sure we have been able to put up all these physical structures.

Question number three was raised by a lady honourable Member from Kyenjojo, seeking to know whether we are actually privatising water. We are not privatising water; we are only commercialising water and this commercialisation has been on for about four years here in Kampala, and the 11 towns run by National Water. And where we go in the districts, we make sure that people know that this water has got to have value of delivery.  It is not the water that we are selling. But we are putting value to the delivery, and in one way, we are asking people to commit themselves to sustainability of the projects we put in place.  

Finally, the last question was about the water project in Kyenjojo by the same honourable Member.  Kyenjojo water project is underway and it is on board this financial year. It is under a new project called Support to New Rural Towns and this program is being funded fully by Government. This financial year, actually, the project started with the drilling of productive boreholes. These are already in place. At the moment, the designs are complete. We are now engaging in contracting or sourcing the contractors to run the project or to construct the project, and we know all this is going to be done in this financial year. So, honourable Member, you can assure your people that water is just round the corner. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I put the question to the motion that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,235,973,000 under Vote 012 Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is provided for as Recurrent Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs159,710,120,000 under Vote 112 Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is provided as Development Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,294,341,000 under Vote 029 Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is provided for as Recurrent Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 32,191,467,000 under Vote 129, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is provided for as Development Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENTS) (Mr Sam Kutesa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENTS) (Mr Sam Kutesa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved Votes 012 for Recurrent Expenditure and 112 for Development Expenditure, and also Vote 029 for Recurrent Expenditure and Vote 129 for Development Expenditure for the ministries of Water, Lands and Environment, and Energy and Mineral Development respectively for the financial year 2002/2003.  Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENTS) (Mr Sam KUTESA): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I thank you very much for what you have done! (Applause). We have started implementing the Budget Act positively and I am sure we shall be able to be in time as stipulated by the Act. This brings us to the end of today’s proceedings. 

The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to deal with the estimates of the Committee on Works and Housing.

(The House rose at 5.51 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 August 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


