Wednesday, 17 August 2005

Parliament met at 11.08 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I regret I could not start on time as indicated yesterday. This is because I have been presiding over the Appointments’ Committee, which has been considering some important nominations that had to be dealt with as soon as possible thus the delay but I thank you for coming.

In the gallery we have Mr Davidson Burg, leading a team of five visitors from Long Beach, California in the United States of America. They are here for development projects and I ask hon. Kabushenga to make a brief statement on this issue. You are most welcome.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

11.10
REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members of the august House. I wish to request the support of Members of Parliament to commend in a special way the people in the gallery for some very special intervention in the development of this country, and I also request for your kind support in sending a message to their colleagues in the United States of America and to pray that many will follow their example. 

These friends are from the All Saints Church in Long Beach, California but what is interesting is that although their church is in California they belong to the Anglican Church of Uganda under the Diocese of Luwero because they are among the people who denounced some of the beliefs that are creeping into the Church in the United States of America. I want to recognise them because they have shared with us the need for a just, prosperous and God loving society and recognised the national poverty and shortcomings, which we have in achieving that dream. Some of their main achievements in Kinkiizi are: 

Their team of about eight communities surrounding Churches and Rotary Clubs in California have invested about US $200,000 in the establishment of the Great Lakes Regional College, which started two years ago in Kinkiizi. 

They have shown support for the disabled in Uganda because the Free Wheel Chair Mission is resident –our contact people are in their Church and they have paid for the wheelchairs some of which were distributed by you hon. Members of Parliament.

They have brought in support for tourism development in Kanungu and those six men you see have for the last one week nearly completed a prototype banda that we are going to use around Bwindi National Park.

Finally and most importantly, Davidson Burg is a trustee of the newly incorporated non-profit corporation in the United States called The Uganda Christian Development Mission (UCDM), which is seeking to be an open door for Uganda to apply to various charities in the United States to achieve our objectives in development.

I wish to send a message of thanks to the Board of UCDM and also request that you expand your support that once Kinkiizi has had enough that you kindly consider expanding your support to all these Members of Parliament who share the same problems nationwide.

THE SPEAKER: Very good.

11.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You remember yesterday when we were celebrating the golden medal of Inzikuru we talked about government securing some good money and sent a team of university athletes to the World University Championships in Turkey. As we talk now we have already secured another gold medal in the 10,000 meters’ race by a grandson of this soil by the name of Wilson Busienei Kipkemei. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Very good. Congratulations.

11.15
MR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to report on something I consider of national importance. When I went back to my constituency I found a very nasty incident had taken place. In the night of 11th August this year, that is last Thursday night, a group of people estimated to be about ten, who are believed to be from West Pokot District in the Republic of Kenya, attacked my constituency. They attacked a village called Tulwo in Moyo Parish, Kwany sub-county, Kween County. 

When the residents of the area walked about in the morning of the following day they found that two of their adult kinsmen, Arapbile Emmanuel and Arapmisho, had been tied Kandoya and slaughtered to death. They were attacked while guarding their animals. They also found out that 80 head of cattle and 29 donkeys belonging to about fifteen people had disappeared. On tracing the footmarks of the raiders plus their animals they eventually entered into the Republic of Kenya through a place called Nakuyuyeni, which is near Kanyeruzi in the Republic of Kenya. 

When the locals sought assistance from the UPDF detaches they were dismayed by what they found out. For example in Kiriki barracks, which is in Kapchorwa district, they only found three soldiers in the barracks where they expected to find about 100 of them. When they again contacted the nearby detach in Kupe County in Nakapiripirit district they only found 12 soldiers in the barracks, so actually they could not assist them to recover the animals and to date no animals have been recovered. So the situation on the ground is very tense because people are feeling very defenceless. 

In another battalion’s headquarters, which is in Chepsikunya manned by the 3rd Battalion, the soldiers there are hardly 20! In another place called Sudent still the soldiers are very sparse so I appeal to the relevant ministry and authorities to see how they can recover these animals from the Republic of Kenya and to improve on the security situation on the ground because it is very tense and the people are very defenceless. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, are you aware of that?

11.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. I have stood up to assure the honourable member that the military is doing everything possible to save the lives of the people in that area. Yesterday I discussed the matter with him, he wrote to me a letter and I contacted the Army Commander to find out what he has done. We have made arrangements to beef up the UPDF soldiers’ presence on the ground and secondly, we have contacted the Kenyan authorities.  

As I briefed Parliament some time ago, we are now trying to solve the problem of cattle rustling bilaterally with Kenya and we are supposed to go to Kenya and have another meeting following the inaugural one in Entebbe, Uganda. So, we are doing everything possible to make sure that such abrupt or surprise attacks do not happen again. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Continue to liase with the minister so that a solution can really be found to this. I advise Dr Chebrot to also liase with the minister, if it is the same subject.  

11.22
DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Just allow me to say something in connection to the incident in Kween County. Mr Speaker, the Pokot of West Kenya have continuously made it a habit to raid the people of Kapchorwa and kill them as well. We do recall that about two years ago they killed over 30 people and burnt over two hundred houses and to date we had hoped that the Government of Uganda would send emissaries to Kenya to ensure that this does not happen again. We also hoped that those people who lost their lives and houses would be compensated. 

We have not got that compensation to date and whenever we go to that constituency we are asked, “What has our government done to ensure that these people are compensated?” Mr Speaker, when we discuss these issues with the minister these are some of the issues we would like to discuss with her. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you have joint meetings of Kenyan and Ugandan leaders at the border to talk over this matter?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, before we broke off for recess I held four meetings with the MPs from the affected areas at Hotel Equatoria. Unfortunately Dr Chebrot did not attend any of those meetings but involving Kenya is simply to make sure that we lay down the procedure, objectives and agreements that we shall follow while handling this particular issue. As I informed the House, the inaugural meeting between the Ministers of Defence and the permanent secretaries from the concerned ministries took place here in Uganda, in Entebbe. 

The second meeting is going to take place in Kenya. It was scheduled for 5th August 2005, which was unfortunate because we were supposed to be –(Interruption)  

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister knew that I was not in the country when she called that meeting. I was away in Denmark. When I came back she had already held her meetings in Hotel Equatoria. Even then, many Members of Parliament did not manage to attend that meeting in Hotel Equatoria because she gave members only one day within which to come for that meeting and this is not procedurally right for her to say that I did not attend the meeting. Is she in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: What you should have done is to explain why you were absent. The fact remains that you did not attend because you were out of the country.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I want to apologise to Dr Chebrot because his personal assistant did not inform me when he was travelling. Otherwise, I would have considered him. Thank you -(Dr Chebrot rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: No, no, let this matter be handled by the members. I have said you should liase with the Minister of Defence – you do not have to inform us here now. You get in touch with her and you continue to find a solution to the problem.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2005

11.26
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, yesterday we cleared five clauses in the Bill and we stood over clause 4, 6 and 7. When we dispose of this we shall have cleared this particular Bill and I have to thank you and I hope we shall do it today. 

Clause 4

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have six amendments to clause 4 and if you allow me I propose that each of them be considered independently, one at a time.

In clause 4 we propose that sub-clause (3) be amended as follows: “Subject to clause 1 and to the provisions of the Constitution, the districts of the regions of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Lango and Acholi specified in the first schedule to this Constitution shall be deemed to have agreed to form regional governments for purposes of this Article.”

You recall that when we concluded the Second Reading to this Bill, I did indicate that Government had proposed that districts, which wished to be deemed had to pass resolutions by two thirds majority requesting that they be deemed. I would like to report that as you know, in 1994 during the Constituent Assembly the districts of Buganda as they were then had submitted resolutions to Government for purposes of being deemed to corporate in the region of Buganda.

The districts of Busoga passed resolutions to form a charter of corporation under Article 178 of the Constitution, the districts of Apac and Lira have each submitted a resolution to be deemed to have agreed to form the regional government of Lango. 

The districts of Masindi, Hoima and Kibaale have each submitted resolutions to Government to be deemed to have agreed to form the regional government of Bunyoro; and the districts of Acholi did submit resolutions, they are not reflected in these amendments because I only received the last resolution yesterday. 

The districts of Kitgum, Gulu and Pader have each submitted resolutions to be deemed to form the regional government of Acholi. As for the region of Toro, the districts of Kabalore and Kyenjojo have each submitted resolutions to be deemed to form the regional government of Toro, however, the district of Kamwenge of Toro has to date not submitted the resolution. Therefore, the region of Toro did not comply with the requirements of Cabinet to have all the district resolutions submitted. It is the understanding of the leadership in Toro that the formation of the regional government of Toro should be differed, to be formed through the procedure that is prescribed in clause 2(a) and (b) of this Bill. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, let us vote on this amendment by roll call –(Interruption)

MRS KASULE: Mr Chairman, I want to comment it about this.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you oppose it, you oppose it.

MRS KASULE: Before I oppose it I want to put my case clearly. Mr Chairman, the minister has said that the district leaders passed resolutions to join the Busoga Charter but the people of Bugiri petitioned Parliament about the Busoga Charter, and the responsibility was given to the Committee of Local Government to investigate. It is now a year and the committee has never reported back and the people of Bugiri are waiting for the response from Parliament about their petition. 

There is no council resolution from Bugiri District to join the regional government of Busoga. The people of Bugiri, from all the constituencies, petitioned Parliament against the Busoga Charter. Mr Chairman, I think it would be wise for this Parliament to leave out Bugiri in the Busoga regional government until the people of Bugiri have decided, since the power belongs to the people. There is no council resolution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I do not know, the minister has said there is one, and they want to form a charter but I think he should be able to differentiate between individuals in any given district petitioning Parliament for one reason or another, and the structure of a district. Whereas there could 100 people in Masaka petitioning on this and the other, but in Masaka there is an established authority and, therefore, when you are dealing with these issues we do not go to individuals. We go to the authorities to make decisions, because it is the leadership. (Applause)

MRS KASULE: Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I am just explaining, I am not deciding for you. I wanted you to know that whereas as an individual I do not decide for you, the district may. If the minister is talking about the charter having been done as a result of a petition by your district council, we take that as a district. We do not count how many people are in the district or agreeing with this and the other. I think that is how things should be done.

MRS KASULE: Chairman, this law we are passing talks of resolutions from councils -(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Chairman, I am surprised that hon. Lumumba this morning is trying to argue against a regional tier when in this House she voted for the regional tier to be allowed to exist, including that of Busoga. Is she really in order to mislead this House that she is double legged?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we have received a report from the minister on this issue and we are going to vote on this matter. You have heard arguments of hon. Lumumba that there are individuals in her district who petitioned Parliament. Take that into account as you vote yes or no, otherwise we shall be going into a referendum in the district of Bugiri.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, there are two important questions that must be answered today. One is whether there is controversy on whether Bugiri district should be part of the regional government, and the answer is, yes. 

Secondly, this House should address itself to the question of whether the best way of resolving a controversy is by deeming. I think the best thing that this House should do is to consult and as my colleague the Woman Member for Bugiri District has said, there is a petition from some people from Bugiri. This petition was accepted by Parliament under rule 22 and indeed a committee of Parliament is considering this matter. It would, therefore, not be proper for this House to make a decision based on a matter that a committee constituted by ourselves is still handling. Assuming the findings of this committee are to the contrary?

The other point that I want to make as I wind up, Mr Chairman, is that issues of the legality of resolution - the purported resolution by Bugiri – is one of the things being investigated. Members who were in Naminage know that when all of us were invited, including the district councillors, people were invited for a seminar. When they get there, contrary to regulation 9 of the Local Government Act that councillors will be given due notice, they were told, “Since you are here constitute yourselves into a council and make a resolution”. So, I have no problem with Bugiri joining the regional government but let it join with a resolution. And indeed the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has given evidence here that all those that are going to be deemed, apart from Buganda whose case is known, have submitted fresh resolutions and the terms of the charter and regional government are different. Why can we not allow the people of Bugiri to understand what they are going into?

So I want to beg you honourable members to support that Busoga be deemed with the exception of Bugiri, which has controversy. And I now wish to move that the district -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us get this clearly. A Member of Parliament here does not speak for the district where he comes from. He represents a constituency in the district but the authority in this particular case to speak for the district, is the district council. A Member of Parliament may disagree with what a district has done. That is different. However, for this purpose we work with the district authorities, which are the district councils. 

In respect of the petition you are talking about, it is not the petition by the district council of Bugiri. It is by the individuals in the district so I think this should be clear. However, to solve this problem, let us vote on each of these mentioned regions. We shall deal with Busoga. You might have persuaded people to disagree on the deeming of Busoga, then that is democracy. Let us start with the district of Buganda, and vote on it. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the results on Buganda are: one abstention, none against, and those for are 121. The ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the next we are voting on is Bunyoro. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on Bunyoro is: one abstention, none against, and those for are 126. The ayes have it. (Applause) Bunyoro is adopted.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now we should go to Lango.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on Lango is: one abstention, none against, and those for are 121. Lango is adopted.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  So now we go to Acholi.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on Acholi is: one abstention, none against, and those for are 130. Acholi is adopted.

(Question agreed to.)

 THE CHAIRMAN: Now we go to Busoga.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on Busoga is: three abstentions, those against are four, and those for are 123. The ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Have I left any other out?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (4) of clause 4 - I have circulated the amendment, as it is not reflected in my amendments. The heading is “additional amendments”. 

I propose that the headquarters of the regional governments, which we have just deemed to have been established in clause 3 of this Article; shall be as follows: 
(a)	Buganda - Mengo Municipality, which shall be created by Parliament. (Applause)
(b)	Bungoro – Hoima Municipality, which shall be created by Parliament. (Applause)
(c)	Busoga  - Jinja Municipality. (Applause)
(d)	Acholi – Gulu Municipality. (Applause)
(e)	Lango  - Lira Municipality.

Mr chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee had proposed the deletion of clause 4 in the Bill and had given the reason as the isolation of Mengo Municipality; and recommended that Mengo Municipality should be created under the laws for creation of municipalities. That is what the committee had proposed. The reason for this is that it presented a constitutional problem. The creation of Mengo Municipality in effect will amount to the altering of the boundaries of Wakiso District and Kampala District. 

The Constitution provides, under Article 179, clearly how that process should be done and even stipulates a vote that should be taken to determine the alteration of district borders and the creation of new districts. So, we had raised this objection that it would not be proper to do it this way under the Constitution. The neater way we could have done it would have been to bring a resolution to alter the boundaries of Wakiso District and alter the boundary of Kampala District and there automatically create Mengo Municipality. But the drafting that now has been brought takes care of this situation –(Applause)- and we have no difficulty in supporting the position of the Government. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I am really reluctant to support this additional amendment. In principle there is no problem establishing the headquarters of this regional governments. However, I do not think it is proper for us to do it under the Constitution. I think we are overloading this Constitution and, therefore, we are opening ourselves up to additional problems in future. I think this regional headquarter could have been established under an Act of Parliament with the amendment of the Local Government Act. I do not think it is the proper place for us to put it in the Constitution. I do not think so.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is being done here is to say that in the Constitution the regional headquarters shall be a municipality. For some of the regions that have been created, they already have the municipalities now and they are only mentioning that the headquarters of Mengo or this and the other will be a municipality created by Parliament. Parliament, under the enabling law, makes this municipality. I do not see any contradiction. Let us vote on the amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the minister’s amendment on municipalities is as follows: two abstentions, none against, and those for are 115. The ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have the third amendment, which is reflected on page 2 of my document on amendments, to amend the proposed Article 178(9) of the Bill to delete the current clause 9 and insert the following -(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I sorry, but since we are following the Bill the way it is arranged and the clause there, other amendments before that which –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The committee’s? Okay.

MR OULANYAH: Okay and there are simple ones for example clause 6, it makes reference to the “regional assembly” but I think the phrase should be “regional government”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Eh!

MR OULANYAH: In the proposed clause 6 you say, “A regional assembly shall be a body corporate.” I think what is meant is “regional government” and the same in clause 7, “regional government” not “regional assembly”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard amendments by the committee. Instead of saying “assembly” it is “government”. Can we vote on the amendment by the committee?

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the amendment proposed by the committee read out by the chairperson is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 133. The motion is carried.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to sub-clause (9) of the Bill to insert the following instead of what is in the Bill now to state that: “A regional assembly shall have power to legislate on matters within its jurisdiction.” This was a correction, which came from Mengo after the Bill had been printed. This was the negotiated position. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us vote on the amendment. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the amendment by the minister on deleting sub-clause (9) and inserting what he has said is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 133. The ayes have it. 

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the fourth amendment is on clause 4 again, the proposed Article 178(11), on page 6 of the Bill. I propose to delete clause 11 and insert the following: “The laws made by the regional assembly shall be in conformity with the Constitution, the national laws and shall be consistent with national policies.” I beg to move.  
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Let us vote on the proposed new clause.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for 137. The motion is carried.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have the fifth amendment to clause (4), to the effect that the proposed Article 178 on page 6 of the Bill, at the end of the proposed Article 178. I propose to add the following – this will now become sub-clause (13) that: “Regional governments shall not come into being before the financial year commencing, 1st July 2006.” This is for 2006, for planning purposes. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: But instead of being negative, why don’t you say, “Regional governments shall come into existence in this and the other?”

MR MWESIGE: I take your guidance, Sir. I, therefore, amend my amendment to state: “Regional governments shall commence on the 1st of July 2006.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us vote on the proposed amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 141. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in sub-clauses (8) and (10), there is also the use of the phrase “regional assembly.” But if you read (8), a regional assembly shall in particular have in relation to the region the functions and services conferred upon the regional government in the Fifth Schedule to this Constitution, and may make laws.  

You see, it is not very clear whether it should be government or the region that may make laws. We better look at it again and say, “And may make laws, which shall have the force of law in the region.” So, it should be a regional government, I think.

THE CHAIRMAN: Regional? So, what is the amendment?

MR OULANYAH: To change it to “government” instead of “assembly”. Also in (10), the first part should say, “Subject to this Article and to the Fifth Schedule to this Constitution, the Executive and administrative powers of a regional government …”, not “assembly” –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: I have no objection to the chairman’s proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Please, do not be distractive, because sometimes when we vote, some people may not vote. Let us vote on the proposed amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment is as follows: no abstention, none against, and those for are 141. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have sixth and the last amendment on clause (4). This amendment is meant to cater for districts, which do not opt to join regional governments, and it is supposed to introduce Article 178(a) entitled “grants for districts not forming regional governments”. It says: 
“(i) A district, which does not wish or is not able to enter into corporation arrangement to form a regional government shall be paid equalization grant.
(ii) The equalization grant payable under clause (1) shall be based on the incremental costs met by the central government in managing the regional government.
(iii) The President shall cause to be presented to Parliament proposals for the money to be paid out of the Consolidated Fund as equalisation grant under clause 1, for the proposals made under clause (3) shall be made at the same time as estimates of revenue and expenditure under Article 155 of this Constitution and shall state the sums of money that are to be paid to each district.” Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us vote on the amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment is as follows: no abstentions, none against and those for are 142. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Let me begin by thanking the honourable members for having supported Buganda to have a region. I have one additional amendment to clause 4. I would like to propose that we amend clause 4 as follows: “There shall be established a district in Buganda to be known as Mengo District, the boundaries of which will be designated by an Act of Parliament.”  

I am doing so on the instructions of Lubaga Division, which has already communicated a resolution to you and to Members of Parliament namely myself and hon. Kayongo. I have also got the blessings of His Majesty’s Government at Mengo, the Government of Buganda. This is the Justification. 

Following the constitutional amendment process that reconstituted the former district of Kampala into the Capital City of Uganda to be administered by the central government, it is important to determine the proper designation of Kampala to exclude Lubaga South, Lubaga North and possibly Kyaddondo South to form an independent district known as Mengo. Now that the status of a district under Kampala has become redundant, let it be regained by Mengo to become the district of Mengo. The proposal to make Mengo a municipality does not propose anything fundamentally different from the existing structures, but is rather misleading constitutionally in the following regards –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am rising on a point of procedure. The motion that is being moved is incompetent because under Article 93, which we are very familiar with, that motion can only be moved by the Government or on behalf of the Government. Therefore, I seek your guidance whether from a procedural point of view you can entertain such a motion. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, we have dealt with this matter before. People wanted to create a district but they had that hurdle. That must be clear to you and any other person but eventually a solution will have to be found. It may not be now but according to the minister, this is infringing on the provision of the Constitution that you cannot bring that. However, rest assured that since your area has been severed from Kampala District, which is no longer a district, somehow a home would have to be found for this area. I do not know whether it will be Mengo, but it may be part of a district or independent, but a proper procedure should be followed. Government will have to bring that motion for a resolution by Parliament, which is competent and empowered to make that district.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, I have had extensive discussions with hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in my office, and in the corridors of this Parliament. I have tried to bring him on board on how a district can be created, how a municipality can be expanded - if people can benefit from allocations of money from the central government in a better formula than using a district and so on. I am surprised that he still insisted on presenting this matter.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, for your wise ruling Mr Chairman. Indeed this being a constitutional matter, it may not directly impact on Article 93. In justification of my motion – (Interjection)– I would like to take your guidance –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, your intention may be good but it is only the constitutional hurdle that is still blocking you, and Dr Okulo Epak was trying to remove that hurdle but we did not assist him in the matter. So for the time being, the hurdle is still there but what you want to achieve will come because this area, which has been part of a district that longer exists must finally find a home. It could be Mengo, or whatever; you rest assured that you will be in a new district or part of another district soon.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, very much for your wise ruling and guidance. Even if I rested my case here, it is now truly understood that a solution must be found and I have also partially given a solution in terms of a district for Mengo. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have to vote on clause 4 as amended by roll call.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	 AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS  
2.	 AADROA ONZIMA ALEX 
3.	 AANIMU ANGUPALE 
4.	 AEL ARK LODOU 
5.	 AHABWE PEREZ 
6.	 AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 
7.	 AKECH OKULLO BETTY 
8.	 AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
9.	 AKWERO ODWONG JANE 
10.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
11.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
12.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
13.	ANANG-ODUR TOMSON 
14.	ANDRUALE AWUZU 
15.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 
16.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 
17.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON  
18.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY 
19.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
20.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
21.	BADDA FRED 
22.	BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER 
23.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
24.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE 
25.	BANYENZAKI HENRY 
26.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY 
27.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
28.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILLIP 
29.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
30.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
31.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT 
32.	BINTU ABWOOLI JALIA 
33.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA 
34.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE 
35.	BITANGARO SAMUEL 
36.	BULAMU JOHNNY 
37.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
38.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
39.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
40.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE 
41.	CHEBROT STEVEN 
42.	CHELANGAT KULANY 
43.	EPETAIT FRANCIS 
44.	ERIYO JESSICA 
45.	ESELE JOHN 
46.	ETONU BENEDICT 
47.	GABOI KIBALE 
48.	HYUHA DOROTHY
49.	IMUMET ISAIAH 
50.	ISANGA NAKADAMA 
51.	KABAKUMBA MASIKO 
52.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES 
53.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE 
54.	KAGABA HARRIET 
55.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA
56.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
57.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA 
58.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
59.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA 
60.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
61.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU 
62.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
63.	KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR 
64.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS
65.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
66.	KAWANGA JOHN 
67.	KAYIZZI ASANASIO 
68.	KAYONGO TOM
69.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO 
70.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA 
71.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA
72.	KIKUNGWE ISSA 
73.	KITYO MUTEBI 
74.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM 
75.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE 
76.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS 
77.	KIZIGE MOSES 
78.	KOLUO PETER 
79.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES
80.	KULE MURANGA 
81.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
82.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN 
83.	LOKERIS PAUL 
84.	LOKERIS PETER 
85.	LUBOWA MOSES 
86.	LUKYAMUZI KEN 
87.	LULE MAWIYA 
88.	LWANGA HERBERT
89.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA 
90.	MAATE ROGERS 
91.	MABIKKE MICHAEL 
92.	MADADA SULAIMAN 
93.	MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE BEATRICE 
94.	MALINGA JOHNSON 
95.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
96.	MATOVU DAVID 
97.	MAYENDE SIMON 
98.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA 
99.	MEHANGYE IDA 
100.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 			
101.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 		
102.	MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH
103.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA 
104.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH 	
105.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA 			
106.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 	
107.	MUSUMBA ISAAC ISANGA 		
108.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI 		109.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA 	
110.	MWESIGE ADOLF 			
111.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 	
112.	NABETA NASANI 			
113.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 			
114.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH 
115.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 	
116.	NASASIRA JOHN 			
117.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA	
118.	NDUHUURA RICHARD 		
119.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE
120.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 		
121.	NVUMETTA LUTAYA KAVUMA  	
122.	NYANZI VINCENT 			
123.	NYEKO OCULA MICHAEL 		
124.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 		
125.	OCHIENG PETER PATRICK 		
126.	ODIT JOHN 				
127.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 	
128.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 		
129.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 			
130.	OKULO EPAK YEFUSA 		
131.	OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS 
132.	OKURUT KAROORO BUSINGYE MARY 	
133.	OLUM ZACHARY 
134.	OMACH MANDIR FRED 		
135.	OMWONY OJWOK 			
136.	ONEK OBALOKER HILARY 	
137.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 		
138.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 		
139.	OULANYAH JACOB 			
140.	OWORI AMOOTI OTADA 		
141.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 			
142.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY
143.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE		
144.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 			
145.	SEBAGGALA LATIF 			
146.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 		
147.	SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD
148.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA
149.	SENINDE NANSUBUGA ROSEMARY 			
150.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA
151.	SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK 	
152.	THEMBO NYOMBI GEORGE WILLIAM 	
153.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 	
154.	TUMA RUTH 				
155.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE
156.	WACHA BEN 				
157.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN  		
158.	WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID 
159.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
160.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER 
161.	WESONGA EDWARD 
162.	WONEKA OLIVER 
163.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
164.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 
165.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 

NOES: 
1.	 MATEMBE MIRIA

ABSTENTIONS:
1.	 SABIITI JACK 

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on clause 4 as amended is as follows: there is one abstention, one against, and those for are 165.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, you guided yesterday that the hon. Minister of Local Government would introduce an amendment to the resolution to name the districts that were not named. So, perhaps you could introduce his amendment first.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is a motion for the resolution of Parliament under Article 179(1), paragraph (b) of the Constitution, naming districts and their headquarters.  

“On the 20th July 2005, Parliament passed a resolution approving the creation of 20 new districts under Article 179(1)(b) of the Constitution. At the time a few of the new districts did not have proper names consistent with the policy of naming the districts after their headquarters because the people concerned had not agreed on where the district headquarters would be located. Since then consultations have been carried out on this matter and the people in four of these districts have agreed on the location of their district headquarters, hence the names of the new districts.  

I would like to move that the following new districts be named as follows:

The headquarters of a new district consisting of Maracha and Terego counties in the current Arua District be located at Kubala, and the district be named Kubala.

The headquarters of a new district consisting Kilak and Nwoya counties in the current Gulu District be located at Amuru and the district be named Amuru.

The headquarters of a new district consisting Busiki county in the current Iganga District be located at Namutumba and the district be named Namutumba. 

The headquarters of a new district consisting of Dokolo county in the current Lira District be located at Dokolo and the district be named Dokolo.” Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: What I do not know is whether I should entertain this motion in the committee or in the House. Let us dispose of other issues because there were other issues involving pairing Busoga and Bugisu - has this been resolved?

MR MWESIGE: We have finally negotiated the grouping of the districts as follows: Bundibugyo and Kasese of Rwenzori; Abim, Kaabong, Kotido, Moroto, Nakapiripirit of Karamoja, then Bukwo and Kapchorwa of Sebei, Adjumani and Moyo of Madi; Arua, Koboko, Nebbi and Yumbe of West Nile.  

Kubala is missing because it is part of the minister’s resolution, so if we adopt it then it will consequentially be added.

Busia, Butaleja, Pallisa and Tororo of Bukedea, Mbale and Sironko of Bugisu for the time being, Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and Amuru of Acholi.  

For the next group there is still controversy over Buliisa. I am going on to Bunyoro now. For the time being we have Hoima, Kibaale and Masindi of Bunyoro.  

Well, I got the indication from the Members of Parliament –(Interjections)- I am just giving you information then you will advise me later.  

There are some Members of Parliament who think it should be called Biiso, and others think it should be called Bulisa. I do not know whether you have finally agreed. If you have finally agreed, I will inform the House, Sir. 

MR WESONGA: Mr Chairman, the clarification I wish to get from both the Attorney-General and the Minister of Local Government concerns the district of Manafwa, which was curved out of Mbale District. What is interesting is that the Minister of Local Government informed both the Public Service and Local Government Sessional Committees that he sent a technical team to the new district to locate its new headquarters and that after the findings the technical team renamed the district Bubulo with its headquarters in Bubulo county headquarters.  

What is interesting is that on 11th this month the Electoral Commission conducted elections according to that explanation and a chairman was elected. He formed his executive committee and the council was conducted for the first time in the new district. As I talk now, the great Mbale District has already given out assets like vehicles to the new district. But what is perturbing me is that the Minister of Local Government has failed to pronounce himself in this House because Parliament pronounced itself and created the district for Bubulo West, Bubulo East and Manafwa County. All the three constituencies constituted a quorum and conducted their elections under the Electoral Commission. May I beg that the two ministers do pronounce themselves right now otherwise they may create? 

THE CHAIRMAN: As I have already said, these issues, which are disputed and have caused uncertainty can only be resolved when the House is proceeding. Currently we are dealing with matters, which we can handle in the committee. That shall be handled in the House, but let us get the other one first. 

MRS MASIKO: Mr Chairman, thank you very much for this opportunity. I am surprised that an issue is being raised that there is controversy over Bulisa District. The Member of Parliament from Masindi and Buliisa in particular and the District Council agreed that Buliisa District be created and the headquarters of course will be in Buliisa. 

MR MWESIGE: Then I accept the consensus from Bunyoro and, therefore –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, on the issue of Bunyoro, the only problem is there is always a misspelling of Buliisa and Kibaale –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We corrected Kibaale yesterday.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to get clarification on the issue of Rwenzori because Rwenzori is understood to include Toro, Kasese and Bundibugyo. We have a Parliamentary group called Rwenzori Parliamentary Group chaired by Hon. Kamanda Batalingaya. So when we have these districts of Rwenzori, what happens to the bigger Rwenzori as it is understood? I only want that clarification.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, yes, there are a number of districts in the Rwenzori region but I do not think that that stops the two districts, which have opted to use it from proceeding to use the name, because no other regional grouping claims that name. Some of us Members of Parliament from Toro have no objection to the use of the Rwenzori region by the districts of Bundibugyo and Kasese. I would kindly ask my colleague hon. Dora Byamukama to accept.  

I was proceeding with the region of Bunyoro and following the guidance of hon. Kabakumba, I would like to proceed as follows: that the districts of Buliisa, Hoima, Kibaale and Masindi are of Bunyoro. 

The next group is Kabarole, Kamwenge and Kyenjojo of Toro. 

The next group is Amuria, Katakwi, Kumi, Soroti and Kaberamaido of Teso. 

The next group is Kalangala, Kayunga, Kiboga, Luweero, Masaka, Mityana, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Rakai, Sembabule and Wakiso of Buganda. 

The next group is Bushenyi, Ibanda, Isingiro, Kiruhuura, Mbarara, and Ntungamo of Ankole. 

Then the next group is Amuriat, Apac, Dokolo, Lira and Oyam of Lango. 

The next group is Namutumba, Bugiri, Iganga, Jinja, Kaliro, Kamuli and Mayuge of Busoga. 

The last group is Kabale, Kanungu, Kisoro and Rukungiri of Kigezi. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR WANJUSI WASIEBA: Mr Chairman, I do not know if I heard you properly! You said about the Bubulo District that something would be referred to the Committee of Local Government. I am a Member of Local Government Committee and on that day, which hon. Kamana mentioned, the Minister for Local Government did inform us as a committee that his technical committee had gone through the procedure, they had visited the site and concluded that Bubulo be named as the district with their headquarters in Bubulo.

THE CHAIRMAN: The matters that were referred to the committee should wait for the report to this House. We cannot resolve these issues when the committee is still handling them. Let us concentrate on those that are not in the committee.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, talking of Mbale or Bugisu is just a geographical matter. Eventually Bubulo is part of Mbale and, therefore, of Bugisu. Whatever they agree on should not hinder our progress.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. That has no problem. We agree.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, it is true the ministry sent a team to the counties of Bubulo and Manjiya. Recommendations were made to the effect that Bubulo becomes the headquarters and, therefore, takes the name Bubulo. However, when this information was given to the committee, as a by–the-way one of the members from the area was perturbed. He seemed to be so worked out that I did not feel confident enough to bring this matter here. The honourable member is in the House now. We have tried to talk to him several times. If he has no objection - I am frank about this - then I have no objection at all. The team recommended Bubulo and I think the majority from the Mbale region is agreeable with that. However, there is an honourable member who should be on board because I think the world will not end if Bubulo becomes the headquarters.

THE CHAIRMAN: As I have said, this matter was referred to the committee and we should wait. Your technical team will only assist the committee to reach a conclusion. When the committee is through with their deliberations, they will report to us. That is when we shall take necessary – (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: This matter is not among those that were referred to the committee. I was in the committee and I told them about what is happening. Now that hon. Wakikona is here, I think he can help us in this matter.

DR OKULO EPAK: I beg your pardon, hon. Wakikona.  News is spreading that Members of Parliament have disagreed on the district name, headquarters, and so on. However, constitutionally this is the responsibility of the district councils. Members of Parliament have their opinion and recommendation, which may be different from that of district. Yet district matters should be based on specific district resolutions. The individual thinking and whatever you call it of individual Members of Parliament in this House should affect the progress of new districts. 

Even when the minister says they sent a technical team in the field, that team’s opinion must be subject to the resolution of the district council. Otherwise, we are going to have many problems with district creation. We may later on have to come back to this House to undo what we have done. I would not wish, as a Member of Parliament, to decide on a matter, which according to the Constitution should be dealt with the local governments.  

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the House that it is not true that the creation of new districts is a responsibility of the district councils. Article 179(1) is very clear on this and it says; “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may –
(a)	Alter the boundaries of districts; and
(b)	(b) create new districts.” 

It does not mention district councils anywhere.

MR WESONGA: Mr Chairman, districts are created from the existing districts and therefore, the resolution of the existing council of the old district is very important. I also want to supplement what hon. Okulo Epak said. The ministry’s technical team went and consulted with Mbale district council. The Mbale district technical workers located the district in Bubulo. Therefore, if this Parliament does not consider the resolution of the district council, a mother district, I fail to understand.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the procedure is that the district council may initiate, but Parliament is not bound to honour their initiation. They may accept or reject what the council initiated. However, as I said, we should handle matters that have no controversy. The committee will handle the rest. Since the honourable minister has a motion for a resolution of Parliament for the other one, that is when we shall be able to debate matters related to those districts, where there are still controversies.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Chairman, you are putting us in a difficult situation. For instance, we Members of Parliament who hail from Apac had agreed that Oyam and Kole counties constitute Oyam District. However, the minister said, “No, unless I have a resolution from the district council to the effect that Kole be joined with Oyam, I cannot accept this.” Now where are we heading? If we have the mandate to vary the resolution of the district council, then obviously we will have a very different Constitution as far as Oyam District is concerned.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there is nothing wrong with the district council starting the process. This is what I have just said. They should say, “This district is a big district, let us petition for a change.” Eventually, the necessary steps will be taken by Parliament. 

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Since I have been mentioned, it is better that I say something about Manafwa district. It is true that the resolution of the council was passed in the year 2001 but since then things have changed. It is also true that this Parliament talked about Manafwa and there was an objection on the grounds that Manafwa is a river. They felt that a town council could not be named after a river. The Minister of Local Government promised to come here with a name, which would have been agreed upon by the parties concerned. He sent a technical team, who reported to him after consultations with the district council. I requested him to discuss the outcome with the parties concerned. 

Right now you are listening to three Members of Parliament: hon. Wopuwa, hon. Wesonga and hon. Wanjusi. They are all from Bubulo, against Wakikona from Manjiya. Manjiya is being joined to Bubulo to form a district –(Interjecions)- Mr Chairman, you and I already know what they want to inform us about. Hon. Wasieba who went to Mbale Municipality is a Member of Parliament for Bubulo West where hon. Wesonga is. Therefore, it is something you already know and it is not a matter of getting angry about here on the Floor. Bubulo County has only 264,000 people against Manjiya’s 134,000. We expected a 50 percent share in decision-making. Right now as we speak, the Minister of Local Government is recommending Bubulo as the headquarters yet Bubulo is a county just as Manjiya is. You cannot merge two elements to make one. You know how it may psychologically torture those who are Manjians. How do you call them overnight and tell them, “From today onwards, you are Bubuloians”? These are two counties and the history of Bubulo and Manjiya has not begun today, it began long time ago. Therefore, we have not agreed to the name and we still have that Manafwa as a river. I accept the suggestion that we go back and negotiate so that we agree on the name. We shall thereafter come back to you.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I had moved amendments to clause 6, which can be adopted. The resolution of the Minister of Local Government will be discussed when the House resumes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Could we now pronounce ourselves on the amendments that have no controversies at all? We are voting on clause 6 as amended. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the result is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 114. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005 and adopted clause 4 with amendments. The committee also considered clause 6 and stood it over. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

MR SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I think this is the convenient time to suspend the proceedings so that we go for lunch and come back at 3.00 p.m.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.43 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.20 p.m._)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome.  This afternoon we have pupils of Ibanda Integrated School, Ibanda South constituency, in the public gallery. You are welcome.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much. I must apologise on behalf of the Minister of Local Government. Hon. Adolf Mwesige will take charge. I suggest that we proceed. We are always disaster-prepared.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister of Local Government had presented a resolution for the approval of the names of district councils. However, some members raised issues with respect to the proposed districts of Bubulo and Kubala, whose names and headquarters are still in dispute. Therefore, we propose that minus those districts, which still have disputes, the rest be approved by this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is that we made a resolution establishing the districts. The only problem was the names. This is a minor issue but we have to follow the procedure. A report has to be made here so that we endorse what we resolved. So, could we deal with all the districts apart from those the minister mentioned? 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, if these districts have had elections and leaders have been elected, we should approve them as they sort the issue of names and headquarters. 

THE SPEAKER: No, our duty is not to approve those who have been elected. It is a question of something, which we did not complete. For instance, for Maracha and Terego, we did not give the name; for Dokolo, we did not deal with the headquarters. These are some of the minor things I think the motion intends to achieve.

3.25
MRS BAKOKO BAKORU (Ayivu County, Arua): Mr Speaker, this morning the Minister of Local Government gave us a proposed name for the district on the motion that he moved. When these districts were being approved in Parliament there was the wish that the northern districts, which have been generally marginalised and have very high indices of high mortality, be given priority. This district was approved on that basis among others, now it is very disheartening that after the district had sent a resolution to the Minister of Local Government, Parliament is now saying that there is a dispute. I would rather that we vote on this. I really do not think that we have controversy.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, to help you on this, delivering a baby girl is always followed by the naming ceremony of that girl. Therefore, likewise, the district was delivered but it is only the naming that we are trying to do.  

MRS BAKOKO: Mr Speaker, Kubala was named as the proposed district. So really for me it – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the resolution was that the counties of Maracha and Terego form a district, which was approved. That is the delivery of a baby district. The remaining part is now the naming, which we must resolve now. 

3.26
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a grown up Ugandan, not a youth, but an adult. I am of sound mind and I represent the people of Maracha. At my age I know that we should tackle national issues with honesty, transparency and fairness.

When Parliament approved 20 districts on 20 July 2005, I was not in the House. I was holding a huge meeting during which I consulted the people of Maracha on the attempt to remove the headquarters of the newly created district from Nyadri to Kubala. Yesterday I met the Minister of Local Government, just in the corridor, he called me and said, “Alex Onzima you now have to agree with your other colleagues on the naming of the new district.” I told him that Arua District local council had actually demanded this district twice and they gave it a name, Nyadri District, although the circumstances have now changed. In 1999 the district local council asked for a district comprising of Koboko, Maracha and Terego and suggested that Nyadri become the headquarters. This was not granted.  

Then last February the district local council in its wisdom said, “Now that Koboko is going to be a district - because the President has assented to it when he came for the burial of the late Speaker - let us have a second district comprising of Maracha and Terego.” They also wanted to divide Madi-Okolo into two counties, and Madi-Okolo is the lower part and if they so wished they could be part of Nyadri District. It was optional and this is another part of Arua District, which is furthest, since it borders with River Nile. The district in its wisdom said, “If these people so wish, they should belong to Nyadri District.” For me, as an individual I thought it was not proper because Madi would be split into two. One part of Madi would be in Arua and another part in Nyadri, which would not be fair. It would not be good for them to be in two different districts.  

Therefore, it was now an issue of Terego and Madi. I have the two resolutions and in that council meeting, hon. Kassiano Wadri, the Member of Parliament of Terego addressed the council on behalf of the Members of Parliament from Arua. The main essence of his address was the creation of a new district. Fortunately the Government has created that district. The district has actually been given a name. 

Mr Speaker, what happened after that was that I remember it was a Friday before the 10th, the Deputy Speaker was in Chair and she said, “On 12 July 2005 Parliament will approve districts.” So the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development called the speaker of Arua District local council that he should organise a meeting for the people of Maracha and Terego to agree on the headquarters of the new district. This information was conveyed to one LC III Chairman of Nyadri, because Nyadri is also a sub-county in Maracha, on the 9th of July. The chairman was told, “Go and mobilise the people of Maracha, they must be in Arua town on the 10 July 2005” - which was a Sunday. They were to agree on the name of the district.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Sir, given the guidance you have already given, where there is controversy let the matter be stayed until the controversies are clarified. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I have said, honourable minister you have the medicine for the matter. However, as the minister who represented the Minister of Local Government said, we are not going to deal with these two districts of Bubulo and Kubala. You are going to sit with others and sort out this matter. I hope that you will eventually reach an agreement. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, before we leave this resolution from my colleague, the Minister of Local Government, has he abandoned his number one? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is what he said. He is abandoning Kubala and Bubulo so that we deal with only those districts where there is no problem. Later he will sit with those concerned including hon. Onzima and others to sort out their differences after which they report to us.

MRS MUKWAYA: Sir, can I request that the House be availed the map of Maracha and -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Not now.

MRS MUKWAYA: No, when the minister is reporting.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, just give me just two minutes to enable me wind this up. I want to bring it to the attention of this House that the people of Maracha were informed on the 9th and they called for a meeting on 10th. The speaker of the district local council was under strict instructions to send the resolutions of that meeting on the 11th, so that on the 12th when Parliament approves districts, Arua is not left out. 

The people of Terego dominated that meeting, because they had prepared for it. The resolution they sent to the Minister of Local Government was a fake one. It was copied to the Minister of Gender and to the Member of Parliament Terego, who reported that. The minister later rejected that document because it had no address. It was not signed and there is no way it could have been acceptable.

Hon. Wadri called the speaker of the district council and asked him to prepare a better one. They prepared a better one but again copied it to hon. Bakoko and hon. Wadri. Hon. Bakoko is a Member of Parliament of Ayivu, you are creating a district for Maracha and Terego, and then you leave out a Member of Parliament for Maracha? What I want say finally is, I have compiled all the documents here, including the very map the minister is asking for. I am disappointed because yesterday I did not agree with the Prof. Kabwegyere on the issue of this district. Even this morning, he told me he was going to present it and I said, “Please, do not do it because the people of Maracha are not for that.” We have the minutes of the meeting we had with the people of Maracha on 20 July 2005 contained in this document. 

Let me lay it on Table, so that it becomes part of the property of this august House. The committee can look into it and if possible the way the PS of Local Government told me, since the district will become operational next year, he will also send a technical committee to Terego, Kubala and Nyadri. I am sure they will take a decision. Therefore, I beg to lay the documents on Table. Arua District local council requested for the creation of Nyadri district twice. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister, the owner of the motion for a resolution has adjusted the motion to leave out some districts so that he takes time to examine all the disputes arising from what has so far been done. I envisage that this will require convening proper meetings with proper notices to all concerned parties to talk about this matter. The fact that these districts will not be included in the schedule will not prejudice their being districts because as for their being districts, the resolution has already been done. Since he is owner of the motion, let us give him time to sort out all this. He will come back to us with the solution. Let us deal with only those that have no dispute.  

Let us pronounce ourselves on the others by a show of hands.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE SPEAKER: The results of the voting are as follows: one abstention, none against, and those for are 114. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, we have now finally adopted the names of the three districts of Amuru, Namutumba and Dokolo. I propose that the House constitutes itself into the Committee of the Whole House and we formally vote on clause 6 as amended.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2005

3.44

Clause 6
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	 AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS 	
2.	 AADROA ONZIMA ALEX 		 
3.	 AEL ARK LODOU
4.	 AGARD DIDI 				
5.	 AHABWE GODFREY PEREZ	
6.	 AKECH OKULO BETTY
7.	 AKELLO DINAH GRACE 		
8.	 AKWERO ODWONG JANE 		
9.	 ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 	
10.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 	
11.	AMAJO MARY MAGDALENE  	
12.	AMAMA MBABAZI 			
13.	ANANG-ODUR TOMSON 		
14.	ANGIRO GUTOMOI CHARLES 	
15.	ANYOLO SAMUEL 			
16.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 		
17.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON  		
18.	ATIM OGWAL CECILIA 		
19.	ATUBO OMARA DANIEL		
20.	AWONGO AHMED 			
21.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY 		
22.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 		
23.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 		
24.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE 		
25.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA 	
26.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY 	
27.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 	
28.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILIP
29.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
30.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 	
31.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 			
32.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE 		
33.	BINTU ABWOOLI JALIA 
34.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA	
35.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
36.	BITANGARO SAMUEL 
37.	BULAMU JONNY RICHARD 
38.	BUTIME TOM 
39.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
40.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
41.	BYAMUKAMA NULU 
42.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
43.	BYARUHANGA CHARLES 
44.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO STEVEN 
45.	CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE 
46.	ERIYO JESSICA 
47.	ESELE JOHN PETER 
48.	ETONU BENEDICT 
49.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY 
50.	IMUMET ISAIAH 
51.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA 
52.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
53.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES  
54.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM 
55.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL
56.	KAGABA HARRIET 
57.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE 
58.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
59.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
60.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
61.	KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD 
62.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA COS 
63.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
64.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU 
65.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
66.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS 
67.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
68.	KATUNTU ABDU 
69.	KATURAMU HOOD KIRIBEDDA 
70.	KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST 
71.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
72.	KAYIZZI ASANASIO 
73.	KAYONGO TOM 
74.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL 
75.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN 
76.	KIKUNGWE ISSA 
77.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM  
78.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE 
79.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
80.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL 
81.	KIWANDA GODFREY 
82.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
83.	KIZIGE MOSES 
84.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
85.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON
86.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
87.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
88.	LOKERIS PAUL 
89.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
90.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL
91.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN 
92.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR 
93.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY 
94.	LYOMOKI SAM 
95.	MAATE ROGERS 
96.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
97.	MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR 
98.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
99.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
100.	MATOVU DAVID 
101.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET 
102.	MBALIBULHA TABAN CHRISTOPHER 
103.	MEHANGYE IDAH 
104.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
105.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
106.	MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH 
107.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA 
108.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH 
109.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 
110.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON 
111.	MUKULA RICHARD 
112.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 
113.	MULENGANI BERNARD 
114.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI 
115.	MWESIGE ADOLF 
116.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 
117.	MWONDHA PATRICK 
118.	NABETA NASANI 
119.	NAMAYANJA ROSE
120.	NAMUSOKE KIYINGI SARAH 
121.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER 
122.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH 
123.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 
124.	NASASIRA JOHN 
125.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA 
126.	NDUHUURA RICHARD
127.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES
128.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE 
129.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU YUSUF
130.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILIP MARY
131.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 
132.	NVUMETTA LUTAYA KAVUMA  
133.	NYANZI VINCENT 
134.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN 
135.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH  
136.	ODIT JOHN 
137.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 
138.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
139.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 
140.	OKULO EPAK YEFUSA 
141.	OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK  
142.	OKURUT KAROORO MARY 
143.	OLUM ZACHARY 
144.	OMACH MANDIR FRED 
145.	OMWONY OJWOK 
146.	OULANYAH JACOB 
147.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET 
148.	RUHINDI FREDDIE 
149.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
150.	RUZINDANA AUGUSTINE 
151.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
152.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT 
153.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
154.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
155.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
156.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA 
157.	SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK 
158.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA   
159.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
160.	TUMA RUTH 
161.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
162.	UDONGO PACUTO BETTY 
163.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE  
164.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 
165.	WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID 
166.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
167.	WANDIRA SPECIOSA KAZIBWE 
168.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER  
169.	WONEKA OLIVER 
170.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
171.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 
172.	YIGA ANTHONY 
173.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, the position on clause 6 as amended is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 173. The ayes have it. The clause is adopted. Thank you.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have a total of 14 amendments to clause 7, which I propose should be adopted one at a time by a show of hands. The first amendment is in paragraph five of the document, which I have circulated. I propose therein that the proposed Fifth Schedule, paragraph 2(1)(d) on page 9, we delete paragraph 2(1)(d) and insert the following (d) to read: “Representatives of indigenous cultural interests in areas where there is a traditional cultural leader nominated by the traditional leader or cultural leader, but not exceeding 15 percent of the members of the regional assembly.”  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, this is a procedural, administrative detail. While they are still computing the figures, to speed up the process I propose we get two more clerk assistants so that each can take a row and then we speed up the process of counting. They are redundant. One clerk on this row, one clerk on this row, one clerk on this row and we put up our hands, they compute and we finish.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not have them. It has come too late when really we are used to – it is a good idea but - the position on the proposed amendment is: no abstentions, none against and those for are 148. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the second amendment is on clause 7, Fifth Schedule and sub-paragraph (2) on page 9 of the Bill. I propose to delete sub-paragraph (2) and insert the following: “The regional assembly shall have a speaker, elected by the regional assembly from among its members but a person shall be taken to have been elected if the votes cast in his or her favour are more than 50 percent of all the members of the regional assembly.

2(a) The speaker of the regional assembly shall, in relation to the regional assembly, perform similar functions to those of the Speaker of Parliament.” Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the proposed amendments is: no abstentions, none against and those for are 162. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the third amendment is on clause 7 again, Fifth Schedule, paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) on page 10 of the Bill. I propose to delete sub-paragraph (3). I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question for the deletion of sub-paragraph (3) in the Fifth Schedule, clause 7.

(Question put.)

(The members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the proposed amendment is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 141. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the fourth amendment, clause 7, proposed Fifth Schedule, paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (3) on page 10 of the Bill, I propose to delete paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (3) and insert the following: “The standing committee on cultural matters shall have, as against the rest of the members of the regional assembly, exclusive jurisdiction on cultural matters of the region.” I beg to move.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I have a small clarification, which I am seeking on an earlier amendment. We have not passed that sub-clause just because it did not have an amendment and I had just thought that the minister would consider looking at the fourth, which says that, “Members of the regional assemblies shall serve for the same term as members of the district councils.” I was thinking that instead of referring to a lower council, which is a district council for a regional assembly maybe you could just say “for a term of five years”. Why are we cross-referring - maybe it should be as it is in the Constitution.

MR MWESIGE: Well, I do not know whether the import of your amendment is to state the number of years but in Bill 3 we have already fixed the term of local councils to five years. I do not see any difference it would make.

MRS ZZIWA: My contention is a higher council referring to a lower council.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is: no abstentions, none against and those for are 158. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the fifth amendment, clause 7 paragraph 3, on page 10 of the Bill, I propose that immediately after sub-paragraph (4) the following be inserted: “In carrying out its responsibilities under sub paragraph 3 and 4, the standing committee on cultural matters shall consult the traditional or cultural leader of the region as well as the relevant clan leaders. A decision of the standing committee on cultural matters shall not be effective until the decision has been approved by the traditional or cultural leader of the region and in the case of succession under sub paragraph 4 by the clan and cultural leaders council.” I beg to move.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am seeking clarification, Mr Chairman on the relevant clan leaders. How about other cultural leaders who are not clans, how about family leaders or family members, what is the import of a clan? I want some clarification.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Culture is the collective expression of the norms of a community. When it is singular it cannot be the culture. That is the explanation. Thank you.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us vote on the proposed amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the proposed amendment is: no abstentions, none against and those for are 155. The ayes have it. (Applause).

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, clause 7 in the proposed Fifth Schedule 4 at page 11 of the Bill, I propose to delete paragraph 4 and instead insert the following:  
“(i) A regional government shall be led by a regional chairperson elected in accordance with this paragraph.

(ii) A person shall not be qualified to be elected as a regional chairperson unless - 
	a)	He or she is a citizen of Uganda by birth as defined by Article 10 of this Constitution, or one of whose parents or grandparents is or was a resident in the region and a member of the indigenous communities existing and residing within the borders of the region as the first day of February 1926.  
	b)	He or she is qualified to be Member of 		Parliament; and 
	c)	He or she is not less than 35 years of age.  
ii)	A regional chairperson shall: 
	a)	Be directly elected by universal adult suf		frage at an election conducted by the 			Electoral Commission. 
	b)	Be willing and able where applicable to 		adhere to, and perform the cultural tradi		tional functions and rights required by his 		office.
	c)	Where applicable upon election be given 		instruments of office by the cultural tradi		tional leader of region and 
	d)	Be the political and administrative head of 		the regional government.”
Mr Chairman Sir, I beg to move.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to re-state the position taken by the committee upon examination of witnesses and evidence that was presented before the committee. On the proposed amended clause, which is equivalent to what is in paragraph (b) in 4 that is on the issue that the person to be elected shall be a citizen of Uganda by birth as defined by Article 10 of this Constitution, the committee examined this and if you see on the recommendations of the committee, page 1 on the proposed amendment, the committee had proposed that clause 7, page 11, paragraph 4(b) that we insert a full stop after the word “Constitution” and delete the rest of the paragraph. 

Our justification is that this restriction is unnecessary and cannot be of a general application in other regions of Uganda. For example, there are communities that have settled in present Toro Kingdom for many years, the Bakiga, Banyarwanda whose children would unfairly not qualify to be elected to chair the regional government.  

Mr Chairman, this matter was very much discussed and we had a submission from Toro Kingdom. The submission from Toro Kingdom by a letter, which was also verbally presented to the committee on 16 April 2004, I will read paragraph 2 of this submission. The letter signed by the three Regents from Toro Kingdom in paragraph 2 stated as follows; “That the Fifth Schedule, clause 4, regarding the qualifications of chairperson of regional administration owing to the traditions cultural diversity and demographic characteristics of Toro, we propose that any member of any of the indigenous communities of Uganda as defined in the Third Schedule to the Constitution having resided within the borders of the Kingdom of Toro for not less than ten years is qualified to be elected chairperson of the regional administration in the case of Toro Kingdom. This is without prejudice to the position taken by other kingdoms on this subject.”   

The committee examined these propositions, the committee listened to other people who made submissions on this point and the committee thought that by stopping at the Constitution in the proposed draft, it will bring harmony and that is why the committee proposed that the things be deleted. But the matter is for Parliament to decide and that decision should be taken.

Secondly, on the proposed last function – I mean the leader of a region that he shall be the political and administrative head, we propose that we remove the words “and administrative” because it will not be practical to have a regional leader elected and that same regional leader is also the administrative head of the region. We thought this would be something, which should be corrected so that it is like what is in Article 183(1)(a) in relation to chairpersons of districts. It says that the political heads of the district should apply also to the regions. I propose this amendment.

MRS KASULE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to support the chairman of the committee, especially on clause 2(a). This clause is not gender sensitive and does not look into the culture of Uganda. In Uganda women leave their parents and join the husbands to be in the husband’s place. For women who have married outside the regions where they are born, that means they have been disqualified. They will be disqualified with this - it is not gender sensitive. (Applause). 

Mr Chairman, the period we are talking about is the period when there were the Tsetse fly infections in a number of parts of this country. It happened in Busoga –(Interruptions)

MRS ZZIWA: I want to thank hon. Justine Lumumba for giving way. The information I want to give her is that within the women’s movement, within the women’s agenda, the issues concerning clans have been comprehensively looked at and for that matter the patriarchal arrangement as it exists, as long as it does not hinder the rights of the women, we have said let us not antagonize the status quo. Let us not bring this in this argument.

MRS KASULE: Thank you for the information, hon. Margaret Zziwa, Woman Member of Parliament, Kampala District. Culturally we are still in a patriarchal society. Everybody knows it very well. It is women who leave their parents to go and stay with the man in the man’s parents’ place. It goes beyond that that even in some cultures a woman is only supposed to be buried in the husband’s place. For women who are married outside their places of origin, that means this amendment - should it pass - it segregates against them.

I was bringing up another point. This was the year they were talking about, 1926. This was a time when Uganda had a problem of Tsetse flies. Some people had even left their places and had gone to settle somewhere in places that were safer for them.  People went back after this, their grandparents went back after this. People leaving their places to go to places, which were safer was because government by then did not manage to help them fight the problem of Tsetse flies. Right now in Uganda every Ugandan is free to settle where she or he wants, unless we are going to change again in the Constitution and say that Ugandans should strictly settle in the areas where they are born or where their parents are.

I also want to comment about the amendment proposed by the minister to 3(b) that somebody must be willing and able where applicable to adhere to and perform the culture and traditional functions and rights required by his office. This is so tricky because I come from Bugiri District. Part of Bugiri District is Busoga land and part of it is Samia land. So, assuming somebody came –(Interruptions)

MR MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, Bugiri has been for as long as Busoga has been. Bugiri has very clear boundaries. Is it in order for my sister to create doubt in the minds of Ugandans that part of Bugiri is Busoga and part of Bugiri is Samia? Is it in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, why do you say what you have said?

MRS KASULE: Mr Chairman, in Bugiri District the sub-counties of Bugiri Town Council, Nankoma, Kapyanga, Mutelele, Buzaya, Nabukalu where my colleague hails from, are Busoga land. The sub-counties of Buluguyi, part of his constituency, the sub-counties of Buluguyi, Buswale, Buyinja, Mutumba, Sigulu, this is Samia land. It is just the boundary that made part of Samia land come to Busoga and that is why we have these problems in Busoga. I want to inform this House that what I am saying is that part of Bugiri District is Busoga land and part of it is Samia land.  

I want to substantiate more and say, hon. Martin Wandera comes from the indigenous community; the indigenous –(Interruptions)

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, I am speaking here in my capacity as the Chairperson of Busoga People’s Forum and I would like to inform hon. Lumumba and this House that actually Busoga is such a diverse place. Busoga has people who are called Batenga; it has people who are called Bakene; it has people who are called Banyoli; it has people who are called Banyala; it has people who are Badama; it has people who are Bagwe - like my great grandparents from Sigulu Island. It has people of diverse origin who settled there because the place was conducive to settle. 

My sister is saying that if you get into a diverse place like that and then you subject it to the intricacies of a homogenous cultural programme then each of these sub-groupings that have agreed to stay together in harmony will be disharmonized. I do not think when hon. Lumumba says that part of the sub-counties in Bugiri belong to Samia land she is saying there are more Samia there than there are Batenga. Because you know there is so much history in the rest of this country.

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me. Are you trying to amend the statement of hon. Lumumba - because she was clear?

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: No, I stood up to give her information and to clarify that really I think the point she is making is to deal with the intricacies in this particular Article, which should be cured so that the rest of the country and members who are uncomfortable are explained to. They should know that they will not be subjected to one Katikkiro who is not a traditional leader and you say, Because I am from Kigulu and I am not indigenous but I am within Busoga and its designated not part of the traditional, I am not able to become the Katikkiro of Busoga.”  I think also that it may be quite retrogressive and you may need to rephrase it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, this matter rose as a result of a point of order but it seems this is a factual situation, which we have to verify first. Who is telling this or who is telling the other? I may not be really in position or it is not fair for me to say she is out of order; it is not possible. But hon. Lumumba, you have heard the version of the hon. Member for Kigulu. Do you agree? Is that what you intended to say?  

MRS KASULE: Mr Chairman, what she is saying is right but I still stand by what I said that it was right. What made me raise this is that assuming somebody who is not from the recognized indigenous communities becomes the chairperson and is not willing to perform the cultural and traditional functions and rights as required by that office, what will happen? In addition to that, where we say “where applicable upon election be given instruments of office by the cultural and traditional leader of the region.” Assuming the cultural leader refuses to give the instruments of power to the person elected, what happens? I beg the minister to clarify on this. Let us make a law that is not going to antagonize the various communities that have lived together in harmony.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman for giving me the Floor. This particular amendment makes close reference to Article 10 of our Constitution and Article 10 defines the citizenship by birth. The chairman of the committee in the report of the committee suggests that we should simply make cross-reference to that, which would be all right if we were talking about citizenship alone. But as members clearly see in clause 4 here and what we are doing in establishing regional government, there is an element of culture as we said.  

Those of us who were in the Constituent Assembly will remember that we had a tremendous debate, a very extensive debate on this point, which you see in the Constitution, in the schedule, which talks of districts being of such a place. The specific place at that time and the debate was Buganda. Why was this so? It was so because people from Buganda thought now that Uganda was free they could reassert themselves as a community on the map of Uganda. That is what they wanted to do. 

Why did they want to do it? Because an attempt had been made previously to erase them from the map of Uganda. We all know that. So, in the agitation for regional government, like the agitation in the Constituent Assembly for recognition of regions and bringing them back on the map, those who felt they wanted to come out on the map of Uganda in this - there was a very strong sense of community identity.  

In the agitation for regional government previously, it has now caught on for everybody but originally the chief agitators for regional government were former kingdoms or places where we have re-established cultural or traditional leaders. The formation of this regional government is to take care of the interests of the communities in these regions. When we were negotiating this point we clearly recognized that in regions you may not have one cultural entity. In fact almost in all regions you have many cultural entities and that the formulation of this Bill is as it is, to take care of that fact. 

The Bill says that a regional government must respect all the cultural entities in its borders and when we talk of indigenous people as defined under Article 10 of the Constitution, it is the indigenous people in that region. I will give Buganda as an example - maybe even Busoga could be a good example as hon. Wandera was saying. There are many communities in Busoga. Busoga found these communities there at any rate and by 1926 these communities were in the geographical entity called Busoga today. There are not only Basoga, there are not only Bagweri, there are not only those she mentioned, they were so many. When we talk of indigenous communities therefore, for instance of Busoga, we talk of all of those and we do not exclude anybody. That is the import of Article 10 and all we are doing in this clause 4 is importing what is in clause 10. 

This clause 10 has been in our Constitution since independence. It has not changed that time -(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and the minister for giving way. The point here and more so the point of Bugiri, is a peculiar case. There was at that time the Tsetse fly infestation around 1900 to 1930. Those who persisted, even the Basoga themselves who persisted and stayed in Bugiri, died. The rest were advised to leave and I can assure you that this clause as it is causes a lot of confusion in that area. 

The much long awaited and famous regional tier in that place stands to have a lot of problems if this clause is left the way it is. I, therefore, request the honourable minister to clarify the issue of the agreement between what the chairman is saying and if it is the same, why then do we add on all this if it stands with the clause of the citizenship of this area? We are much comfortable with the citizenship and then if you find that it is the same, why then do you have to include in all this? This will cause us a lot of confusion.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Chairman, migrations in Uganda date as far back as even 1900 and even before that. That is why in the census of 1921 at least you will find these indigenous communities defined in the schedule. You will find that at least in every district at that time there was a representation of that indigenous group in every district. Which parameter are you going to use? Unless you are going to say that the number of the indigenous community in the population must be defined in order to qualify that you are an indigenous community at that time. Otherwise, in every district even in that census of 1921 you will find that Banyarwanda were almost in every district of Uganda. Will you deny them to be the heads of those regional tiers?

MS KYATUHEIRE: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the chief negotiator because I might be one of the few people in Kinkiizi who are indigenous people. Assuming I got married to a man in Rukungiri whose parents migrated to Rukungiri in 1944, would my children qualify to stand as chairperson for example as of a regional tier if Kigezi region accepted to be deemed? Thank you.

MR MBABAZI: Okay, just a second honourable. I will give you way later on. Let me answer those. 

MR WACHA: Honourable minister, maybe you will handle all of them together and it might help. My reading of this proposal by the minister under clause 4(2), which is being proposed in this paper, I see that whatever appears after the word “region” is simply a repetition of what is already stated in the first part. As the ministry is trying to explain, the concept of this is that you must be a citizen of Uganda as provided for under Article 10. The gist of Article 10 is that you are a citizen if you are a member of the indigenous community as at 1926. That being the position, could the minister accept that we could do away with everything that appears after the word “region” and still maintain the spirit of this provision?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Chairman, further to hon. Ben Wacha’s clarification, I want to put it to the Minister that clause 7(2) “A person shall not be qualified to be elected to a regional chairperson unless he or she is a citizen of Uganda as defined by Article 10 of this Constitution -(Interruption)
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have heard a submission by the chairman of the committee and hon. Ben Wacha talking other things as being a repetition. When you look at Article 10 of the Constitution, there are two types of citizens of Uganda. Is it the intention that the category of citizens mentioned here is one falling under 10(a) so that we only say you stop where you want to stop? But when you say 10(a) and then you can leave out the other –(Interjection)- you see the formulation provides as follows; “he or she is a citizen of Uganda as defined by Article 10(a) of the Constitution,” then you can stop there and the rest may be understood. I do not know whether this can assist in resolving the problem we have here.

MR WACHA: Sir, immediately you mention Article 10 it will have already taken care of 10(a) and 10(b). But then if you go ahead and start the element of 1926 then you are putting more emphasis on (a) and sort of trying to ignore (b). My position is that we mention Article 10 but then we provide for residence of one of their parents or grandparents in the region.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you not think really the mission behind the current formulation is to exclude somebody who becomes citizen of Uganda under (b) just for ten years and then he stays in the region? They are trying to get someone who is original rather than a person who acquires citizenship. Do you not think that is the area? 

MR WACHA: But we are trying to cure the problem of Toro, which is so peculiar.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let the owner of the Bill say something. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I want to clearly understand hon. Wacha. Does he propose that we stop at the word “region” in line 3 or the word “region” in line 6? I want him to clarify where exactly he wants us to stop.

MR WACHA: Sir, I meant region in line 3 so that it reads: “He or she is a citizen of Uganda by birth as defined by Article 10 of the Constitution and whose parents or grandparents are or were resident in the region.”

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If only hon. Ochieng and hon. Banyenzaki who raised points of clarification would listen to me, I am about to clarify. Can I start with the issue raised by hon. Banyenzaki? 

Hon. Banyenzaki, if as a result of migration a community was in a region in 1900 or 1921 then there is no problem at all because those communities are catered for.  

As regards the issue raised by hon. Ochieng, if because of Tsetse flies part of a community moved out of Busoga and for instance went to Kanungu but the community is known to have been there by 1926, then that community is also well catered for and they have no problem. Let me also say that even if you were born in Kanungu but your community was previously from Busoga, you qualify and there is absolutely no problem. I think this also answers the query raised by hon. Kyatuheire that I will handle in more detail in my presentation about communities that migrated after 1st February 1926 and what their fate is. I think that is the question she was asking.

About hon. Wacha’s query, the Attorney-General and I were seriously considering his proposal because on the surface it appeared reasonable. However, when we examined it critically we realized that if we took it up we would not achieve what was intended. This clause is intended to give specific qualifications for those vying for the office of leader of a regional government. 

We have stated that the qualification should be that one is a citizen of Uganda by birth whose parents or grandparents were resident in the region and members of the indigenous community existing and residing in that region by 1st February 1926. (Applause). To take up hon. Wacha’s amendment would be to open the whole thing and not limit it and this is an opportunity for me to explain the rationale behind this.  

First of all, Mr Chairman, the question of qualifications is not a new one. The Constitution is full of nothing but qualifications for elective offices from that of the President down to LC I. If I may start with the office of the President, Article 102 gives the qualifications for this office. The chapter under citizenship has three classifications or categories of citizens. There is a citizen by birth in Article 10, citizenship by registration in Article 12 and citizenship by naturalization in Article 13.  

By the wisdom of the Constituent Assembly, which is under no challenge even now, we have given a basic qualification for candidates for President, that is, they must only fall under the citizenship described in category (a), that is by birth. That excludes all other citizens of Uganda that do not fall under that category. By definition when you lay down qualifications it means you are excluding some people. Therefore, the reason for this specific qualification is because, as we have said in this Bill, the chairperson of a regional government should be willing and able where applicable to adhere to and perform cultural and traditional functions and rights. In other words, this office is required to perform cultural and traditional functions and that is why –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think we should go ahead and vote on this because no new ideas are forthcoming. Honourable minister, please conclude.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, what I really wanted to say is that since this office is supposed to perform cultural functions, it is only logical that the office bearer should come from communities that are familiar with the culture of the area. (Applause) This qualification is only restricted to this office and other offices in the regional government are open. This is the only one office that is required to symbolize the cultural identity of the area.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are no new positions.  

MR MBABAZI: I have an amendment. Okay? Thank you, I think I will stop here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there are no new ideas on this. We have two positions, one is by the committee and the other is by the minister. Since the one on the committee was amended, let us first vote on their position.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the committee’s amendment is as follows: no member abstained, 128 members voted against it, and those for are 25. The noes have it.

(Question negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we vote on the minister’s amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the amendment by the minister is as follows: 11 members abstained, nine are against, and 128 are for. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR OCHIENG: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek guidance. When this Constitution was made, Article 10 handled citizenship by birth and gave the boundaries of Uganda as they stand today. The guidance I would like is that now that we have also created regions and perfected them, may we know from this government when they will show residents of this country a schedule similar to Schedule III for the whole country and specifically those indigenous communities that lived within these regions at a particular time? This is for purposes of ease of work. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have already carried out the exercise of identifying indigenous communities. Should an issue within a region arise, one will be required to bring proof that one belongs to that particular indigenous community and that the indigenous community was in that region.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, there was a proposal for the amendment of the last clause by the minister and in particular to delete the words “and administrative”. Has that also been taken as part of the vote?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I accept the committee’s proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a proposal to delete the words “and administrative” because a political head does not have to be an administrative one. We have agreed to that proposal.  

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have provided qualifications for the office of the chairperson of the regional government and looking at the other offices that we have in the Constitution for example the office of the President, we have also stated the necessary qualifications and grounds for removal in Article 107. Likewise, Article 118 caters for ministers and Article 185 caters for the district chairpersons. Also Article 185(2) prescribes that Parliament can come up with other grounds and procedures for removal.  

Therefore, in the event that we are creating a regional government and a chairperson for that government, is it not prudent for us to also state grounds upon which this person can –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Would you like to move an amendment for us to consider?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman I move that Parliament shall prescribe the grounds and procedure for the removal of the chairperson of a regional government. I thank you.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on hon. Namayanja’s amendment, which I presume will be placed immediately after the first one, is as follows: one member abstained, none against, and those for are 140. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, as regards regional government I would like to amend this particular Article or clause to reflect the new political dispensation with the new political nomenclature. That is wherever the word “chairperson” appears it should be substituted with the word “Prime Minister” for the following reasons:

First of all in the subsequent paragraphs we will be talking about ministers and I think that either a Chief Minister or a Prime Minister should head a group of ministers.

THE CHAIRMAN: Since each region was given the power to name its government, why don’t you leave that as a regional issue depending on particular culture among other things?

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, I go by your ruling and I abandon it. There is a subsequent proposal to reflect a new political dispensation, or multi-party politics. Instead of saying, “A person shall not be qualified to be elected regional chairperson …”, I would prefer if we said, “a person shall not be qualified to be chairperson …” and then in Article 3 we say, “A regional chairperson shall be the leader of the political party or coalition commanding a majority of things in Parliament”.

THE CHAIRMAN: In the law there is a provision for adult suffrage and the election of that person. Therefore, if it is an election by adult suffrage you must command majority of the votes.

MR AWORI:	While I take your guidance Mr Chairman, in a multi-party political party system we generally have, as you have rightly put it, a head of government who must be elected universally. For that leader to command the political majority in the House, the elected representatives of the people must give him support notwithstanding his so-called universal adult suffrage support. Otherwise he may come to the assembly only to have these people gang up against him. As a result he may never be able to work.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, the position is that we are making the President the executive head of government and as such a situation may arise where in Uganda for instance a President may not command the majority support in Parliament yet because of the nature of his election he still controls as President. However, I advise that we leave this to the electoral law that we will make to deal with such a situation.

MR AWORI: Although I was not totally persuaded by your previous ruling, I go by your last one that this matter shall be reflected in the electoral law.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wanted to move an amendment to Article 4 so that it reads as follows; “A regional government shall be led by the chairperson who shall adhere to perform the cultural and traditional functions and rights required by his office.” I propose that we remove the words “be willing” and “where applicable”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we have already done that and finished with the amendment.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, before I move an amendment I need some clarification from the Attorney-General in regard to paragraph 10, sub-paragraph 3, which is in relation to the election of the chairperson. In Uganda the cultural background of these regions –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Which page are you referring to? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Page 6. As I was saying in Uganda the cultural background of these regions is not uniform yet the main purpose of this arrangement under the regional tier is to ensure that our cultural backgrounds are harnessed in a manner that can encourage development.  

Being fully aware of that, Mr Chairman, in the case of Buganda we have a problem. We have a Katikkiro who in accordance with our history has never been directly elected by the people yet he is controlled and approved by the Lukiiko historically. Therefore, I move the amendment - I would like to hear from the Attorney General on how far he can allay my fear that the person described above can also adhere to the conditions stated in sub-paragraph 2. How do I ensure that the person elected abides by what is required of him?

THE CHAIRMAN: Are we moving in reverse gears? We have already adopted that part and it is only waiting for implementation. If we keep going backwards when are we going to finish this?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, this point has not been tackled and as a representative of the people I want the Attorney General to answer.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. Honourable members when we make laws we do not interpret them. Should the need arise for interpretation some other person will do it.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to the clause and this is in line with what we have decided. We are on clause 7 but before we go to the fifth -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Where are you?

MR OCHIENG: Page 11 of the original Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but where in particular? 

MR OCHIENG:  After (e).

THE CHAIRMAN: (e) of what?

MR OCHIENG: (e) of paragraph 4 that deals with regional government; I request this House to allow me to move an amendment to the effect that all these qualifications and everything else that we have decided on as a House, basing on the fact that we are going into this for the first time, will be reviewed after ten years.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we would be contradicting ourselves. We have said that according to the current law and for purposes of amending the Constitution, Parliament has the mandate to amend the Constitution and there is no timeframe attached to that. We could amend it today only to amend it again in January. We cannot tie the hands of the one who has the mandate, namely Parliament, by saying that we restricted amendment of the Constitution to ten years. Should Parliament wish to review this Constitution after one or five years, it should be able to do so as the necessary procedure is followed.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Chairman, my reasoning is that there was a precedent set. When we introduced affirmative action in this country, something like this was arranged and put in the Constitution. The reason I am saying this is that most of these negotiations were done with one region and now we are trying to apply it to the whole country. It is for this reason that we are experiencing difficulty in implementation. I, therefore, request that my amendment be allowed to enable all of us to move together as a country.

THE CHAIRMAN: When the next Parliament takes over, it can decide to scrap the issue of regional governments. I think it is as clear as that.  

Clause 7

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that the current paragraph 5 of clause 7 on page 11 of the Bill be deleted and replaced with the following paragraph 5.  The sub-section 1 entitled “Regional ministers” should read: “A regional government shall have regional ministers who shall be appointed by the head of the regional government with the approval of the regional assembly”.

Sub-section (2) of the same paragraph should read: “The number of the regional ministers of a region shall be determined by Parliament”.  

Furthermore I propose that on page 11, paragraph 7 and sub-section 1, we delete the words, “And in any case may vote only on cultural matters”. The reason for this amendment is to allow representatives of different cultural interests in the assembly to vote like other representatives on all matters that affect the region. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is as follows: no members abstained, none against, and those for are 140. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend paragraph 6 on page 11 entitled, “Co-operation with Central Government”. I wish to substitute that paragraph with the following amendment: “The regional government shall co-operate with and be responsible to the ministry responsible for regional governments”.  

The current formulation may bring confusion in governance and particularly operational government. This is because we are talking about a regional government co-operating with ministries. I think it is necessary for government to appoint one particular ministry to be responsible for regional governments instead of having them go to different ministries. That particular ministry would be responsible for policy formulation at this particular level of governance. I think if we do this it will be much better and will streamline personal relationships between the regional governments and central government while at the same time easing work between the two levels of government.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Where do you want to put this amendment?

MR ANANG-ODUR: I want this amendment to replace the provision in paragraph 6 that says, “A regional government shall co-operate with the ministries of the Central Government, but on policy matters they shall liase with the Office of the President.” My argument is that this is bound to cause confusion in the relationship between regional governments and the central government. My proposal is that the central government should designate one particular ministry that will be responsible for regional governments and policy formulation at this level and to which all regional governments will report.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you envisaging a situation where a regional government is not able to for instance go to the Ministry of Health with health issues and deal with them or go to the Ministry of Education if the issue is related to education? Do you recommend that all decisions go to one particular ministry and that that ministry would then deal with the concerned ministry? 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, yes I think it might cause a bit of confusion. For example, it would be easier in my view for the central government, when it is deciding on health matters, to formulate all policies on this for the regional government and then have one particular ministry responsible for co-ordinating this activity instead of going to the different ministries.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As the honourable member knows the proposed functions at the regional government level are functions that are currently under the central government and each of these functions has a line ministry. For instance we are proposing that regional governments perform the functions of secondary education, regional hospitals, maintenance of inter or regional roads and others that are listed in the Bill. The idea here is for regions to continue to deal with the relevant line ministry. When we talk about roads there is a central government line ministry that deals with roads and the same applies to health, education and so on. Each regional government will for each of its functions deal with relevant line ministry. 

It is only on general policy issues then that they deal with the Office of the President. As to who deals with what in the Office of the President is an administrative matter not a constitutional one because there should be flexibility in determining how that function is going to be performed.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Since hon. Amama was in University Hall, which was also my hall, I withdraw this particular amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, thank you very much.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to paragraph 9 of the Bill that deals with the functions and services for which regional governments will be responsible. I propose that in paragraph 9 on page 12 we delete sub-paragraph (b) and insert “regional roads”. 

I also propose that we delete subparagraph (e) and insert the following: “Forests, other than national parks and wild life reserves managed by the Central Government.”  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment is as follows: no members abstained, none against, and those for are 137. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)
 
MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to paragraph 9(l) on page 13. The current paragraph title states, “Functions and services of regional governments”, and sub-paragraph (l) states, “Functions and services of regional governments” and sub-paragraph (l) states, “Functions and services surrendered voluntarily by a district council or district councils.”  I wish to replace that with, “Any other functions and services as Parliament shall by law prescribe.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, some members do not seem to have got this right. In my view the current formulation means that we will allow districts to surrender whatever services or functions they have voluntarily. In that case we are going to have for example, in the region of Lango districts surrendering certain services they have and regions like Kigezi being different in some ways from Lango. My argument is that for ease of allocation of funds to the regions and individual districts it would be better for them to have similar functions. This way all the districts in Uganda will have similar functions and the same will apply to regional governments. This will make it easier for us when we are determining budget allocations and monitoring. That is why I am suggesting that it should be Parliament to determine these functions.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment because by adopting paragraph 9 Parliament is in effect allocating functions to particular regions. Parliament has done its part and what is left is for the district council, on its own volition, to surrender particular functions to a regional government for management. You cannot give with one hand and take away with another.  

Parliament has already conferred functions from (a) to (k), including (l) and (m). Therefore, to go further and say that in addition to what Parliament has given it can still take away would confuse not only the draft but also the management of regional governments. I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on both sides is known. I put the question to the amendment by the honourable member.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: two members abstained, 116 are against, and those for are 6. The noes have it.

(Question negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we vote on the –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that in paragraph 10 of the seventh schedule of clause 7, which is on page 13 of the Bill immediately after sub-paragraph (2) we insert sub-paragraph (3) to state that, “A regional land board shall be represented on each district land board in its region in a manner prescribed by Parliament”. I beg to move.

MR LYOMOKI: Mr Chairman, I stood up to amend paragraph 9 but you did not see me.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which 9?

MR LYOMOKI: I had an amendment to paragraph 9 entitled, “Functions and services of regional governments.” The effect of my amendment is to provide for the possibility of additional services and functions as Parliament may prescribe particularly in situations where new functions arise and we want to integrate them. I do not know whether it may be necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that was covered in the amendment by hon. Anang-Odur.

MR LYOMOKI: I wanted us to add and say, “Such other functions and services as Parliament may prescribe.”

THE CHAIRMAN: This is the exact amendment we dealt with. Can we deal with the minister’s amendment, please?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, in paragraph 10 we have said, “A regional government may establish a regional land board whose functions may include coordination and monitoring of land use in the region, planning of land use.” If I may refer to Article 241(2) of the Constitution and I will read it; “In the performance of its functions a district land board shall be independent of the Uganda Land Commission and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority but shall take into account the national and district council policy on land.” For us to put a regional land board in place and say that it is going to co-ordinate and monitor land. Consequently we may have to amend this Article.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, as we speak district land boards have more or less failed to operate. I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General on why you are reversing the trend. I thought individual districts would be represented in the regional arrangement. 

MR MWESIGE: If hon. Lukyamuzi had read the clause he would have realized that it is stated in paragraph (2) that a regional land board consists of all chairpersons of the various district land boards in the region.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The question to the minister is that by this particular amendment are you not eroding the independence of district land boards or is it your intention to do so?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and the answer is no. All that the regional land boards will do will be to co-ordinate and monitor. This will not hamper the independent decision making process of the district land board because the region land board will not direct them or impose any decision on them. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us vote on the minister’s amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the amendment is as follows: no members abstained, none against, and those for are 110. The ayes have it. 

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, in paragraph 11 of clause 7 I propose the following amendments: that in paragraph 11 sub-paragraph (2) on page 13 of the Bill we delete sub-paragraph (2) and insert, “Experts under the general direction of government and in consultation with the regional governments shall work out the formula for financial allocation to regional governments.”  

Also in paragraph 11, sub-paragraph (4) on page 13 of the Bill I propose that we delete the word “deliberately” and replace it with the words “without reasonable cause”. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: The position on the said amendment is:  no abstentions, none against, and those for are 127. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that in paragraph 12 on page 11 of the Bill we delete sub-paragraph (2) and we insert the following: “A regional government shall ensure that there is equitable distribution of the resources in the region in accordance with a formula worked out by the Government in consultation with the regional governments.” 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. What formula is that? Is it merely a formula? I would like to know the mathematics behind that formula.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you look at the Constitution as it is - I think before even that Constitution we will use the formula for certain things. How did you work out the figure you gave? Let us vote on the amendment.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 127. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that immediately after paragraph 12 we insert the following new paragraph 13 entitled “National Cultural Heritage Sites” so that the current paragraph 13 will be 14 - to provide that: “Parliament shall by law - 
(a) 	Gazette national cultural heritage sites, which shall be accessed by communities, which subscribe to that culture. 
(b) 	Provide for the ownership and management of the cultural sites referred to in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph.” I beg to move.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, my understanding of these two paragraphs is that if I from Madi-Okolo of Arua District do not subscribe and pay homage to a cultural site, even if I had the curiosity to visit these sites I will by law be barred from it. This is my understanding.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that the intention?

MR MWESIGE: I do not think that this provision excludes tourists like the honourable member from Madi-Okolo from visiting these cultural sites. This provision simply gives the right to those who pay allegiance to those sites to go and pay homage to those sites. However, they will of course still be open as a national cultural heritage to tourists like my colleague from Madi-Okolo.

MR ARUMADRI: In (b), for the management of these cultural sites that I do not pay homage to, part of my taxes will also be used there and yet I do not pay homage to them. Am I compelled by law to subscribe to this?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, the minister’s explanation is quite clear but from the wording of the amendment, if one interpreted it literally, it would appear to mean that to access a cultural heritage site by communities you must be – why don’t we add “de-gazette cultural heritage sites, which shall be accessed by communities, tourists and communities, which subscribe and pay homage to those cultural sites and others who have tourist interests” – or at least something to that effect? If we leave it the way it is, it will be interpreted to mean that if you do not belong to that community you should not access them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we do it this way: gazette national cultural heritage sites, then (b) should provide for ownership and management of cultural sites referred to in the paragraph.

MR MWESIGE: I take your guidance, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, now let us vote on this.

(Question put.)

 (The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: None abstained, none is against, and those for are 129. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, one last amendment to paragraph 13, page 14 of the Bill. I propose to delete sub-paragraph (1) and insert the following: “Where a court of a law determines that there is failure to comply with the requirement for recognition and respect of cultural diversity and equitable distribution of the resources of the region, the regional government shall be liable to a takeover of its administration by the President in a manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament.”

In the fifth schedule, paragraph 13, which is now 14(6)(b), I propose that immediately after the word “Parliament” we insert the following: “by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament”. I beg to move.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee examined this as was proposed originally in the bill. Clause 13(1) had four parts (a), (b), (c), and (d) and the committee agreed on the provision where there is evidence of persistent failure to comply with the requirements of paragraph 12. It is raised in our observation No. 5 and recommendation No. 6 in our report to the House. We propose that it should involve a court process to examine this evidence but the drafting now proposed by the honourable minister does not take care of what already exists in the Constitution for districts under Article 202. 

Under Article 202, there are other circumstances, which for example are reflected in the Bill in (b), (c), and (d). In (b) that is where the regional government is so “to request” is the equivalent of the district councils requesting. A state of emergency in (c) is the same with the state of emergency in (b) in Article 202(1). Where it has become extremely difficult or impossible for the regional government to function that is the equivalent of the other one in Article 202.  

To take care of what the honourable minister has proposed I now propose the following: that we amend only clause 13(1)(a) to read: “Where a court of law determines that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of paragraph 12” - and then the rest of the clause should be maintained to bring harmony with circumstances under Article 202. I propose.

I am now proposing that we amend the Bill as it is in clause 13(1). We should only amend (a) and leave (b), (c) and (d) to correspond to Article 202(1) (a), (b) and (c). The amendment I am proposing in (a) would take care of what the minister is raising. That is amendment (a), which reads: “Where a court of law determines that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of paragraph 12.” This would take care of the drafting that the honourable minister has proposed. 

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I think we would have no problem with that. The only issue, which I wanted to raise in specific reference to what actually was agreed upon was that it would not be any court of law. Because as it is maybe if you went to a magistrates court or something like that you could get this decision. So, we had agreed that it should be the High Court. I, therefore, propose an amendment that instead of saying, “by any court of law”, we should say, “where the High Court determines”.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay. Agreed. Now let us vote on this amendment by the minister and improved by the committee.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

MR CHAIRMAN: Meanwhile we can know what you want to say, hon. Patrick Mwondha.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Chairman, I am thinking of a situation whereby there could be a state of emergency in one district of the region. What happens when we say the President takes over that district? Would it also mean that he has taken over the region?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in that case the President would take over the district under Article 202. It will not be under this. In that case it would be a district under Article 202.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the amendment is as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 120. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have rested my case. I now move that you put the question on –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: There is this clause on the Forest and Wildlife Policy and Management.

MR MWESIGE: That is clause 8. It was handled yesterday.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Mr Chairman, yesterday I discussed with the honourable minister that I wanted to move an amendment to paragraph 1, clause 7. The amendment reads as follows: “A regional government may adopt its own name in consultation with district councils.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we dealt with this one. Our rules will not permit us now to take it at this stage. We shall vote by roll call to adopt clause 7 as amended.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS 
2.	AEL ARK LODOU 
3.	AGARD DIDI
4.	AHABWE GODFREY PEREZ 
5.	AKECH OKULLO BETTY 
6.	AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
7.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
8.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
9.	AMAJO MARY MAGDALENE ORIEKOT 
10.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
11.	ANANG-ODUR TOMSON 
12.	ANDRUALE AWUZU 
13.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO JOHN 
14.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 
15.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON MPONGO 
16.	ATUBO OMARA DANIEL 
17.	AWONGO AHMED 			
18.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
19.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
20.	BADDA FRED 
21.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
22.	BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE
23.	BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA 
24.	BALIKUDEMBE JOSEPH
25.	BANYENZAKI HENRY
26.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS
27.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY 
28.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
29.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS
30.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
31.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE 
32.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT 
33.	BINTU ABWOOLI LUKUMU JALIA 
34.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
35.	BITANGARO SAMUEL 
36.	BULAMU JOHN RICHARD
37.	BUTIME TOM 
38.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
39.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
40.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE
41.	CHELANGAT KULANY 
42.	EKANYA GEOFFREY 
43.	ERIYO JESSICA 
44.	ESELE JOHN 
45.	ETONU BENEDICT 
46.	HYUHA DOROTHY 
47.	ISANGA NAKADAMA 
48.	KABAKUMBA MASIKO 
49.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES 
50.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA 
51.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE 
52.	KAGABA HARRIET 
53.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA 
54.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
55.	KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD 
56.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA	
57.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
58.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
59.	KAWOYA ANIFA 
60.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO 
61.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA 
62.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA 
63.	KINOBE JIMMY 
64.	KIRASO BEATRICE 
65.	KITYO MUTEBI
66.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM 
67.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE 
68.	KIWANDA GODFREY 
69.	KIZIGE MOSES 
70.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER
71.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
72.	KULE MURANGA 
73.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI 
74.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
75.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN 
76.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT
77.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
78.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL 
79.	LUKYAMUZI KEN 
80.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY
81.	LYOMOKI SAM 
82.	MAATE ROGERS 
83.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
84.	MASIKO WINIFRED 
85.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
86.	MATOVU DAVID 
87.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA 
88.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
89.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA
90.	MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH 
91.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH
92.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 
93.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON
94.	MUKIIBI BENIGN 
95.	MUKWAYA JANAT 
96.	MULENGANI BERNARD 		
97.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI 	
98.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA
99.	MWESIGE ADOLF 			
100.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 	
101.	MWONDHA PATRICK 		
102.	NABETA NASANI 			
103.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 			
104.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH 
105.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 	
106.	NASASIRA JOHN 			
107.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA 	
108.	NDUHUURA RICHARD 		
109.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES 		
110.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE
111.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU 			
112.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 		
113.	NVUMETTA KAVUMA RUTH 	
114.	NYANZI VINCENT 			
115.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 		
116.	OCHIENG PETER PATRICK 		
117.	ODIT JOHN 				
118.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 	
119.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 		
120.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 			
121.	OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS 	
122.	OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED
123.	OMWONY OJWOK 			
124.	ORANGE LOUIS 				
125.	OULANYAH JACOB 			
126.	OWORI AMOOTI OTADA 		
127.	PAJOBO BRUNO 			
128.	RUHINDI FREDDIE 			
129.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY
130.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 		
131.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT 		
132.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 		
133.	SEINED NANSUBUGA ROSEMARY
134.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA
135.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA
136.	THEM BO NYOMBI GEORGE WILLIAM 	
137.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 	
138.	TUMA RUTH 				
139.	UDONGO PACUTO BETTY 		
140.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE
141.	WACHA BEN 				
142.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 		
143.	WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID 		
144.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
145.	WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER 
146.	WONEKA OLIVER 			
147.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 	
148.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 		
149.	YIGA ANTHONY 			
150.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 		

NOES:
1.	BYAMUKAMA NULU
2.	KASULE LUMUMBA JUSTINE

ABSTENTIONS: 
1.	MEHANGYE IDA 

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the position on Clause 7 as amended is as follows: one abstention, those against are two, and those for are 150. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 7 as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House this afternoon considered clauses 6 and 7, and passed them with amendments.  

MOTION OF ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is to adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have been quite impressive. It has been a very long way from the establishment of the Ssempebwa Commission to today. Tomorrow we shall see what to do with these two Bills. I expect a motion for the Third Reading. We, therefore –[Mr. Kamuntu: “Let us handle the Third Reading”]- we cannot handle it now because it is not on the Order Paper for today.  

So, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 August 2005 at 10.30 a.m.)


