Thursday, 18 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

The Vice-Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I would like to bring to the attention of the hon. ministers that the various Sectoral Committees are waiting submission of the respective ministerial statements before they can accomplish their work. I would like to urge you so that you make your submissions as urgently as possible so that we can proceed to dispose of the Budget Debate.  (Applause)

MR ZABASAIJA:  Mr Chairman, question 28/94. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILD LIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Dr Kazibwe): Thank you, Mr Chairman. The question put by hon. Deo Zabasaija, CM for Buhaguzi, read as follows; vermin, especially baboons destroy almost half of the food and cash crops produced by farmers in Hoima District.  But the situation is likely worse in Buhaguzi County of Hoima District.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

The question put by hon. Deo Zabasaija CM for Buhaguzi County, went as follows: vermin especially baboons destroy almost half of the food and cash crops produced by farmers in Hoima District.  But the situation is likely to get worse in Buhaguzi County of Hoima District.  The chiefs and RCs with little resources at their disposal have endeavoured to contain these vermin but no avail.  Given that the baboon population is increasing at an alarming rate, could the hon. Minster inform the House what measures she intends to put in place to avert the vermin in Hoima District.

My Ministry is aware of the problems brought about by animals normally referred to as vermin, and these destroy crops in many parts of the country.  Most notorious are the baboons, the vervet monkeys and the bush pigs.  A unit exists within the Game Department known as the ‘Vermin Control Unit,’ and it was created specifically to handle this problem.  A few years back field officers were created in most disturbed districts like Hoima and Luwero.  

Furthermore, we have a mobile unit based at the Game Department Headquarters in Entebbe which attends to emergency situations in any part of the country.  As far as Hoima District and in particular Buhaguzi County, which the hon. Member represents, the Vermin Control Office has done quite a lot.  It is on record that last year alone over 200 baboons were destroyed.  

But, I mentioned earlier that these vermin especially the baboons which are very similar to the human beings multiple prolifically if given good conditions; and they have also been enjoying the peace brought in by the NRM Government. (Laughters) So, they have actually continued to multiply.  I wish also to observe that the farmers themselves managed to destroy quite a number of vermin.  

I said earlier that bush pigs belong to this group of notorious animals; and when farmers kill bush pigs they, actually, do not notify anybody, they take them quickly to their houses and make a fast.  So, it is very difficult to quantify how many bush pigs are killed at any one time? The Game Department despite the logistical problems has done quite a lot to assist the farmers against the vermin in many areas.  Notably in Mukono, Luwero, Tororo, Iganga and Masindi. The long-term solution, however, lies in the following, provision of sufficient logistics to the Vermin Control Unit which must be quite mobile, this involves inter-earlier purchase of sufficient termination and transport.  Farmers should restrain themselves from opening up farms in the middle of forests and woodlands, which is the habitat of these animals.  

If forested areas are to be opened out for farming it must be done systematically with a clear front separating cultivated land from the forests.  There should be sufficient budget provisions, and since we are debating the budget to the Game Department to allow effective control of vermin if we are to realise the food security that we hope to achieve. In the last Financial Year the Department only had a provision of 8.9 million shillings for this purpose but despite this being inadequate most of it was under suspended item of the Budget and hence it could not be realised.  This Financial Year a provision of 17,000,000/= is provided but again over 50 per cent may not be realised.  I do hope hon. Members, will bear this issue in min during the Budget reprocess and ensure sufficient funding is provided.  

I also want to add that since districts have been decentralised, control of vermin though part and parcel of the central control of the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.  Officers under the Game Department station in districts should be effectively utilized to mop up these animals. In addition to the steps we are taking to destroy the vermin from crop destruction we are in the process of working out a system for exporting some of the vermin like monkeys - the vervet monkeys overseas as soon as the markets and pricing levels are agreed to.  This would be a better method of Wildlife utilisation since vervet monkeys are used quite a lot in research. I hope hon. Members will continue to support the activities under the Ministry, because we need your human resources, we need you to mobilise thee population to undertake the right agricultural practise especially in areas where we have plenty of wood land and bush which is the nature habitant of these animals.  Thank you very much. (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you Mr Chairman. The remarks made by the Minister, the answer has not been given.  My friend complained that his crops are being destroyed.  I think the Minister has given this House very clear activities of her Ministry, leaving us with no answer. The question is, how are going to destroy these things at the moment they are damaging crops? I thought the Minister was going to say I am going to mobilise the mobile unit at Entebbe, they will go down to Bunyoro and destroy these animals.  When she comes here and tells us the whole good story of what her Ministry is doing and where her problem is with limitation of funds I personally get lost, because I have the same problem.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  So what is your supplementary question?  What is your supplementary Question?

AN HON. MEMBER: My supplementary question is to ask the Minister to tell us when she is actually, going to assist.

DR KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, as the hon. Member is aware, mobilizing is not my problem.  It is the financial support that I need, and I know that under another Ministry I have the manpower to help mobilize the villages to make sure that these baboons and vervet monkeys and pigs also add to the nutrition in the villages.  My problem is the money.  Last year all that - with that the House allocated to us was not released.  This year we are waiting for only Shs17, 000,000 which has been given to us in the budget, we are calling upon hon. Members to help us, that is why I mentioned the district programme so that we link it up with the emergence unit at Entebbe and we do something that is reasonable.  Thank you.

MR NDEGE: Thank you Mr Chairman.  The Minister for Tourism and Antiquities, I am sure you have a lot of forest reserves and some of these forests are empty and wee are destroying these beautiful animals which would be very good for Tourists to see, some of them have never seen baboons.  People who have wanted to export these animals are arrested at the Airport; and they are given very, very - I think a heavy sentence is given; he has not come out publicly to say, I have too many baboons and vervet, the brother monkeys and so on and so fourth. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please put your question.

MR NDEGE: Please, could you answer to us, is it either to destroy or to sell whatever you can and transfer some of them in your Forest Reserves

DR KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that question because it gives me opportunity to educate the House on Wild Life.  There is what is known as the carrying capacity of any forest and there is what is known as a natural habitant of many of these wild animals.  You cannot take a baboon to Queen Elizabeth National Park and expect it to be there.  Though at present we have no baboon in the Queen Elizabeth National Park.  

One way that gives us indicators that, actually, the food that is naturally available in the forests from which these vermin comes from is depleted is then coming to attack food grown for human consumption. Baboons are not very stupid animals, in this they are actually stealing the food if there was enough food in the forest or the bushland that is next to the farms they would eat what is in the forests. 

So, I would also want to urge hon. Members to help in the conservation of some of those Forest Reserves too, because it is after people have depleted the forests of the natural habitant that the baboons are deprived of the natural foliage, which encourages the food that they eat to grow.  So, I hope the hon. Member will know that by this time we have many baboons and we do not need to take them to Hoima and Buhaguzi the problem there is not that the tourists want to see baboons, our problem now is that the Wanainchi are having there food destroyed.  We have baboons in other places where they are not destroying food; we shall direct the tourist there.  Thank you.


MR KAHERU: The hon. Minister is giving - is what this problem has not been properly understood by her Ministry.  This problem of vermin is so serous that efforts at mobilization for increase in agricultural production is being undermined.  So, I would like to hear from the hon. Minister whether she is prepared to send a task force or to study this problem both in Hoima District and other districts where vermin are serious and inform this House.

DR KAZIBWE:  Mr Chairman, I am really grateful the hon. Member to really start thinking in the direction that we have been thinking in the Ministry.  The question that was asked was what are we going to do about the baboons that are actually destroying food in Hoima District.  When a patient comes to you with a headache and fever you first give aspirin while you take off blood to find out what is happening.  Let us treat the immediate symptom while carrying out the study; we have the capacity in the Ministry to do the study as I said earlier it is the financial resources that are hampering us, otherwise the technical officers are there in the district, if we get the money we shall have the situation under control.  Thank you.

MR OKURUT:  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to assure this House that the destruction of vermin is within her Ministry, because it has always been the Ministry of Local Government and if it is so, was it not necessary for her to pass the question to the Minister of Local Government.

DR KAZIBWE:  Mr Chairman, that is a sign of good co-ordination within Government organs.  Thank you.

MR BWAMBALIRE:  Mr Chairman, the question of vermin actually is not in Buhaguzi County alone.  In Bundibugyo we have a serious problem of vermin.  Bundibugyo is surrounded by about three parks, just a small district; and this issue had been addressed by the Minister much earlier.  The size the question of the vermin we even have a problem of the boundary of the park.  At the moment some people have been arrested because the boundary of the park is not very clear.  We were informed the Ministry released some funds to Uganda National Park to have that boundary demarcated.  

At the same time you said also we release funds to go and demarcate the park; and the question of the vermin is also still there.  Last year Hon. Member, I addressed this issue to the Ministry, but nothing was done; and the price does not allow the people effected to kill vermin.  The only thing if they destroy the crops they will be compensated; and the process is so long.  You may not even get compensated.  In view of the fact that compensation is very difficult can the Minister propose to amend that law so that the people can protect themselves against their crops?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR KAZIBWE:  Mr Chairman, the current policy in the management of forests and protected areas is that we get the local communities to participate within these areas but when it comes to having boundaries demarcated vermin cannot respect boundaries. It is after we have mobilised the communities around that we shall be in a position to work out proper plans on how we shall together with the communities destroy or control the effect of the vermin on the wanainchi’s crops.  The hon. Member is really aware because I have been to Bundibugyo I went their about four weeks ago; and this question was put to me and I explained to the people there that this is in line with what the Ministry is planning to do but it all centred around resources. I want hon. colleagues to know that some of us are proud that within Government we have people who are technically able to do the work. What is hindering us is the resources, maybe if the hon. Member mobilizes more people in Bundibugyo to pay taxes we shall be able to get the resources to do the work.  Thank you.

MR TURYAHABWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My supplementary question to the question which has been answered by the hon. Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is this; the habitat who are the vermin come and attack crops sometimes also harbours other animals called carnivores like lions and leopards get hurt, the carnivores also attack the man and his property.  So, in an effort to provide a solution to vermin, I would like to know what the hon. Minister has to guard or to compensate for live or property of people which have been destroyed by carnivores; and in fact, Kinkizi is another area which suffers from vermin and also cases of carnivorous attacks.

MRS DR KAZIBWE:  Mr Chairman, I think I have already answered the hon. Minister question, but I also want to inform him that the issue of vermin in Kinkizi county has been brought on my desk, I am waiting for the money to be released so that we move in there, that means guns ammunition, but I also want to educate him and say that where you find loans, vervet monkeys will not hang around to eat people’s crops. Thank you.

MR WASUGIRYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Before coming to my supplementary question, I wanted to keep in bit of information.  I worked in the game department before, and it is not true to say that vermin control is the responsibility of local Government, It used to be a responsibility of district administrations in the 60s, but this was taken over by game department, where that particular section of vermin control is the fact that, the funding for now decades, has been so minimal.  This particular section requires a lot of ammunition because we have got the tools, those small ammunition and guns, and then we have got even - the short guns.  

So, if we do not have that ammunition, you do not have the short guns, you are lacking even the manpower to contain the situation of vermin, and then I do not see how far you can go.  So, I do rally behind the Minister when she says that it is our responsibility here to emphasize the agency for this particular Ministry to get some adequate funds.  

Then lastly, my question is, sometime back the 1992, we were told that there was market for vermin, I think in one of the foreign countries, and I remember since, I belong to a Sectoral Committee, handling this, we did recommend very strongly, that since there is market, then people should be mobilised to get some of this vermin so that -(Interjection)- alive of course, so that they are sold off.  I think we did recommend this.  i do not know how far, the Ministry, actually has gone in trying to pursue this recommendation.  Thank you.

DR KAZIBWE: Mr Chairman, I would be very happy if hon. Wasugirya came to get a licence from my office to catch those vermin monkeys and export them.  Thank you.  (Laughter)

MRS MUKIIBI BENIGANA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would also want to emphasize the problem of vermin in Kibale District, and I would like to thank my Brother from Buhaguzi, for having brought up this section. What I want to inform Minister is that this problem should be given the importance it deserves.  In Kibale District, the baboons and monkeys destroy crops to almost 100 per cent.  In order to avoid that women and children have to stay long hours in the field guarding, and when the crops are about to mature, the children are withdrawn from school, when the crops are nearing maturity.  It is a very important problem in my district, hon. Minister.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR ELYAU:  My supplementary question, Mr Chairman, is that I wanted the Minister to tell this House that she is aware of the new group of the vermin; we call them in Teso to day, at one safari, they are moving in thousands.  I just saw them last five years, in Teso, but because of the reserve forest, they have now developed, they move in thousands and they are destroying groundnuts and potatoes, I do not know whether she is aware of such a group of animals, they are small like wild cut, but they are very many they move in groups.

DR KAZIBWE:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information but I wish he had brought that to the attention of our office, otherwise he does not know that they are, I do not know what they are. (Laughter) I think we need really to find out exactly what they are, so that we can actually give the right treatment.  Thank you.

MOTION

(General Debate continued.)

MR AKURE (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to touch, some few things on this Police Bill. One is the Welfare of the Police. Previously, the policemen used to be very smart; from time to time, they used to change their dressing, but these days, you find a policeman has one dress almost for the whole week, and he has no time to wash his dresses, although the hon. Minister is trying to say, it is not true, I would want him one day to go up country to see what is one the ground because perhaps he seems the Policemen in Kampala, here, thinking that all the policemen in the country are smart.  

This is a problem and I think hired to look after these institutions, guarding banks, some other factories, and I believe, they are being paid from there and part of these money. I understand the Government takes. 

Now why can the Government not improve on the welfare of the Police; from this money which is being collected? I cannot see the reason why a policeman or policewoman was has one dress for the rest of the whole week until it is Saturday, then that is when one has got to wash, his dress or her dress. It is even a pity to see some of these policemen during big functions in up-country. You find, he may wash a shirt or his cloth, but somewhere it is torn.  I do not expect such a thing to happen.  I have seen this several times. It is not an abuse, but I feel, the policemen must be given much attention, after all, these are people who are permanent, each time, even if the regime changes, the Policemen are there, and therefore, they must be looked out very well.  Why do we waste a lot of money on this other small, small things, when our Policemen are dirty?  

Arising also form accommodation yesterday, I did indicate that, when - Nsambya Barracks here, you find that some of our policemen are sleeping in some of the bathrooms, and I think the committee responsible for that - one time you take some judges to Nsambya barracks, you will find that these policemen really are sleeping in some of these bathrooms, I do not know whether it is not hygienic to policemen to sleep there, and if the number is big, why do you not have so many barracks here within Kampala? I am told Kampala needs a large force, but how can you then accommodate a number of about 3000 policemen in a barracks, which has no accommodation, which has no facility -(Interruption) 

 MR ARUNA ADAM: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member on the Floor that it is true Police are sleeping in bathrooms. In Arua even in offices, Police are sharing toilets as offices! So, I do not know how police are taken.

MR AKURE:  So, Mr Chairman, it is not only in Kampala where the policemen are sleeping in bathrooms and toilets, that is already an example given by my Colleague from Arua Municipality, but I think the Government has never addressed the issue of the Police.  I cannot see, reason why the policemen are being denied their rights, and yet they are custodian of law, they are always sent to apprehend criminals and Government is not taking care of them.  

I would have loved during the budget proposal for the Police, the figure should have been really, because these are people who are suffering, these are people who have all this business of actually looking after our property, and then we do not see the reason why really they should not be looked after.  The House should take serious steps to ensure that the Police are assisted.  The Police like us, we are human beings, but when others want to be very comfortable why can they not be very comfortable?  They are human beings like us.  And I do not know why the Minister draws a small Budget for maintaining the Police! Sincerely, if it came here, me I feel the House would have, actually, supported because these are the people who are keeping law, each time they are sent to do even dangerous peace of job. They are attacking robbers, they are fighting with robbers but we seem not to be responsible. Who can then be responsible for the Police? (Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker, that in his Budget Statement, the Minister, actually lamented that it is about time, the Policemen are paid a living wage, but it is only lamentation, the Minister makes no effort to tell us, the House as to what is - what he means by a living wage, I think it would be better if the Minister worked out what the Policemen  require as wages, so that the House can see whether something can be done about it, rather than lament, that is about time they are paid a living wage.

MR WENENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that if Policemen steal or get bribes, it is because we under pay them ourselves.  We cannot afford without a good Police Force, what I would like to see the Minister do, is for him to bring culprits who have stolen, for instance in Bank of Uganda Shs 200,000,000/= and nobody has brought those culprits to book or take them to court! So, may I inform him that, it is our fault if we do not pay Policemen very well.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, there are two points of information I would like to give to the hon. Member.  One, is that I have looked at the Budget for this year for the Police.  It is the highest Budget that is going to be voted for by this Parliament to the Police and for that, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, who made sure that this is so this year; but my worry is, the way that money is going to be used, that is where we should be very emphatic, because we have now injected an amount of money in the Police which is really reasonable in terms of our income, but what happens? 

The Police in the past held commissions of inquiry in the mismanagement of their financial affairs, and the reports were inconclusive, and the people who were involved in those commissions of inquiry, they whole thing was covered up, there was commission by Nyende which was chaired by chap called Nyende who looked into the affairs of corruption in the Police. That report should be provided to you, so that you can see what is actually, taking place.  

The second point, which I would like to inform the Member, is the involvement of the British Government to our Police.  I think we should thank the British Government for the assistance they have consistently rendered to Uganda Police Force.  (Applause) The problem is that these issues when they buy vehicles, the next thing you see a vehicle which is supposed to be doing a specific duty, carrying something else in the name of matooke and other staff, and charcoal.  So, those are the two points that we should take note of.

MR AKURE:  Thank you very much Colleagues for giving me this information while winding up the accommodation, I would like to emphasize that if accommodation is a problem here in Kampala, where a policeman is sleeping in latrines, in bathrooms, there are other areas which need the Police very much, they are areas which lack manpower, if that is the case, why do you not have a transfer of some of these people who are suffering, who are sleeping in latrines, to those areas which need them.  I think the Ministry should be very responsible for this. Me, I really do not want to see a human being, like me, being just handled as if they are not part of the site.

I would also want to emphasize on the Police Council, which is already mentioned here.  When I saw as probation, I find a number is very small, it comprise of about 56 people that is the Regional Police Commanders, then those who are in the Headquarters here, and then the big chief, that is the Inspector General.  I would like to say that, let this thing be extended to the District Police Commanders, after all there are about 39 districts, and then when you put this one, the number will not be too big really, and then from there, they can have their sub-committees at their regional level where the Regional Police Commander can be a chairman, because this small group may not cater for every district, the Regional Police Commander can be briefing this committee, but there could be some crucial matters which might have been left behind.  Me, I feel a representative from a very district that is the District Police Commander should be in this council and of course, they know how they can discipline their men.  

I always strongly support the idea of creating a board, because this board will be actually, over seeing what the Police is doing, a  - development part of it, and other things, and I would also say they could be now advising the council of the Police, what is wrong within the Police Force, and I think when we creates such body, it can also lessen the work of this committee, and this committee could be seeing exactly from angles, what is happening, like other bodies we have in some of these parastatals.  Now, the animals are creating theirs, and I think the Police should have the same, and in this Board, we should also, I think include the Commissioner of Prisons because after all it is one department, although they are divided, but I think these could be the people who could be in this Vote.

I would also wish to say that sometime, early in 60s to middle 70s, the Police Force used to have drivers, the drivers were there, but if you see what is happening now, the officers have become greedy, there are no drivers, they have taken over the control of these vehicles, and in most cases, these vehicle getting an accident and is driven by an officer, and the drivers are left behind; whether there are there, or not, I would like to know from the Minister whether Police drivers are still there or they have been abandoned, and if so, he would explain to us, why there are no Police drivers, these days in the Police Force.

MAJ. BUTIME: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, as a point of information because I do not know whether you will give me an opportunity to answer back but this information to hon. Akure is that the Police drivers are there, they are alive, and healthy and well trained, that it is true senior Police officers have become greedy and indiscipline, and it is also true, that they have got accidents quite often, driving Government Police vehicles, when they know very well, they are not allowed to drive them, because they did not have what we call a Force Driving Permit, every Police Officer, who drives must receive a special force driving permit, specifically issued to Police drivers and all those - and all other policemen who qualify to drive vehicles.  So, there are two types of driving permits.  There is a general one, which all of us can get, and there is a specific one, given to police driving officers.  Even they new vehicles, which we just bought, three of them have been crushed by senior police officers, they are now on suspension all of them.  They are on suspension, all of them, pending both prosecution and possible other action to be taken.

MR AKURE:  Thank you for information, hon. Minister.  I would like the hon. Minister to believe that in Kotido District where I come from there are two new vehicles, the white ones which we just gave recently about two months ago, these vehicles have been driven by the officers one of the vehicle UP 1051 got an accident driven by all this CID, and I am glad, you have suspended him - (Laughter) So, therefore, when I am telling you about the drivers, I am not talking out of nothing -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member when he - us addressing this Chamber, instead of addressing the House through you, to directly, even point a finger to the hon. Minister.  Is he really in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please refrain from being militant and direct your address to the Chair. (Laughter) 

MR AKURE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to say, I was not pointing to the Minister, I am frankly emphasizing the point.  I am tracing -(Laughter)- and I cannot avoid. So, that is really a point that the issue is very crucial, because these officers have really abused -(Interruption)

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  In view of the admission by the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, that Police drivers are very reckless -(Interjection)- Police officers.  Would he now consider insuring comprehensively Police vehicles. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Chairman, as a point of information to hon. Ssebaana Kizito, now that he has proposed that we consider insuring the vehicles and I think the Police, I will try to consider that one, but through the National Insurance Corporation. (Laughter)

MR KARUHNGA:  Point of information. I just wanted to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and for interest of hon. Ssebaana Kizito, that it is too risky a business for any insurance company, whether it is National Insurance Corporation or a Private Insurance Company like SWICO or PWICO, to insure a Government vehicle.  The life expectancy of a Government vehicle is less than six months - and therefore, the Police officer who have been suspended, really are doing what everybody else is doing even outside the police crushing Government vehicles.

MR AKURE:  While winding up, Mr Chairman, I would like through you to request the Minister to take serious steps on this, because if these officers continue driving these vehicles, we may not have them any more. They have even abused the assistance from the British Government! The British Government has been assisting the Police so much.  In so many ways, these Landrovers they have been coming from Britain, now this pick up, the same but I do not know how reckless we are, and when shall we again have this in place; because I see the British Government is wasting a lot of money, and I think, if they learn of these vehicles having got accidents many of them, one time one day, they may not be in position to assist the Police.  Because since we are still beggars, we must ensure whatever we are given, we must maintain; but let us not say, after all, they come freely, but it costs this country a lot of money to get some of these facilities, and I think we have had all this problem from time to time, not only police vehicles are getting accidents, even other Government vehicles, the way they are being driven, nobody cares after all, tomorrow they will buy another one; but I think we must be very careful here, we are spending a lot of money to get some of these facilities, but we are not taking serious steps to ensure that these vehicles stay longer! I do not really see the mentality we have.

Finally, people have talked about corruption, but I think corruption, maybe it has become either a routine or we have talked about it several times, we have raised in different forums, but I do not see an action being taken.  There is a lost of hundred which was said here, we have not seen these people being arrested, another one 188 - I do not know, we have not seen these people, now what do we do really -(Interruption)

MR KABUUBI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that, it is not only those a 100 names which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister promised to give to this House, but we got also another undertaking buy no other person that the President of this country, saying that he was going to ensure, to effect and make sure that this House discuss this issue of corruption.  As I talk, it is coming to two years and NRM’s period is almost ending, we are not discussing this very dangerous phenomenon whereby everyone is losing credibility, whereby this country - I mean, all of us we are being discriminated, we are being associated to Government, where there is so much rampant corruption. (Laughter)

MR AKURE:  I would like also the Minister of Internal Affairs to take this point very seriously, there are some Policemen or Police officers who have over stayed in some districts, and these are people who have some use to the business there, especially on the CID section, and I think once somebody has stayed for more than two years, he must be transferred, because we arrest criminals and tomorrow you will find s criminal has been released and now this criminal who has been released tomorrow comes and tells you, you see, you took me there, and now, I am out what can you do?  And I think this problem is prevailing everywhere.  It is too much, these fellows must be checked and really these are the people who are bringing us a lot of problems.  

In our case, there you are arresting - this worries - these are men who are armed and the chiefs have suffered! Those who have arrested them are RCs, and I think, the system in CID must be changed.  You go and check your records, and see whether so many people have stayed in place for a long, and I think the better you transfer them, why do you keep somebody for three years, four years, he has already got used to a system.  So, Mr Chairman, I thank you for having given me this time to contribute on this Bill.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you Mr Chairman. I stand in support of the Bill. I have only got two or three remarks to make. I hope with the passing of this Bill, the Police will be strengthened to be able to fight the highway robberies that are occurring these days. Quite often, we have been disappointed by thee behaviour of our police when you report them an incident of robbery somewhere; then they start asking you how many guns have they got. Are they blue or red; are they heavily armed?  

You know, such information, cannot be expected of a common man like me.  I cannot know what make of a gun, such a gun is, and if I am reporting to you a case of robbery, you cannot ask me how many they are; whether they are very heavily armed; whether they are dressing blue or in black; so I hope with the passing of this Bill, the Police will be strengthened to face all these challenges.  And I hope with the passing of this Bill -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, it is one of the duties of a citizen to co-operate and fight crime.  I do not see anything wrong if you have reported a crime like robbery for the police to ask for information from you.  If you have been at the site, and have seen 20 robbers, I do not see anything wrong if you give that information, so that they mobilise, accordingly; and I do not see anything wrong for them to ask if they are armed with guns, pangas or arrows; so that they can also mobilise accordingly.  Thank you.  It is a duty of citizen to co-operate.

MR OYAT BALMOI:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give the hon. Member on the Floor is that, the point he is raising clearly shows the importance of the mchaka mchaka; he should make an attempt to attend these courses.  Thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful for that information. But my colleague who first informed me is forgetting that, by reporting to the police a case of robbery, I am already co-operating as a good citizen.  But the point I was trying to stress, when you report a case of robbers with guns, you cannot be expected to define to the policemen that the guns are of this make.  Because that is something that is not known to me as a normal civilian.  

And the point I was trying to drive at is that, in some cases when we report such cases, you will not be surprised for these policemen either to take too long to go and rescue the people concerned, or they may end up not going there.  So, the point I was trying to drive at, we hope with the passing of this Bill, these people will be properly armed to face all kinds of challenges; that is the point I was trying to drive at. Because I believe, even if I participated in mchaka, mchaka they do not teach people the kinds of guns we have in this world, when you go for the mchaka mchaka courses.  I know you handle a gun, but then you cannot tell whether this is a sub-machine gun, whether this is what or this is what.  

Now, secondly, I wanted to talk briefly of the passport section, which I believe, falls under the Ministry for Internal Affairs.  When the Minister for Finance was reading his budget last year, he said all effort be made to make the granting of passports as easy as possible.  But, I want to report that, ever since that statement was made here, things in the passport section have not been made any easier.  You have read in the papers of cases where people have been found trying to forge papers regarding passports.  This is because the process of acquiring a passport in a normal way is becoming more and more difficult There have been many times when people have given in their papers, only to be told that the papers cannot be found or they are missing.  You give in another set of papers.  You go back after a week or two, then you are told again, the papers are missing.  

So, I want to request the Minister for Internal Affairs under whom this section falls, to make sure -(Interjection)- let me finish my point first. I want to request the Minister under whom this section falls, to make sure that the systems he put in place are followed so that, citizens are not inconvenienced, so that they are not forced to start forging or to start using the back doors, through which to get these passports.  Now, I can have the information, Mr Chairman.  (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, first of all, Immigrations falling under a different act but, nevertheless, to inform the hon. Member and the whole House, I believe it is really unfair on Department of Immigration; personally, I have encountered with tens of people who want assistance for passports and I have advised them to put in their applications, and if within three, four weeks they have not hard from immigration, I will be willing to assist.  I will be glad to inform you that almost invaluably, all those people have had their passports issued.  Most of the delays are usually in the RCs and the security questions at the District Headquarters, not at the immigration department. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am thankful for the information given by the Member.  I am getting the impression that, those Members who happen to be directors in the Immigration Department keep on protecting that Department even where mistakes are very obvious.  Because I have also heard people coming to my office for recommendation, now you recommend these people, they come back after a week, that papers have disappeared in the passport section.  You issue him with another letter of recommendation, he comes back a second time, some times even a third time.  Every time he tells you, papers are missing.  In fact, at one time, I was even forced to go there and find out. 

MR MBURA MUHINDO: People are saying that NRC Members and other politicians talk about corruption, and when they go for elections they are the first ones even to buy voters.  Now how can they talk about corruption, I am not saying all but some and I remember in my speech here I said if the politicians also go and buy people, when corruption will be continued to be a cancer for this country, and we can only talk and do nothing.

Now, a few articles on this Bill. Article 42, now this Article deals with the exhibit and police possession.  This has been a big blow to the integrity of the Police, who in the past have been using the exhibits for their own purposes and never even produced some of these exhibits in the courts of law.  Owners of properties never received their properties and it would be worse if the exhibit were money.  This money would grow wings and legs and disappear in air and that would be a quarrel and a conflict between the police and the owner of the money. I now speak to the Police that these exhibits are necessary if we happen to steal confidence in the Police.

Now, Clause 45; the disciplinary court is very important, as in the Police it harassed more or less the population, some of them without any cheques and balances.  I only pray that this one is going to be implemented.  I have a case in Kasese where some policemen just shot people at random, they were arrested and even up to now, we do not know what happened to them.  No single information has ever been brought of whether they were punished or not, and I believe that if this Bill had been in place, the people of Kasese would have immediately seen the penalty that would have been given to these people who misbehave with their guns.  

Clause 60, deals with the welfare of the Police.  The welfare of any worker acts as an incentive in motivation so that one can work.  Now, motivation is not only in terms of money, of salary, but also other things that go with the work. And the worker must be assured of the future even after his services are terminated.  It is with this in mind, that this Clause if well cared after, or cared for, will be able to give hope to the policemen so that they can work very hard knowing that at least their services will be rewarded. 

Clause 64 for participation of the population.  In an effort to create law and order as I had already said before, that this is a new innovation so that the wanainchi are able to participate and so that the police should not think that they are the only ones who are so special to do the job, but they should know that the only duty as a specific job, but also others can assist them. 

Clause 69 is a very welcome article but very difficult to implement.  However, I hope with the RC participation this is a step ahead.  

Clause 70 deals with the complaints.  I only as a question that supposing I complain and the officer to whom I have complained to does not take steps, what do I do? It is very difficult in many cases for some of these policemen to apprehend their fellow policemen.  Practically we have seen this, in fact in the Forces, they are all brothers. At times it is very difficult; may be in the NRA, but in the Police having known what it was, we hope that with this new revolution, they will be able to punish their friends.  But I am asking, supposing I complain and there is no response, what do I do? 

So, in conclusion, with this Bill in place, I have no doubts on my mind that the police work will improve creating more favourable conditions for the maintenance of law and order, which are prerequisite for development. And I can add that some of this economic growth which we have heard, I think the Police has had a contribution.  Because without law and order, then even this growth will not have been achieved.  With these few comments, I beg to support the Bill. I thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would just like to make some few observations in the Bill and also mention some things which, I think, are of great concern to all of us.  First let me say that I support the police because they are the people who deal with civil society and they are supposed to help us in times of both peace and at most time they are really the people who would give a helping hand when we are in difficulties.  I therefore, feel that they should be very well equipped to do their work. 

I will start with the welfare of the Police. Several Members have mentioned about the welfare. The state in which the policemen are, and the work and the assignment they have, are not yet harmonized, and therefore, in performance of their duty they have tended also to try and survive because of the circumstances in which they are.  I do not think that the local - our policemen are basically corrupt, or inept, it is the conditions under which they are being - under which they are working which is forcing them to behave the way they are behaving.  I will give you an example.  A policeman who is staying in Nsambya who sees whatever goes on in Kampala, who aspires for the same life time, at times as I have always said may be forced by needs to do something which he should not otherwise do. (Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the impression he is trying to create before this House, that a police is trying to survive, he is doing some abnormal things so that he can survive is a bit absurd; because there are other people in other organizations who are having similar problems even worse problems but they do not debate themselves so much as what the policemen are doing.  

For instance, they have even become watchmen - night watchmen of properties, you find them you know a escorting businessmen with their properties on these Pepsi-cola what, what, they are no longer policemen.  An army man is equally living in a worse situation; he is living in ‘maama yingia pole.’ the policeman is living in a uniport and in a town. So, the army man has not gone so long to start escorting Pepsi-cola, guarding houses, guarding what.  So, certain things, it is a question of ethics, ethics which is now going so low the policeman is supposed to be a gentleman, more civilised, more informed and to look after the welfare and the property of the people, much more, but not to become a watchman.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, the policeman to be doing that, my hon. Friend said, he is guarding the property when he is accompanying Pepsi-cola. He is also doing that and let me say in questions of ethics, I do agree with the hon. Member, the policeman should be what a policeman should be.  He should be a decent man, a man who understands the problems in that society that he is trying to protect.  I am saying that conditions have been searched that the man have got so and we need to get his out of that situation so that he becomes the policeman that we know or we used to know. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information Mr Chairman. I would like to inform my hon. friend holding the Floor of the House that to the Government and this House, and if a public reveals some report were implemented which was more or less favourable to create in the right and proper conditions for the policeman. In that, particularly on pages 392, where all the details for the Police work starting from UP 1 to Up 17.  You find that the best thing to make it best is to - better feeding and proper welfare as we call it in the law nominally that the bottom ones because UP 17 should get 240,000 shillings a month.  So that he will not have to go for bribes.  The top man UP 1, should have a half million shillings. Why?  Why should the Minister commute from here daily to Jinja and he gets some transport allowances. And these other people who are looking after our lives, we ought to pay them well.

MR KANYOMOZI: That is already in support of what I was already saying. I am not only restricting that to the Police, but also to the security organs of this state. All of them and even our civil servants, our doctors. I have just looked at one paper, which says, we cannot hope for a living wage.  If people have got to live then they will devise ways of how to live, if government says there is no living possibility of a living wage. I think the paper I have just finished here, the topic where they say, we can forget about living wage, and then what do you expect the policeman to do. What do you expect the army man to do, what do you expect the doctor  to do?  I am saying that let us concentrate on getting the welfare of these people to enable which can sustain them and be able to make them professionals as they should be.

I want to touch on the abusive.  We know that the police for example, have over stretched may be what the hon. Brig. Kyaligonza has just said; especially on main roads, the amount of harassment on main roads actually is terrible.  Although I am saying they may be forced to be doing these things, but the way they do it, is actually degrading.  The lorries, the small pick ups and what have you, the way they handle them and they leave those things which should be done and they do things which they should not do.  There are things which they should do, but which they leave and instead do other things, which makes life very difficult. If you see the number of stops that one has got to go through on the main roads, especially, the ones carrying matooke and cows and what have you, you really worry as to what is actually going to happen. I am not saying they should not penalise people who overload vehicles, they should because that is part of their work.  But even when you are not over loaded, they will make you feel that you are over loaded.  And since you are in a hurry you will have to pay or to cough, as they say. And I think that is a bit of a worry that the police need to look into.

Let me touch on the Bill.  Yesterday, I see again in the some of the Papers they tend to misquote us. Yesterday I said, we want a Police Force, which is well catered for, and I was looking for alternative sources of making the police get for.  Where do we get the money to cater for the police?  There is a lot duplication of efforts.  In the institutions, which we have established, I know organisations, the army must have military intelligence, but there are other organizations which do duplicate the work being done by the police and which would be under one house and will reduce the cost.  I mentioned yesterday, the work when we looked at the schedule, which was given to us by ISO, was exactly the same as what the special branch was supposed to do.  Why not merge the two and we enforce them, and we reduce the amount of money of running parallel institutions.  

We are not saying we should not have an intelligence service, any government must have an intelligence service, but where the intelligence service duplicates another work of another arm of government, I think it is a waste.  We would like to see some rationalisation; either merges with special branch, because that is the work they are both doing.  They are looking at the political crimes and at economic sabotage, or both of them.  Why can’t we merge them?  And in so doing we will reduce the expense.  And I am looking at another part in mass mobilization department, there is also another section which does some intelligence work.  If we were to rationalize all those, we would have enough money to sustain these institutions and in a better way.  (Interruption)

MR OYAT BALMOI:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kanyomozi on the issue merging the security organs. I was wondering whether these organs existed today and yesterday only when did they start? 

I am saying this in order to avoid some one saying this thing is bad because I am not in it or that thing is good because I am in it.  If they started long ago, and this was a Cabinet Minister; he did not correct it then. I want him to clarify to the House, people must speak with clean hearts whether these organisations existed and they were not jointed.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, let me - it is just a simple thing to answer - to clarify.  First of all two wrongs do not make a right. Secondly, there is no  - two wrongs do not make a right.  Secondly, it is wrong to have two intelligence organs doing same thing that is what I said.  Whether it is NASA or general service, or ISO, or State Research, I am saying all of them are wrong they should be rationalised so that we can save money, and that is logical hon. Member, and it should be acceptable. (Interruption)

LT COL KIZZA BESIGYE: Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that intelligence services inform government about security matters, but they can also misinform, and quite often they have misinformed.  It is, therefore, necessary - and misinformation can be extremely dangerous once they do.  It is, therefore, necessary to have information from several sources so that it crosschecks the others.  I think it is known to the hon. Member holding the Floor that one of the leaders on an intelligence organization who was supposed to be informed was actually arrested because he did not know that security of his government and of himself was in danger until it was too late.  (Laughter) So, my information is that there is objective ground for having more than one source of information to government.  I thank you.

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, probably another bit of information I would like to add, is that, too many occasions, the intelligence organisations are staffed with people who are not intelligent. (Laughter)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, let me just clear the air  -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Is it in order for hon. Israel Mayengo to say that the people who are in intelligence are not intelligent when we know that the head  - when we know that the current people who are there like Col Otafiire, are - is a very intelligent man, Mr Muhwezi, very intelligent man?  So, is it in order for hon. Meyengo to say that these people are unintelligent?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I would have made a ruling on that if the point of order were raised in time when hon. Mayengo spoke.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, just to wind up on that one let me just say exactly what Col Besigye has just said.  In fact it was having too many of them that led the person to get arrested and not the opposite.  May be if he had a good source he would have saved himself and saved the organisation. (Interjection) Indeed I did not have the intelligence to do so. Mr Chairman, let me continue and touch on the Bill.

I am concerned about the sections in the Bill, especially sections which deal with the Police Council; sections 11 and 12.  My concern on that one is that the Council, which is given the task to recruit, appoint and promote the Police, may be there should be a different body to do that, entirely composed of the same policemen; they are going to do their thing and follow it. I think they should be a body like we have in the Public Service or the Teaching Service Commission to handle this matter rather than asking the same policemen appoint amongst themselves the people to do the appointments and the promotions; they should be recommending somebody else who does that work.

Now, I touch on the sensitive issue, which we also touched on yesterday. Clauses 23; 28; 32; 37 and 41.  I am worried about the powers being given.  In my worry I am not saying that the police should not have these powers but I am looking at the likely areas of abuse - 28; 33; 36; 37 and 41. For example, take Clause 41 regarding the use of public address system.  To use a public address system you must get a written permission from a police officer.  And this is not only even for only talking even for music.  So, if you are going to have a party here placed with a public address system in a public place, I am saying a public hall for example, you are going to have a dance in a public hall you will have to have a police permission and I am saying that is stretching it too far.  If you are going to have a ceremony in a church, which is also a public place, what will you do?  Will you need permission every Sunday?  (Interjection) Those are the issues I am raising or in a mosque and mosques as you know they have these loud speakers to wake us up in the morning.  As they are going to be writing everyday, I would like to know how this thing is going to work, and I think we are giving too much to the Police and can tend to be abused.  That is my worry.

On clauses 33 and 37.  On Clause 33, especially, section 2, the powers also given are a bit excessive.  I am saying that I fear the possibility again of abuse.  Yesterday I even gave information about things happening in a neighbouring country where if you want to hold a meeting you have got to ask for permission and in most cases given the nature of our society, although we are improving but I can see problems and why I am saying is that, we have had it before, in this House, people sitting here looking at the situation as when they are in position, having been on both sides, been in government and out of it I can tell you what my fears are.  Because in the past, the Detention Bill was passed here. At that time it was passed in order to protect the government. The ones who passed it thought that they were there and they were comfortable and they were going to stay.  

During the time when I was in the government they brought the extension of magistrates as to how long people should stay in remands.  Some of us argued that it is not proper to keep people on remand for a long time.  It did not take two years. The very people who were advocates of that thing ended up serving twenty months in prisons in remand and I am not saying that this government is going to abuse this thing - but I am looking at the possibility of another person being in that position when we have changed roles and then you end up in problems.  So, when we are going to legislate, I think these clauses should be modified, modified in such a way not denying the police the right to do certain things but modified in such a way as to leave some freedom to the individual concerned.

Let me also touch on training of policemen. The policemen, because of the nature of our society, although we all know that they are the ones who stay on with changes in the governments, have had a bit of humiliation.  Because of over emphasis on other security organs, the Police have been sidelined. I am wondering whether it would not be possible. 

I do not know how the situation in South Africa was, whether it would not be possible to train all the security organs initially for the first six months together then you sieve the best ones who are going to be in the civil, handling civil matters and those go to the police, then you sieve others who are going to train, those who are going to go in prisons, then you sieve the others who are going to protect our borders -(Interjection)- yes, and in the same countries actually they serve the same ranks and at officer level it is eve easier.  May be then the army officer or the army sergeant would not look down upon an Inspector of Police because they would have had the same experience initially.  I am suggesting that for consideration by the hon. Minister.

In winding up, crimes in developing countries and in our country are getting more and more complicated. The Police, therefore, need to be equipped to deal with sophisticated criminals. I am looking mostly at the CID and Special Branch.  Are they fully equipped? Are they having the machinery to handle sophisticated criminals?  

Take fraud, for example.  How many, for example, experts do we have do DMA step to apprehend criminals? Do we have them? How many people do we have handwriting reading? How many people do we have with sophisticated cameras to handle situations or even testing when they come on the scene of the crime? Are they equipped to handle these things? Are they equipped to have electronic gadgetry yet to be able to detect the crimes before they are committed? I am saying we need to equip our Police to handle advanced criminals whom we are now going to be throwing out on the streets or who are already out on the street.  If we have these things in place and the law, with the modifications I have said is in place then I can see the future of our police force.  I thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I am sure this House is very conscious of the fact that the police, any law governing the Police is such an important law that all efforts really should be made to ensure that it is a good law.  We are also aware that the importance of a Police law comes because it touches on the daily life of a civilian and, therefore, a happy society needs a good police and a good police will depend on a good law that is given.  

So, I am treating this subject as one of the basic laws of any society. I want this House while considering or debating this Bill to bear in mind, three underlying principles if we are to make a good police Bill, I think we need to bear in mind three underlying principles.  

The first one is that of human rights.  That any Police Bill or any Police law we are making should ensure that the police being an instrument of the State basically the executive arm of the state is likely to abuse those powers if we do not have sufficient machinery within the Police law to protect the ordinary people, the ordinary, the civilians, the ordinary people on the street, the things governing the human rights, how they are arrested, how they are searched, how their homes are visited by the police, if they are taken to the police how soon they should b taken to court and so on.  These are the things which should be very carefully looked at and without bothering this House I think the Committee did try its best in these areas but still new ideas are coming like from hon. Karuhanga, I think this is a very good proposal.  

Others have come from hon. Kanyomozi and Dr Tiberondwa and all this. So whatever improvement we can make on this Bill to ensure that really it is a good Bill, because it affects our lives everyday, it should be welcomed by this House, and as a Member of the Sectoral Committee dealing with this matter, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for being exceptionally magnanimous. (Applause) 

If you look at the Bill which he published last year in 1993 and you compare to what the Sectoral Committee has come with, it is such a fundamental and radical change and if the Minister was not magnanimous he should not have come with this Bill and I was with him most of the times he is bringing out this new Bill and I do believe that the Minister will tolerate more amendments if need be.

The second point to bear in mind is that while we are looking at human rights the second point is that whatever police force we are going to create should be a professional police force.  It should be professional and an effective Police Force.  I am saying this because if it is not, this is a police which can be undermined and the people who are there do not feel that this is their institution, they can be dismissed, they do not have job security, they are not well trained and so on, this is not a professional body.  So we should bear in mind that the Police we should have should be an effective professional Police Force.

The third one is to protect the Police itself from the arm of the executive.  I can tell you that it is possible for a bad executive to make the Police a bad institution and, therefore, in the Police Bill itself, we must create a professional Police Force, which does not take orders from whoever finds himself a political head or the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Of course, I would not be happy to see the Inspector General of Police being ordered by the Minister of Internal Affairs to say ‘go and quell this riot using live bullets’ or ‘go and carry out this order of arrests and ensure that these prisoners are treated like this.’ I think this is beyond the professionalism of a Police Force.  A political head of Internal Affairs should stop at giving policy directives but when it comes to professional functions of the police, like a doctor is a professional man the Minister cannot give him orders on how he should carry out an operation. Once the Minister of Health avails him an ambulance to take the patient to Mulago, definitely, I think, it is now up to the doctor to see how best he can save that life. So, we should also protect the Police from the unnecessary interference by the executive. (Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that, the hon. Member on the Floor that the point he is driving is important and, in fact, as a doctor if the Minister gave such an order and I carried it out, I would be struck off the register, being accused of association.  So, the same, I think we should find a way of making sure that the police does not succumb to just everybody’s orders.

PROF. KABYWEGYERE:  Mr Chairman, I think that area he has touched on, the relationship between the Police and a political head in the Ministry is important.  Now, I would want hon. Omara Atubo to clarify how he feels the Police behaving in the face of orders from the political head.  Because I do not see how the Police can stop the occupancy of a political head himself unless they participate in civil disobedience, you know, participate in refusing to have a bad political head.  Now if they are supposed to be professional, how can they withstand the pressure of the political office under which they operate because this is a very important area because it seems to me that that area, who occupies that office is very far, he is outside the powers of the Police but I would like him to exercise his imagination on this.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I agree with Professor Kabwegyere that this is rather a difficult and gray area, and we in the Committee were very conscious of this, and I do not know whether we have come close to solving the problem by what we have put in Clause 6.  If you look at Part 111 - Force Command, Clause 6, (1) ‘The Uganda Police Force shall be under the command of the Inspector General of Police, whose office shall be a public office. (2) In the performance of his functions under sub-section (1) the Inspector General shall be subject to and act in accordance with the laws of Uganda except that on matters of policy, the Minister may give directions to the Inspector General and the Inspector General shall comply with those directions.’  

So, we know that the police is a very important arm of the executive, of whoever is in power and that is the much we could go, the rest really remains now that if the political head of the Ministry come to the stage where he is politically interfering with the professional functions of the Police then institutions like this Parliament can be called to relieve political issues on that particular Minister and, I think, there is something in the new Constitution about what we call resolution to either impeach the Minister although impeachment applies to the President only and so on.  The work is to censure the Minister.  

Because of the limited time, let me tackle one other issue, and that is RCs and Local Defence Units. This is what we really call community participation, but while I welcome the role of the RCs and Local Defence, that is of the people; community participation in security of their area.  I want to - this House that RCs and Local Defence Force cannot be a substitute to the professional work of the police and there seems to be some comprehension in our society now that the RCs are doing a good job, they are but their level of professionalism in investigation in handling criminals in such in other professional work of a Police are very limited.  I would rather thank that it is important for us to have enough Police spread and they are backed up by the RCs but RCs and Local Defence force cannot be a substitute -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the question of LDUs as opposed to Police is not anywhere in any of our Laws and that if the Minister wants the Police to probably have the LDUs carry out extra job, especially, in handling ammunition, This should be probably included in the law somewhere.  But as it stands now there is a problem, especially, when it comes to the LDUs executing in self-defence of criminals where they will be called upon by RCs to assist.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information. I just wanted to inform hon. Wanendeya that the question of LDUs has been discussed by the National Security Committee and we found out that at first the LDUs thought that they were under the Ministry of Defence and under the Army.  Of recent the Army has said that the LDUs cannot be oxonian of the National Resistance Army and that it is only when the Army needs the LDUs can they use them as a reserve Force and for a reserve Force cannot be reserved and at the same time a standing Army so they would have to be somewhere when the Army Commander needs that reserve Force then he can apply for it and receive it.  Then the LDU started floating because they were no longer under the Army, then they said let us be under the Police and in the Police we found out that LDUs actually are supposed to work together with the RCs and, therefore, they cannot be under thee Ministry of Internal Affairs and neither can they be under the Police. They can only be in the Ministry of Local Government, and since there is decentralisation going and since RCs and LDUs are operating in a certain locality at district level, at county, sub-county etc level they would rather therefore, be in the Ministry of Local Government they would rather be under the district so that the district which can recruit, train, pay and what the police can do is what is supposed to do for local government police and prisons to advise them on ranks to train and discipline and we stop at that.  So, in other words, the LDUs this is our proposal may have to belong to the Ministry of Local Government and the district governments will be the ones to look after them at that level.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. The House may recall that when we opened this Bill and when the chairman was presenting I did ask hon. Butagira then and it was in the absence of hon. Babu what actually was meant by the Sectoral Committee by the meaning of the local police or local administration police, did they mean that we decentralise up the district and then every district recruit its own police or takes those what are there and run their own affairs, including the LDUs and of course the chairman had not dealt in this and he did not give us a sufficient answer.  

But I want to compare the history of other countries how they have developed their own police situations.  You know in America they have what they call the Sheriff these people are actually LDUs, they actually come out of the people, the history of the Police is that it never used to have a presence, but because people were involved in property and some thieves were coming around communities organised themselves created what they called a sheriff paid him and he built a small post of the people.  

So, if there was an attack of hon. Wanendeya’s house the man would probably be around there to know that my garden is going to be attacked.  Now, it seems to me the amendment which the Deputy Minister of Local Government had come with which he has withdraw was coming close to the actual reality on the ground. The other day I gathered from an hon. Member that there is a security situation in West Nile at the moment there is a problem there are people there who have been trained and were been retrenched they can handle the up raising there but they have no chance to do that.  So, you have to come and talk to the President and talk to the Minister to allow people to take situation of their own area in hand. 

So, in my view, let this House take this opportunity; let us localise this Police -(Applause)- and bring it to the people whom we created to be part of it; defend it own it, and let it not be the Government. The Police there in Kampala let it be our Police; our security. Let us involve the people now if we lose this opportunity we shall have missed the bridge. (Interruption)

MR CHEBROT:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to thank hon. Elly Karuhanga for that clarification, but the most important thing I want to say at this stage is to clarify on the role of the local administration Police. I think many people have forgotten their original roles.  Now, the original role of local administration police was that they were actually recruited by the local authorities themselves and they were only trained by the police.  Their role was supposed to be complimentary to that of the police to assist the Police in preventing commission of crimes in those areas were they came from. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the Sectoral Committee, which came up with amendments to save the local authorities from the policemen who were trying to use all the powers of the local authorities. It is not true that I have withdrawn the amendments which I proposed but, I think, there was a procedure problem which I and the Minister for Internal Affairs and I agree to take it back to the Sectoral Committee so that we can iron out those problems.  Once again, I would like to thank all of you and I would also ask you to support those amendments.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. In our case like the areas we had still a long war you find that the LDUs are in plenty and they are the ones who are keeping law and other suppose they arrest somebody and they are not properly trained, me I thought the Minister could have assisted in training these people of the local Police and even the - to know the law and how to handle the civilians in case they go wrong so that they can also assist Police in giving evidence.  

In our place when these local LDUs take the statement, normally people ignore that they are not Police.  Now, in our case were there is no Police at all how are we going to operate like that, there is no Police in Onyara, you find only about six - county.  So, these LDUs and the local administration police should be useful because most of them were trained by Police so I think they should be given training if you are not going to own them - you may fear that you are going to bring in a burden of paying them but those be trained these people are very useful on the ground. These LDUs that they are not belonging to you all to the defence it becomes a burden and we have a lot of them in our place.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, to wind up I also want to touch on the issue of welfare of the Police.  We can make a fine law here we can do everything in this country but if we do not have a contented police force all that we are going to do is going to fail. So, I want to associate myself with the colleagues who have expressed a lot of support and concern on the issue of police welfare. But particularly, I want to point out that as the security in the country improves we should be emphasis this higher expenditure on the Army and on the intelligence organs.  This is where really quite a substantial amount of money goes, if you recall just before independence and just before we started expanding our Army we used to have only one barracks or two in Jinja and another one later in Moroto. The expenditure on the army and other related organs was very minimal.  The British were using the Special Branch and very effectively but since independence every successful government has tried to imitate CIA, KHB, BOS and all these sort of things and then they - if they are also world powers this is sincerely where we have problems. But I believe that as the situation improves in the country we need to have a small effective army we need to have intelligence centre - in one place this question of having three or four branches is a complete waste of money.  

In fact, if you look at the intelligence, the intelligence we have been having in this Country since Independence has only been second armies. All this intelligence whether you talk of state research or ISO, these are institutions of brigadiers and of majors and so on. There have been really more of second armies in the country than of intelligence work.  So, I believe that we can really spend more on the police. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor to the effect that our security a national security arrangement if only at the Kidara village RC security man, we have the views - we have been talking about, we have the special branch, we have the CIDs and Military Intelligence and the district - only one man has got the security or one organ that is the President.  This is that is why Kony is - because there is no security, I have experience, when I was the RC III in Soroti in 1987, I monitored the coming of Lakwena more cleverly than Mohammed who was a so called district officer there -(Laughter) 

Therefore, what ought to be take are two things, first of all the safety of the nation and safety of the individual - the state and naturally to put the police power efficiency more than relaying on the LDUs or RCs because now they are at parallel.  Now the Minister have told us this afternoon so blindly that he does not know where LDUs are he does not know whether they should go to Local Government -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up your information.

MR OBWANGOR:  It shows us that we are not organised  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Member.

MAJ. BUTIME: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Obwangor to come here and say that I blindly told you that this one is there, this one is nowhere, is it in order. I explained that the LDUs used to think they belong to the Army, but they do not. We have proposed to the National Security that they should belong to Local Government. Therefore, I am not blind, I am wearing glass I am very clear I can see hon. Obwangor from here and I would like to congratulate him.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I was winding up.  So, I strongly support this Police Bill. I hope that this Police Bill will protect human rights that, the Bill will give us an effective professional Police Force and that the Police Force will have provisions to protect it from the executive armies of government, although it can be used by the executive arm of government and I do, also hope that we shall have sufficient resources in this country to look after the welfare of the Police.

 ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the Council to Tuesday.

(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

 

