Tuesday 14th August, 2001

Parliament met 2.40p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)
                                         
(The House was called to Order)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to: 

Prof. Edward Rugumayo

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have received a letter from our colleague, hon. Member for Pallisa, hon. Jennifer Namuyangu who was involved in a motor accident last Saturday.   She has told me that she was treated and she is recovering at her home. Let us pray for her speedy recovery.  

Hon. Members, we have to adjust our Order Paper to include two items, namely; as you remember, last week we directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs and other Ministers concerned should visit Katakwi District to find out what was happening, and also to provide a solution. We also said that they should report by Tuesday.  However, this item was not included on the Order Paper because the team had not returned. They returned this morning. Now that they have come back, they will be required to make a statement to the House. 
There is also an hon. Member, hon. Prof. Kabwegyere, who has a brief statement to make. So, we shall also accommodate him on our Order  Paper. 
 
I may have also to explain item No.5. Last June, by the command of the Constitution, the President, through the Minister of Finance, presented the Budget to the 6th Parliament.  The 6th Parliament acted on it, and voted a Vote on Account that is helping the Government to provide services.  Unfortunately, the 6th Parliament’s term ended on 2nd July, before the Budget was debated fully.  Now the onus is upon this 7th Parliament to do the needful. 

One may ask, how do we debate a Budget that was not presented to us?  But because the matter was done under the Constitution, and because we are benefiting from this Budget in that there is a Vote-on-Account, we are the ones to debate this Budget. 

To help Members understand the Budget which was presented in June, the Minister of Finance will be required to make some brief explanation of what happened, so that Members can follow, and then effectively make their submissions on this Budget.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Sarah Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, following the incidents of insecurity that took place in some parts of Uganda, namely, in Katakwi district, both the Government and this House took a decision that these incidents should be investigated and relevant action taken. Last week, the Government promised to report to this House on this matter. 

I am happy to report that a team of five Ministers and Government officials, plus two Members of Parliament, traveled on Saturday 11th August, 2001 to Katakwi, Moroto and Kotido Districts to fulfil this mission. The Ministers that went were; the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Sarah Kiyingi Namusoke; the Minister of State for Defence, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa; the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, hon. Aporu Christine; the Minister of State for Economic Monitoring, hon. Omwony Ojok, and the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs, hon. Lokeris Peter; hon. Apuun Patrick; Member of Parliament for Bokora County Moroto district; and hon. Lokeris Paul, Member of Parliament for Pian County Moroto district. Government officials were also in this team and these were from the Vice President’s Office, Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Finance, the Third Division Commander and others.  

The team visited some of the camps in Katakwi district, held meetings with the people in the camps as well as with the district leaders and the district security committees in particular. The team also visited Moroto and Kotido districts and held meetings with similar committees of these districts, as well as visiting dams in those districts, which dams have been built under the Karamoja Disarmament Programme.  

As I have already said, the team travelled on Saturday and was only able to return in the very early hours of this morning. The team is now in the process of compiling a detailed report, which we hope to be ready by tomorrow around this time to be presented to this House.  

However, regarding the Government intervention, I wish to say, first of all, that we visited the camps in Katakwi. And I want to assure this House that the situation is under control and Government is doing its best to ensure that the plight of the people in the camps is alleviated.  

Regarding the interventions that the Government has made, I wish to say that the Second Deputy Prime Minister who is also the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, has more information on that and I request that he gives that information.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER /MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS & REFUGEES (Brig. Moses Ali): Mr. Speaker, what I want to add on the report of the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs is our effort with the Minister of Finance. This morning, the Minister has managed to release Shs.200 million to my Ministry as advance payment to start to supply whatever we can to the people of Katakwi. Already my Ministry is working very hard so that the first lorries leave by tomorrow. Thank you.

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, do I understand that the two Ministers have made these statements under Rule 37(2) or is it applicable to these particular statements?  

THE SPEAKER: What is your problem?

MR.AWORI: My problem is, can we ask questions? Because if it is under rule 37(2), it says no debate shall arise except elucidatory questions. That is why I wanted to know your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, he has made that statement and that is the only basis for making the statement. But as you have heard from the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, she returned this morning and a detailed report is being typed out. She only made this brief statement to comply with what we decided last week that a statement has to be made today. 

Since she has said a detailed statement will be presented tomorrow, why do you not wait? Because what you want will be in that detailed statement.

MR.AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But when the hon. Minister says, “the situation is under control” and yet 80,000 people are sleeping in the open, is that under control?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. That is why I am saying we wait for a detailed statement. Maybe the details of what kind of control that has been taken will be given to us tomorrow.  She has said that tomorrow by the same time, we shall get that detailed statement and we shall accommodate her on the Order Paper so that a detailed statement, including those particulars, is given. This matter is not being concluded today because I foresee that even during this coming debate, it will come up. But I also promise that we shall accommodate this issue; we shall give it adequate time to be adequately dealt with.

DR.NABWISO: Mr. Speaker, may I know when the substantive Minister of Internal Affairs will be sworn in and start his work?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot say when. It will depend on when he is sworn in. But I do not know whether, because of his absence, there are problems. I see something has been done, it is being handled. When he is ready, he will be sworn in. I think you have done a good job.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member and this House that the Minister of Internal Affairs has been sworn in and he has reported to the office. But I hope that that is not a vote of no confidence as a result of what I said, that the hon. Member wishes that the Minister of Internal Affairs was here. Thank you.

MR.EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This morning as we were coming to Parliament, we saw several people demonstrating, carrying placards. Some of them were around the gates of Parliament, and some wanted to enter. When we tried to investigate, we realised that they were demonstrating against the high rates of electricity by UEB. I would like to find out what steps Parliament would like to take, because this is the second time such group of people is coming to the premises of Parliament. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether Parliament has anything to do with demonstrations, because the Constitution allows demonstrations. Therefore, if these citizens were exercising their constitutional right, let them go ahead, and take note. (Laugher).

MR.ALINTUMA: Mr. Speaker, I think these people came here basically so that we react and chase them away. They are looking for our help. They think Parliament is an organ that can take action against or support their plight.  Thank you.  
THE SPEAKER: Well, I agree with you, but since hon. Ekanya - maybe you and others - saw these people and appreciated why they were demonstrating, you being Members of Parliament representing people should take necessary action. If it is a motion, we shall deal with it.

MR. ERESU:  Mr. Speaker, the issue of the Uganda Confidential for August 16th this year, page 14 implicated officials of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The one mentioned here is Paul Mutiibwa, the Commissioner of Immigration who is being implicated in the trafficking of children from Rwanda through Uganda to Belgium for slavery.  Can the Minister clarify on this matter, because names of other officials are mentioned; like the name of the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry is mentioned, the name of the Inspector General of Police is also mentioned as people who knew about this activity?  Can the Minister clarify?

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say, hon. Member, is that if we are to react from whatever we read in the papers, we shall have no business.  I do not know whether the Minister has seen the paper, so why should you really require her to react, especially when she has told you, she arrived from Katakwi this morning?  Do you think it is necessary? I think there is proper machinery to investigate the matter rather than reacting on everything you see in the paper. You will be bogged down by such reports.  I would rather say, you take this matter to the appropriate Committee, or draw the attention of the Minister at an appropriate time and the answer will be given.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To allay the fears of hon. Ekanya, in my capacity as Vice Chairman of Natural Resources –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we have finished with that issue –(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  We have started discussing the matter related to the tariffs of UEB –(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay, reassure him.

PERSONAL  STATEMENT

PROF.BANZAANA KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to clear the air.  When the hon. Member representing the Workers, hon. Charles Bakkabulindi, stood on a point of order as to whether my dress was suitable for this House, and you ruled that I needed a tie, little did I imagine the consequences that would follow!  (Laughter)

Although I was in this House the same day in the afternoon, because this happened in the morning and everything continued as usual, the newspapers and radio stations had a field day in making wild claims that sounded to my constituents like I had been sacked from Parliament.  In fact, some of the cartoons pictured me as if I was wearing sandals, which was obviously a mis-presentation of reality.  The New Vision newspaper included my name and photograph in its columns of winners and losers - Banzaana Kabwegyere being a loser!  I do not think the hon. Member intended to record me as a loser in the history of this country.  

All this would have been passed for trivia and trifle if my constituents were not invaded with wide rumors that I had actually been removed from Parliament. Mr. Speaker, those can be called negative supporters who poked fun on my active supporters and caused the fight.  I was so perturbed over the weekend because I was told of physical fights arising out of this very ordinary exchange. 

It is for this reason that I want the air cleared; that your ruling could not and did not have any consequences of such a magnitude as to be taken as a removal of Kabwegyere from the House.  My constituents and all my supports, you are here by reassured –(Laughter)- that I am still here representing you, but that the issue of dress and decency is a matter that needs to be looked at.  

At the moment, I do not want to start that debate in this House but time is going to come when the entire nation will research on the identity of a Ugandan and what is most suitable for us in this warm climate, including this House which tends to be overcrowded.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Kabwegyere.   To clear any doubt, I want to state in clear terms that when hon. Kabwegyere was requested to go and get a neck tie, it did not amount to rejecting him from the House.  So for the Members whom hon. Kabwegyere represents, we want to assure you that hon. Kabwegyere is here, and in fact that particular afternoon, he came back and transacted business as required.  I hope this clears the air.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendaula): Mr. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, and for discussion at a later stage, Supplementary Schedule Number 2 of 2000/2001.  I beg to lay the Paper.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION  THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUEANDEXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE


THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendaula): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As already stated, on the 14th June 2001, in conformity with our Constitution, clause 155, I presented, on behalf of His Excellency the President, the Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the fiscal year 2000/2001 and the Budgetary Proposals and the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the fiscal year 2001.  The next day, the 15th, Parliament was convened and as required by the Constitution, I presented the Vote-on-Account which was approved to allow spending from the Consolidated Fund. This was to the 6th Parliament. As you stated already, we are utilising the resources which were approved, and the 6th Parliament never had opportunity to debate and finally pass or appropriate the resources as required by the Constitution. Of course there was no alternative, because the arrangement of our country is such that the term of one Parliament ends at a time after the requirement of the Constitution demands that a budget be presented. That is how we find ourselves in this situation.

When the 7th Parliament took office, the Ministry of Finance distributed copies of the various necessary documents that make it possible for Members of Parliament to debate, then effectively pass the budget. I request the hon. Members to check all the documents that are necessary. These include: 

1. The Background to the Budget 2001/
2002: 

This gives the Member of Parliament an opportunity to appreciate the performance of his or her Government and how the budget has been drawn up.

2.    The Budget Speech 

3.   The Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for Recurrent and Development.  

4.   The Finance Bill.  

When you have those documents, naturally you are able to effectively debate and contribute on the Budget. I have other documents, which we also consider to be very relevant and vital. Each one of you may not have a copy, but these are available in the Member’s library, and they include: 

1.	The Citizens’ Guide to Uganda Budget Process: This gives a background on how we develop the budget, when we start to discuss it and so on. Then with that, the most pronounced activity is fighting of poverty. We have a number of documents that have been prepared. 

2.	Uganda Poverty Status Report. 

3.	Fighting Poverty in Uganda, Poverty Action Fund; because as I will start presenting, and for those of you who have already taken opportunity to read the budget speech, I will, from time to time, refer to PAF funds. It is Poverty Action Funds; and that is properly elaborated in “Fighting Poverty in Uganda” document.  

4	For purpose of ascertaining whether we are in touch, as a Government, with problems that face our economy in as far as investment is concerned, how investments can be attracted and concerns expressed by those who already invest in the economy or those who intend to invest in our economy; we have the “Medium Term Competitive Strategy to the Private Sector 2000/2005.”

These documents, particularly the last three, are already in the library, but we can also ensure that we provide sufficient copies for each one of you. Each year when we have finished presenting the Budget, we present “A Glance at the Budget”. This is a lighter and smaller booklet. It gives an opportunity to the Members of Parliament, as well as the general public, to know how resources have been distributed, what sector takes what, and by what percentage.  

Going to the speech and which I will use, I know for sure each of you has a copy, it is not my intention to go over the speech, because the hon. Members already have their copies. But I will try to go through, in a few minutes, some of the highlights that I feel Members should take note of.

Performance of the economy: Our economy has continued to be strong. The real GDP expanded by 5 per cent, enabling per capita output rise by 2 per cent.  As in previous years, fiscal discipline and sound monetary policy kept inflation to about 5 per cent even in the face of high prices and exchange rate depreciation. The economy remained on track, despite the sharp external terms of trade, clearly demonstrating the benefit of our sound, fiscal and monetary policies and the policies of economic liberalisation.

Projected expenditure and budget out-turn for the Financial Year 2000/2001:  I want you to keep track in that the motion to present the budget starts with a revised revenue expenditure estimate for the fiscal year 2000/2001. Naturally, when the budget is being presented, there must be a review of the out-turn of the Financial Year 2000/2001.  

Government domestic expenditure, last financial year, is projected at Shs. 1,467 billion compared to the approved budget of 1,508 billion. The 97 per cent performance was brought about by a shortfall of Shs.42 billion in URA revenue performance, caused mainly by external shocks of the economy.

I wish to draw the attention of the hon. Members to paragraph 11 up to paragraph 18 of page 4 to page 6 of my budget speech, which pointed out the budget outputs within various sectors, that is, Primary Education, Health, Water, Sanitation, Roads, Inland Water Transport, Electricity and Agriculture. 

Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2001/2002: This is from page 7 of my Budget Speech.  This year’s Budget continues to focus on policies and spending on programs that reflect the following four pillars of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan: Pillar one, measures to promote rapid economic growth and structural transformation. The measure under this pillar also incorporates His Excellency, the President’s Election Manifesto. Pillar Two measures to ensure security and good governance. Pillar Three measures to increase the incomes of the poor and Pillar Four measures to increase the quality of life of the poor.

In particular, this year’s Budget focuses on Export Promotion; implementing the Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture and on improving the quality of public spending, aimed at improving service delivery. Improving the quality of public spending requires action on a number of fronts, which can be highlighted as follows: Strengthening the medium term expenditure framework through the extension of sector-wide approach to more sectors. Programs so far being developed are for education, health and roads; and now for Agriculture, Justice, Law and Order, Water and Sanitation.  This has been our approach.  We are now looking at sector-wide planning; making budgeting more out come oriented. This means the Government moving towards meeting the Poverty Eradication Action Plan objectives, and outcomes in the planning and budgetary process. This will involve extending result-oriented management to all Ministries. This is known in short as ROM.  Ensuring that the Local Governments can efficiently deliver services that meet the needs of the people. 

Following a study we commissioned last year, we are designing a system that will more efficiently transfer funds to the Local Governments. Hence, the Local Governments’ autonomy in resource allocation to suit local priorities and to ensure harmonized and streamlined accountability of funds to the center.

The issue of incorporating or bringing on board the local governments in the planning and in final decision on how to use the resources that are made available is very fundamental, if decentralization is to take root. But at the same time, accountability to the center is very, very important. To this end, we are continuing to assist the local governments to strengthen their capabilities. The local governments will continue to receive capital assistance grants for financing their own development programs, if they have demonstrated adequate capabilities.  

Then we have the Civil Service Pay Reform. Here, quality service delivery is not possible without motivated and professional civil servants. These must be adequately remunerated if they are to be motivated to perform well, and remain in the Public Sector.  To this end, the Ministry of Public Service finalized the Pay Reform Strategy last year. It aims at restoring and preserving the purchasing power of salaries, removing distortions and, over the course of five years, to achieve basic market salary targets for critical positions. I have earmarked shillings 15.6 billion this year to pay increases of varying amounts for officers in the professional and administrative grades,  while lower level staff are receiving a 10 percent increase.  

Strengthening Procurement. When we talk about corruption in Government, we talk about loss of our meagre resources. This is always through procurement.  So, we considered in this year’s Budget that there is a need to strengthen the procurement process.   Government has decentralized the procurement system in order to reduce corruption and associated large financial losses.  

The Central Tender Board is now a supervisory Body to guide procurement units in Government, and I am providing shillings four billion this year to support these units.  What we would like to be appreciated by the hon. Members is that when the procurement process was fully centralized with the Central Tender Board in my Ministry, we at times heard the beneficiaries denying knowledge of what had been procured, or sometimes claiming not to be a party to a procurement even though they were always invited to participate, whenever the Central Tender Board would be considering procurement for a particular department. So now, we have decentralized so that the Central Tender Board remains to play the supervisory role only, so that each Ministry, each district should have its own Tender Committee. 

Strengthening physical discipline. The commitment control system -(Interruption)

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The more I hear the hon. Minister speaking, talking about the figures, wonderful things - it is like whitewashing on a number of items. Accountability, governance, and then finally procurement. 

I know that on accountability, this hon. Minister has never addressed himself to the Auditor General’s Report. Year in, year out, we lose over a billion shillings per annum and nobody tells us where that money goes. He comes here and tells us accountability year in, year out! 

We know that the procurement process and policies of the Ministry of Defence are the most corrupt since independence. Year in, year out we get junk; if they are not helicopters, they are trucks or bad food.  This is public money and the hon. Minister stands before us and says “we have strengthened this, we are going to strengthen here”, when there is a lot of leakage! 

I fail to understand when the hon. Minister stands before us, and talks about governance. Right now, governance, among other things, depends on a proper electoral system -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you stood on a point of clarification. Could you make your point so that it is clarified?

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was coming to the real points. I want clarification on the following. To be brief, number one; when is the Minister going to address himself on the issues in the Auditor General’s Report? 

Number two; can he tell this House what he has done about embezzlement and corruption in the Ministry of Defense, especially as far as their procurement processes and policies are concerned?

Last but not least, I know this House is not empowered to add even one shilling to the Budget in accordance with the provisions of Clause 93 of the Constitution. However, we have a serious problem right now in the Electoral Commission whereby this new process of photographing the voters is going to fail because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, since we are going to have a general debate, I see your point of clarification generating into a general debate on the failures of Government Policy.  Since you will be given an opportunity, why don’t you reserve your contribution, instead of utilizing this clarification to make a substantive contribution to the debate? Because when you ask the Minister of Finance, what to do with the corruption within Defense, surely, I do not know, but I think reserve your contribution.  I will certainly give you an opportunity to make a contribution.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What he was telling us as wonderful is white wash.

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair for the hon. Member to make the point. When we talk about the Auditor General’s report and its contents as presented and dealt with by PAC, that is one body that has all the powers from this House to deal with offenders in the Auditor General’s report. It should be clear that when we finally decide and give authority for appropriation into various votes, we have accounting officers who are appointed and finally Ministries who are supposed to provide accountability to this House, Mr. Speaker.

When we talk about strengthening the fiscal discipline, we introduced the commitment control system and we feel this system has succeeded to some extent.  As a system to control expenditure, and when you are dealing with human beings who have been used to certain systems, it is not easy to receive results all at ago.  I am pleased to report to you that when I consider the arrears that were accumulated prior to introducing the commitment control system, and the arrears that have accrued since we introduced the commitment control system, l am so pleased that we are making progress substantially.  So we shall continue with the system.  

All that we need to call for is this Parliament to take the necessary disciplinary action on those who over shoot their budgets, because we are operating on a cash budget, and naturally our requirement under the commitment control system is that you spend what is available to you.  I have seen reactions in some quarters where suppliers react in a different way; this is not our concern. For us we know we are dealing with Permanent Secretaries to procure.  So we don’t have to do anything with the announcements that are being made by the Ministry of Finance everyday on the Radio on the commitment control.  Surely, we need maximum cooperation if people are not going to have problems with arrears in this country, which really distorts our budgeting; because if we are to start a new year with huge arrears, naturally we have already eaten into that new financial year by settling things we had not planned for in the previous year.

Strengthening financial management and accountability. Hon. Members, I want you to bear with me that we are certainly travelling a long journey in order to effectively implement financial management and accountability in general from all those who handle our resources.  My Ministry has revised the Public Finance Act, and I will present the new Bill to Parliament this Financial Year.  

My Ministry also intends to revise the Treasury Accounting Instructions and Regulations over the coming two years.  We shall also begin designing an Internal Financial Management System taking advantage of information technology.  We intend to hire some accountants; probably you saw the adverts that appeared in the Newspapers last week.

Fighting corruption. The measures I have outlined above, in my view, will help to reduce corruption.

Then I come to the overall funds for the Medium Term Expenditure. Total resources, including total external grants and loans, are projected to increase by 27.5 percent; that is Shs.319.8 billion this year from Shs.2446.3 billion budgeted last year.

Uganda Revenue Authority revenues are projected to increase by 18 percent to Shs.1259 billion; URA revenues will amount to Shs.40.7 billion giving a total of Shs.1300 billion from domestic sources.

Gross in tax revenue will be supported through improved tax administration and through some tax rate increases that I outlined in the Budget Speech.

Non-tax revenue should be increased significantly through improved accountability processes, including the removal of the appropriation-in-aid facility from Ministries and a remission instead of all non-tax revenues to the Consolidated Fund.

Total donor support will amount to shs.1819.8 billion.  The budget support will consist of grants including debt relief and shs.495 billion and Shs.675 of soft loans.  

The debt relief amounts to 495 billion, while the soft loans amount to 673 billion; and the soft loans are based on the highly concessional terms.

Donor project aid will amount to Shs.391 billion and the grants will amount to Shs.26.7 billion.  Not all of these resources are available for financing expenditures, taking into account settled external debts repayment of Shs.143.9 billion.  Clearing of domestic debts of Shs.131.7 billion, including 20 billion due to the former East African Corporation Workers and then the planned saving of 319.3 billion.

The resource available for financing expenditures this year, amounts to Shs.2524.6 billion representing a 19 percent increase over the last year’s budgeted expenditure. These figures can be found in table one (a) of the Budget Speech and in the Draft Estimates.

Expenditure proposals. When we have mobilized all these resources, then the next step is to spend.  So we move to the way we are going to spend the money. Total spending of Shs. 2,524.6 billion budgeted for this year consists of Shs. 1,413.3 billion for Recurrent Expenditure and Shs. 1,111.3 billion for Development Expenditure.  The increase in spending reflects government strategy to spend more resources on strengthening public service delivery, and particularly expanding on basic social services.  The Shs. 2,691,000,000,000 referred to in the Budget Speech consists of the figures that were split in the previous paragraph.  

Government is committed to maintain spending on Poverty Action Fund Programmes as a proportion for this Budget.  In 2001/2002, the share of Poverty Action Fund Programmes, excluding interest payment and spending finance directly by donors, will amount to 35 per cent or Shs.609, 000,000,000 compared to the 18 per cent or Shs. 134,000,000,000 in 1997/98.  The overall domestic deficit defined as Shs. 1,299,700,000,000 of domestic revenue is projected after deducting the expenditure, which is equivalent to 11.7 per cent of GDP.  

I want you to appreciate that when I was giving you what we expect out of Uganda Revenue Authority and the known tax, our total overall available was Shs.1,300,000,000,000 and yet when I came to Expenditure, I gave you a figure that almost doubled. And naturally, this is what I refer to as a deficit. It is 11.7 per cent of our GDP, and it has to be controlled.  The deficit is to be financed with grants and the highly concessional loans, and is fully consistent with our overall macro-economic targets of 7 per cent real GDP growth, five per cent inflation, the low interest rate and sustainable external debt burden - (Interjection).

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Do I understand from the hon. Minister that we have abandoned the Cash Budget, and we are handling deficit financing?

MR. SSENDAULA:  With due respect to the hon. Member, I want you to appreciate how I have used that terminology.  We have an overall expenditure of shs 2,691,000,000,000 whereas the revenue generated is only Shs.1,300,000,000,000. Therefore, a deficit between what we spend and what we have is what I have been referring to.  

Then accelerating Economic Growth and Structural transformation: This is covered on page 14.  

Private Investment Export Promotion Strategy: Under the medium term competitive strategy, government is taking measures to promote private investment and explore Uganda’s potential in the production process and export strategic commodities, while taking advantage of the export opportunities created through the African Gross Opportunity Act (AGOA) of USA, and the recently liberalised trade arrangements with the European Union.  

The strategy concentrates on expanding production, increasing value added through further processing, targeting new markets, strengthening the relevant government institutions and removing regulatory bottlenecks.  

Strategic interventions to support exports - I have said it is our intention to ensure that we support exports.  We will do the following: Provision of supportive infrastructure and services and maintenance of open trade policies.  We also felt that it was necessary to bring together the three government institutions that, in our view, do the same job.  We have Uganda Investment Authority, Export Promotion Board and Uganda Tourist Board. 

We feel when they go out there, they will market the country. People from Investment Authority are requesting investors to come, while those who talk about exports are accessing markets for our products.  In tourism, we tell people to take advantage of our tourist potential. So it is our intention to merge these three bodies.  

Removing unnecessary licensing and regulatory procedures in the Ministry of Finance: We have identified strategic export areas like coffee, textiles, fish, tea, beef, hides & skins and horticultural products, and then determined further the process of adding value on coffee and textiles as we did on fish.  

Provision of Shs. 47,000,000,000 is in support of agricultural exports. Shs. 4,500,000,000 is for coffee planting materials. Shs 1,000,000,000 is for coffee wilt disease control. Shs. 6,500,000,000 is for support of cotton growing. Shs. 2,000,000,000 is for tea planting materials. Shs 22,800,000,000 is for livestock development. Shs. 900,000,000 is for horticultural exports, and Shs.9, 000,000,000 is for fish landing sites in the support of aquarium, and funding the feasibility study for an abattoir.

I would like to point out to hon. Members that these figures have been revised upwards since the budget speech. You recall that when I presented the budget, for those of you who were Members of the Sixth Parliament, the President expressed his concern about our meagre earnings from exports that were less than $500,000,000 a year. This came about as a result of the poor earnings from coffee.  

I want you to appreciate that in 1994, a ton of coffee was $ 3,433 and by yesterday a ton of coffee was $484.  So our export, that is the in-flow, has certainly reduced because of the poor prices we are getting out of the main export. 

The concern of the President on that day - as you have to appreciate when I addressed myself, and as I continue to address myself, and when I am presenting a Budget or explaining, I do this on behalf of the President. The requirement of the Constitution is very clear; it is the President to prepare and present.   So here he expressed concern. From that time, we have revised these figures, which I have mentioned, upwards by an extra shs.20billion, so that we can boost the exports of this country.

Financial sector strengthening. The new Financial Institutions Bill is to be tabled before Parliament this year. The new Micro Finance Bill is to be tabled before Parliament this year. Provisional micro credits should be expanded sharply this year with the help of a shs.15billion loan from ADB through the Rural Micro Finance Credit Support Programme, and the seed capital from other partners. Expanded micro finance is a major component of the plan for the modernization of Agriculture.

Provision and Utility Reform Planned Divestiture. The Government of Uganda is interested in the Dairy Corporation, the National Insurance Corporation, the Coffee Marketing Board and Transocean; planned floatation of Kinyara Sugar Works on Stock Exchange; Minority Government Stock-holding in Stanbic Bank, Barclays Bank, Bank of Baroda, Kakira Sugar Works and Apollo Hotel Corporation to be offered to the general public.  Assets over three new power companies to be leased to Private Sector Concessionaires for management, and investment.
Main Roads Improvement. Continuation of a Ten-Year Programme through shs.100billion of capital spending. Six new road projects to start: Busunju – Kiboga, Kiboga – Hoima, Nebbi – Arua, Nebbi – Pakwach, Ntungamo – Kagamba, and Kyotera – Mutukula.

Commercial Justice Reform.Enhancing reforms in this sector, so as to address the difficulties in enforcing contracts and recovering debts, which have been identified as critical bottlenecks to Private Sector Corporations.

The activities include, among others, amendments to commercial laws and the Advocates Act in order to improve the transparency of commercial legal services, as well as building the capacity of legal professionals.

Higher & Tertiary Education. Preparation of the plan for development of community polytechnics.  

-	Two-window scheme to be introduced for selection to higher learning and tertiary institutions.
-	Shs.6.4billion, additional funding for sponsoring a further two thousand students at Makerere University, and shs.200million to licensed Universities as a research grant.

Security. Defence Reform Programme has been adopted. Justice, Law and Order – finalization of an overall strategy plan.  Shs.2billion, to reduce the backlog of criminal court cases.  Cost saving of shs.1.8billion, to increased emphasis on Prisons farm projects, so that the Prisons Farms can be productive.

Increasing the incomes of the poor through the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture.  This is covered on page 21.  I think I would not bore you, by going through what is there, because all of you have the speech.  

Increasing the quality of life of the poor - this is again covered on page 23. 

Conclusion.Mr. Speaker, we had tax measures, which included tax on airtime; tax on bottled water; increased tax on cigarettes; tariff code – that is, the tax codes will be amended appropriately. The income tax measures – these are technical amendments which include amending of the tariff codes.  

You recall the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, did present before this House some of the laws that require urgent amendments. To make it possible for us to access markets, particularly, the US markets under AGOA. I hope we will be able to discuss these amendments, get them passed, and then we improve and meet the requirements of the prospective buyers of our commodities.

Their concern was basically around the penalties, because the penalties were extremely too low. There was fear that commodities from countries which are permitted to export tax-free into the US market, other countries could easily use this route through our country.  Say, they can bring in the goods, or smuggle them into our countries, and then see them re-exported to these markets abroad. So, there was a need to improve on the punishments given, should such an act be detected.

As part of the Budget speech that I presented on the 14th of June, I provide the medium term Budget framework, and the medium term expenditure framework for the next three years.  For the hon. Members who were in the 6th Parliament, you recall that this House passed a Budget Act, which requires that we provide in advance to the Members information on how we intend to allocate resources. So, I would like you to take interest, when you are looking at the Budget speech, to see the tables which are at the back. One of the tables, that is, Table 3 gives you the medium-term expenditure framework for the years 1999/2000 to 2003/2004. The same tables are repeated in the main big volume; The Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure, Recurrent and Development. 

Therefore, I have this to say. That I have fully complied with the provision of the Budget Act, which requires me to submit to Parliament well in advance, our budgetary plan over the medium term.  I trust, hon. Members, you will find plenty of material in both the budget speech, and Draft Estimates on which they can base timely discussion of this year’s Budget.  Thank you.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  The debate is now open.

MR. MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  But before I address myself to the motion on the Floor, I would like you to allow me to deliver a very warm message to you, and to the hon. Members, from the workers, not of the world, but those of Uganda.

I now beg to turn to the motion. Whereas I support the motion on the Floor, there are some critical issues touching on employment that I would like to raise on behalf of the workers of this country. The Minister of Finance and Economic Planning in his Budget Speech - to be precise in paragraph 3 - stated that the Budget he was going to present was aimed at providing resources for implementing President Museveni’s manifesto. Having read through this budget, I think the statement should have been that it was going to provide resources to implement part of the President’s manifesto. 

If you look at page 111 of the President’s manifesto, he says that one of his main goals was to create employment for the growing population of the youth, especially the school leavers. But the Budget speech says nothing or addresses nothing on employment as a deliberate and specific policy of action for Government. Yet I think that creation of employment is a very important issue just as poverty and modernisation of agriculture.  The question that has come to my mind is that, if there can be deliberate policies for eradication of poverty, deliberate and specific policies for modernisation of agriculture, why can there not be deliberate and very specific policies for the creation of employment?

The thinking in this country has been that employment creation can be left to be an assumed ramification of implementation of other Government policies. Some people have argued that if you stimulate investment growth, then you automatically create employment. But if there are specific figures, say for poverty - because if you look at the Budget, we are told that by 2017 only about 10 per cent of Ugandans should be living in absolute poverty. Why can there not be a plan to ensure that maybe the same number or any figure should be the people who should be unemployed?  I therefore urge Government to put in place an employment policy. 

If you read the Budget Speech and the President’s manifesto, you will find that there has been investment growth in this country, and jobs have been created.  However, one problem in the Trade Union Movement is that, some of the jobs created have been taken over by foreigners, even where we have Ugandans with the requisite skills. An example is the joint venture between Sterling and Strabag that is handling the road construction between Bugiri and Malaba. 

There are Kenyans employed as bulldozer drivers, yet we have an army of unemployed people who can drive bulldozers and other motor vehicles! And the unfortunate thing is that, the Kenyan bulldozer drivers earn more than our own Ugandan people! A Kenyan bulldozer driver earns Shs.400,000 while a Ugandan gets Shs.150,000. This is information I got from the Building Workers’ Union, the union responsible for organising workers in the building and construction industry.

Foreigners have not only taken jobs away from us, but even the conditions of work in this country are poor and need critical attention by the Government. Unfortunately, the conditions of employment have not been taken as a serious matter, even where it touches on the violation of the human dignity of workers. 

In Uganda, people work under very difficult conditions characterised by long working hours, at times up to 18 hours, without over-time allowance. There is job insecurity, which arises out of arbitrary dismissal; there is sexual harassment, especially, in the case of young girls who come for internship. Before they get confirmed, some managers insist that they pass the ‘carpet interview’. This is a fact, and the salaries are obviously low. There is also violation of rights of women relating to maternity.  

Turning to income tax, which is also addressed in the Minister’s speech, on paragraph 99, the Minister says that the current income tax system is modelled on the international basic practice. He continues to say that the tax is fair to the taxpayers. Unless the Ministry of Finance has coined its own definition of ‘fair’, I wish to submit that the workers of this country find the income tax, especially, Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE) one of the most unfair taxes. The Uganda Revenue Authority finds it easier to tax those employed in the formal sector, yet there are many people who earn a lot of money but because they do their work in the informal sector, they are not taxed as heavily as those in the formal sector employment. A study carried out – (Interruption)

MR.SEBALU: Mr. Speaker, I am giving information to the hon. Member about Pay-As-You-Earn. The hon. Minister never touched this important point which, in my opinion, is a killer tax. I know very well that this is a mandatory tax, but in the case of secondary teachers who earn around 320,000 per month, a tax of about 60,000 is deducted. This is about 30 per cent, and it is very excessive and uncalled for, for a group that earns very little and yet a lot is expected from them. How do we expect such people to be motivated in their work? 

Even the MPs have a tax of about Shs.330,000 deducted, leaving about Shs.770,000 as their salary. This is a very small salary yet the public is given an impression that Members of Parliament are given a lot of money. Can the hon. Minister explain to the satisfaction of this House so as to allay the fears of the general public that a lot of money is paid to the Members of Parliament?  That is my submission.

MR.WANDERA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for that information. The Federation of Uganda Employers carried out a study on the question of Pay-As-You-Earn and found that in certain cases, employees pay up to 40 per cent of their income on taxes in terms of Pay-As-You-Earn, VAT, Graduated Tax and other taxes. This, the report states, leaves the workers with less than enough money to make them meet their basic needs like housing, food and clothing and to save.  If workers cannot meet their basic needs, this also frustrates the Government policy to fight poverty. 

With low savings, it reduces the supply of loanable funds. If the supply of loanable funds is low, the cost of borrowing becomes high, and if the cost of borrowing becomes high, this impedes investment. With impediment to investment, this will affect growth and creation of employment, which as I said earlier on, is a stated goal of the President in his manifesto. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.
MR.MUTEBI KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I thank the Government for the good macro-policies put in place, which have curbed inflation and stimulated economic growth. But I appeal to Government to do something about micro-pro-economy because this is what puts money in the common man’s bag. 

I want to restrict my contribution to agriculture. Of recent, Government has started to turn to the improvement of agriculture because at the beginning, the Government was advocating for industry. We used to tell Government that since Uganda is agriculturally based, the industry to flourish should be agriculturally based, because the inputs would be readily available. I am happy that the trend is now changing. But there is still a lot to be done to improve on agriculture, because the agriculture we have today has been depending on the peasants, who have been depending on their mass power with very little support from Government. 

I have got a lot of faith in the Plan to Modernise Agriculture (PMA), but what I would like to report here is that PMA now is trying to do what we lost. For example, in the 1960s, we used to produce half a million bales of cotton. Now we are trying to produce 400,000 bales of cotton using PMA. So the PMA is a plan to revive what we have lost. Since we have lost time and money, we need to do a lot to be on track again. Our agriculture lacks incentives.  

During most of our campaigns, you could afford to move with the youth the whole day on your pick-up or your lorry or your car because they have nothing to do. They have nothing to do - yes - because in agriculture there are no incentives.   Everybody is told to do agriculture, a field where there are no incentives at all. We need to have some radical changes in agriculture by directly injecting money from the budget into it. 

In the last two weeks, the budget office here gave us an analysis of the budget performance. Those who have got this piece of paper, on page 5, it is indicated that agriculture was last year given only 1.46 per cent of the budget allocation. This year, the budget allocation is only 1.37 of the total budget of this country. We cannot say agriculture is the backbone of our economy when we are injecting only 1.3 per cent in agriculture. We have to invest in agriculture. I know the Minister of Finance he has put enough money in agriculture, but I say, ‘no’ because there are still many things which we need in agriculture which we have not seen. 

In agriculture today, we do not have a policy on food security -(Interruption)

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, I know I will have a chance to reply when everybody has contributed. But I beg you to allow me at times when what is being stated is turning facts so that I can bring back the House. One, the allocation to agriculture is far much higher than what the hon. Member is stating. When we talk about agriculture, we are not only looking at the Ministry of Agriculture. We are looking at all other components that relate to the Ministry of Agriculture at the end of the day or relate to agriculture. For example, money that goes into NARO, that is all part of agriculture and other related bodies. 

When we are looking at these figures, we must always put into account both recurrent and capital because all of these are funds supposed to support that particular sector.  I would like the hon. Members to study the big book, which I provided because it provides all the money, both in local and foreign currency, to support the various activities particularly in agriculture. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.KITYO: Thank you for the information, but what I was referring to was the money injected in the budget, excluding donors. I think this Government should put our own money into agriculture, excluding donors. When you add on money from donors, of course, the figures change and they look very attractive, but we have also to inject our own money into agriculture for our development.

Another big problem in agriculture is taxation. Although they say they are not taxing tractors, if you read here, you wonder at the way tractors are taxed. For example, a mini-bus in total is taxed 43 per cent but the tractor is taxed 62 per cent, yet somebody who buys a mini-bus tomorrow earns money, and the one who buys a tractor will take 9 months without getting money. Are we developing agriculture or not? So we need to do something. That is why –(Interruption) 

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the hon. Member, surely I think it would be good if he can clarify which area of the tractor that is charged a tax of 60 per cent. I do not know of that tax because I am not taxing a tractor.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kityo, according to the Minister of Finance, the figures you are giving are inaccurate. Can you substantiate and help us? Is it exaggeration or are you stating facts?

MR.KITYO: I want to give the figures, Mr. Speaker. The tax imposed is import duty, VAT, withholding tax and import licence commission. On a tractor, import duty is zero per cent, VAT is zero per cent, withholding tax is four per cent, and import license commission is two per cent. 

Implements, import duty is zero per cent, Vat is 17 per cent, withholding tax is four per cent and import license commission is two per cent.  

Spares: import duty is zero percent, VAT is 17 per cent, withholding tax is four per cent, and import license commission is two per cent.  The total of that comes to 62 per cent - (Laughter)- I now want to give you the tax on a minibus - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we have to go very far about this. According to him, that is 62 per cent but I think others are looking at it differently.  So, let us leave it as that, and you may say that is his opinion.  He may be right, he may be wrong, but that is his conclusion. 

You see, we now understand what he was saying.  Whether the Members believe him that, that is 62 per cent tax, that is a different matter. Otherwise, that is how he has justified his figure by adding different taxes, and then getting 62 per cent. I see your point but that is his point anyway.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, I get worried when we conclude such a controversial matter like this. Obviously the hon. Member’s computation of the taxes is wrong. So, when we say it is his opinion and we leave it at that, yet on a number of occasions we have been getting people striking, coming to hit us here at Parliament - what if we get a problem tomorrow with the farmers? Why do we not allow the Minister to guide the Member, and show him how taxes are computed?

THE SPEAKER: From the reaction, the consensus was that they did not agree with the hon. Member.  That one I read, that is why I did not want to disrupt him. He said how he got it, but the consensus was that his conclusion was wrong -(Interjection)- hon. Member, we are in a general debate.  The understanding of these things is different, but I have gathered that the House did not agree with the hon. Member.  I think we leave it at that and we proceed.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, it will be helpful if the Minister can give the actual taxes so that for purposes of record, we have the proper figures for taxes on this very important agricultural implement, rather than simply saying that obviously he is wrong, that is his opinion.  I think the Minister should give the correct opinion.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister is the one who moved a motion, and I do not think at this time when you get such a point, he will be right to immediately jump up and give the detailed figures. Apparently, my assessment is that when the hon. Member started giving two per cent, four per cent, I think the Minister was contented with that.  The only problem was the adding up to 62 per cent.  But I imagine at the end of the debate, I will give him an opportunity, because I think he is jotting down all this. His technical staff behind me are also doing the same, so that we get a researched answer. I think we leave it like that.  It is a general debate, but Members have indicated that they do not agree with his conclusion.  The Minister will definitely give us a correct answer -(Interjection)- why do we not allow hon. Kityo to conclude? 

MR. KITYO: Mr. Speaker, no wonder this country had about 2000 tractors in the last two years; and now we have about 1000 countrywide. Kenyans have purchased most of the tractors because Ugandans cannot buy spares, which are highly taxed, and this is true.  The trek of tractors is going to Kenya. They are rehabilitated and then resold back to Uganda. So, the Ministry of Finance should look into the taxation of agricultural implements and tractors. 

In conclusion, I would like to see a deliberate programme for the export of Ugandan crops in external markets.  Uganda has got a very small market, not only because people are poor, but also because 90 per cent of Ugandans are farmers.  So, everybody can have an agricultural product to eat. In Europe, the farmers are five per cent and the buyers are 95 per cent.  In Uganda we are 90 per cent farmers and 10 per cent consumers. So the market is tight.  That is why you see everybody running into Owino, Kalerwe and Nakawa markets, and then their products are bought at a give-away price.  We need a deliberate programme for export.  This is possible, but nobody has put down his head to see that we export our good products to the European Markets. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AADROA ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. For me, I consider the National Budget, particularly the Development Expenditure, the best way of sharing the national cake.  I totally disagree with the people who think that if the President appoints one person as a Minister, a Vice President, Minister of State, from any part of the country, that is their national cake, as has always been the debate in the newspapers and so on.  

It is also true that it is through the National Budget that the President can fulfil the manifesto he made in the campaigns. But, Mr. Speaker, I am yet to know from the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Energy and the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications, as to what they did with the monies that were budgeted in the previous Budgets for the construction of the Karuma-Arua-Pakwach roads and the Nyagak projects.  In the 1999/2000 Budget, 17 billion Shillings was provided for the construction of Karuma-Pakwach road, but nothing was done on the ground.  In the year 2000/2001 the same road was allocated 17 billion, and yesterday I came by road from Malachi, I did not see any single work. In the current Budget they are talking of another 17 billion.  This is a clear reason why the people of Arua refused to vote for President Museveni in the recently concluded Presidential Elections.  I am a bit disappointed that the former substantive Minister of the two Ministries has been retained in these Ministries, which means nothing is going to change again between the year 2001- 2006. 

It is therefore illogical for the President to have told the people of Uganda that he needed people who supported him in order to fulfill his Manifesto, when he has a team that supports him, and they continue to let him down in the implementation of his Manifesto.  You can be a Vice President in this country, but you will have no influence on the decaying industries in your sub region; you can be a Vice President in this country, you will fail to rehabilitate say, Luwero Triangle; you can be a Speaker, and you will have no influence to tarmac the road from Arua to Karuma. You can be a key man of the President; the best example is the District of Rukungiri, we have key leaders in the Movement such as the hon. Amama Mbabazi, the hon. Prof. Kagonyera, the hon. Brig. Jim Muhwezi, the Retired Col. Kiiza Besigye; 15 years down the road they have been in this Government, Government has not even tarmacked one kilometer of  road in Rukungiri District  -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: There is a Minister in charge of roads.

MR. AWUZU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the right of the member on the Floor to say what he thinks is right, but when he mis-leads the House, I think he should withdraw the statement, because in the Ministry of Works, we have got an urban road resealing unit, which tarmacs roads in four towns in Uganda every Financial Year.  Last Financial Year, we tarmacked more than 2 kilometers of roads in Rukungiri –(Laughter). Unless the roads we tarmacked last Financial Year in Rukungiri have been washed away. Currently we have begun operations on tarmacking the road from Ntugamo through Kagamba to Rukungiri and Congo border.  Therefore, in both cases his statements are not correct.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much and thank you hon. Onzima for giving way.  I wish to inform the House that it is great to learn that hon. Onzima knows that the regions do not matter, because it is in this same House that he has always consistently said that everything goes to the West.  I am glad he now realizes that he has been consistently incorrect in his assessment.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. MATEMBE: I am seeking clarification from hon. Onzima.  Hon. Onzima said, that because of not working on that road, Arua has persistently refused to vote for His Excellency the President, and yet he has observed that in Rukungiri, no road at all has been worked on, and the people have persistently voted for the President with 99 percent. Is it therefore, another reason that the people of Arua have persistently refused to vote the President? I think he should go back and check for that reason and ensure that next time they do better.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform the hon. Member and the whole House that it is clear that Government does not operate on the weight of Ministers or Vice Presidents, but it has a master plan.  Government implements that master plan every year.  I hope he takes note of that.

THE SPEAKER:  Precede, hon. Onzima.

MR. ONZIMA:  Mr. Speaker, I thought the Minister of Finance had something to say, but since he has –(Laughter)

MR. SSENDAULA:  Mr. Speaker, I have certainly something to say, and l will say it very loudly and clearly.  There are certain basic plans for different activities and sectors.  We have the ten-year road program, which is financed with 100 billion.  Under that plan, we have sought finances to work on those roads that we have selected.  There is a process before we can finally say we are now going to undertake that road. We have to make economic returns on the road, even if it is money directly from donors, where they tell us to decide on the roads to be constructed. 

There are methods that are used, for example, we get the statistics of the number of vehicles, economic return of the road and so on, before we can release money for the road to be constructed. Nobody takes away money from the budget. All that happens is that we present the intentions, and then within that budget year, we may be able to implement them. But if the resources have not been achieved and we fail to implement our intentions, then it goes into the next year. That is why you find that the previous year’s item appears, and if it was not carried out, then they carry it forward to the next year. The road that you are referring to is certainly one of those within our Ten-year Road Programme for which I am seeking financing to a tune of Shs.100 billion, and I am sure I will get it. Thank you.

MR.ALINTUMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very glad hon. Ssendaula tells us that we should consider the economic strength of an area before a road can be constructed. Now, it is the time for me to ask the Minister of Finance if he means that we consider the economic strength of an area before a road can be constructed. 

We have destinations where we have a lot of resources like roads joining us to Lake Victoria and, I could mention one, that is the road from Masaka town to Bukakata. If we look into the resources of this country, we have fish and that road has been sidelined for a very long time. So I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Finance if that road was considered? It is a very specific road as far as economic returns for this country is concerned.

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, I request the Ministry of Works to avail the hon. Members a copy of the document about the roads we have to cover within the Ten-year Road Programme. This is because the road he is referring to will undergo the economic return study in 2002 to 2003, and then we move forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We have noted that the House is interested in roads generally and many Members will raise questions and clarifications. The Member holding the Floor is hon. Onzima. Instead of interrupting him with so many clarifications that are local to our areas, I think we should allow him to proceed. But of course the sector Minister will take into account the observations that will come from the Floor, and at the end of the debate or some time during the debate, tell us the policy being followed in the Ministry about roads and other issues. Would you proceed, hon. Onzima?

MR.ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope you will do me a favour and consider all this time that has been -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you two or three minutes.

MR.ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to draw the attention of the hon. Minister of Finance to the fact that the question of looking for funds to construct the Karuma-Arua road is irrelevant. It is irrelevant because in the 6th Parliament, I consistently informed the House that when the President came for campaigns in 1996 in Maracha, he summoned all his agents, then including Onzima, to a meeting in Anyafio State Lodge. 

He categorically told the people of West Nile that the Government had secured US$800 million for constructing that road. In fact, that very day he summoned us, he said he had held a meeting with the then Minister of Finance, Mayanja Nkangi. Those were his very words -(Interruption). Yes, it is on record. That is what he told us in that meeting, and that Government also secured US$2 million on electricity which, I think, was paid by Kenya, which money he said he had directed Mayanja Nkangi to use on the construction on Nyangak. It is on record; you can check in the Hansard. So, for us, the people of West Nile, we know that the money is either - I do not know, it might have been used for some other purposes or the President deliberately chose to mislead us. I was in that meeting. 

On the issue of the voting pattern in Rukungiri, I cannot tell because the pattern of voting in the presidential election varied from one region to another or from one district to another, but as I said, for us in Arua, that was the reason.  

And for the Ministerial Appointments, I have never stood on the Floor of this House that Ministers should be appointed so that development can be carried to those areas. I had only said that, let every part of this country have a say in the running of this country, especially when it concerns key Ministries. And I stand by that. So, this goes to the Rt. hon. Prof. Kagonyera. I stand by that; let politics be seen across this country, but not appointing Ministers for purposes of development and so on.

As I wind up, the key point I want to raise here is that, the Government under President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni should have clear, tangible, preferential development plans for each and every region in this country so that we see a Government that is for all parts of the country. And when he makes a commitment, that he has secured funds for a particular project, whether that project is in Karamoja for building dams, whether it is for constructing roads in Bunyoro, let those plans be fulfilled,since action speaks louder than words. Otherwise, if that does not happen between now and 2006, we shall again fight very hard to deny President Museveni votes in Arua, or any other person he is going to anoint to succeed him - (Interruption). You cannot rule out the possibility that the man is not going to stand in 2006; this is Africa. The Constitution can be amended any time like Chiluba attempted to do. So, these are clear signals I want to send to the Head of State. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo South, Wakiso): Mr. Speaker, not long ago, we got explanations from the Government as to why the President had requested to expand the Cabinet. One of the reasons we were given was that they wanted specific supervision - a supervisor for each department. It is surprising for the hon. Minister of Finance to come to this House and tell us that there are departments, which they have realised or he has realised are doing similar things. He cited Uganda Investment Authority, Export Promotion Council and the Tourism Board. I think this is a contradiction, that Government will continue judging itself as to where they need specific supervision and where they need to make a merger. I do not know what the hon. Minister has to say about that.  

Again in his speech, he talked of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture and a number of items have been enumerated; ways of implementing this, and one of the issues is to electrify the rural areas. I do not know how this is going to be implemented when the electricity bills are going up, when people, even those who have better incomes than the rural have started demonstrating. And they talk of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture by electrifying the rural areas!  

Corruption: Whatever we do in Uganda, corruption must be addressed as problem number one. Not enough attention has been given fighting to corruption, considering that Uganda was rated third amongst the most corrupt countries in the world. After expanding the Cabinet, I want to assure you that we have created breeding grounds for the corrupt to continue with their job.
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, there is a Minister in charge of fighting corruption.  She has something to say.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ETHICS & INTEGRITY) (Mrs. Miria Matembe): Mr. Speaker, the information I want to give to the hon. Member and the House, is that it is important if they get access to that report on the Internet, read it properly and internalise it well. They will be able to contribute very intelligently here, having read that report.  Because, what the hon. Member is saying, is that Uganda is rated the most corrupt among all the countries; that is not even correct, because not every country in this -(Interruption)

MR.KIBAALE: Mr. Speaker, from what the Minister of Ethics has said in answering hon. Kikungwe, I read and understand that she is saying we are not intelligently contributing in this House because we have not read what is on the Internet as she has referred. Is she in order? Is it ethical as well for the hon. Member to impute that we are unintelligently contributing to the debate in this House?

THE SPEAKER: The Minister was giving information in respect of one aspect which hon. Kikungwe was talking about, and that was the rating of Uganda as the third most corrupt country in the world.  And the Minister was saying it is necessary to internalise the report that gave that assessment.  Otherwise, if you have not read it - I think that is how she was developing -  you may not be competently dealing with that aspect.  So she was not saying that when Members are contributing, they are not contributing intelligently.

MRS.MATEMBE: Thank you Mr. Speaker, for that wise, intelligent ruling because my information was specifically in relation to that item. And this is the third time I have heard Members alluding to that report. I decided to stand here because the nature of the contribution they make indicates that they may not have read the report. Because if they did, he would not say that this is the third most corrupt country in the whole world. Because for instance -(Interruption)

MR.SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Point of clarification.
THE SPEAKER: No, let her develop the information really.

MRS.MATEMBE: If he had read, he would not have made that statement, because it is not all the countries of the world that were surveyed. And even then, it is not a consistent survey of countries, which have been surveyed for the last three times to be able to rate them accordingly. This year, they investigate, survey about 50, next year, leave the other 50 and go to about 20 new countries. So, how can you be able to compare unless you have surveyed consecutively?  Therefore, what I am saying is, could the Members access this report and read it so that they can be able -(Interruption)

MR.SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us not use points of order to choke people from making points. She is giving information. When somebody is giving information and you do not believe it, that does not justify you to say that the person is out of order. Let her finish and then we see whether she is in order or out of order.

MRS.MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, I am inviting the Members in this House to access this report on the Internet. It is in your interest if you are to be able to effectively represent even your constituencies here and be able to answer the question why we are third most corrupt. It is important for you hon. Members to access this report and read it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, since you are in charge of this sector and we are handicapped, we do not have access to the Internet, as you were saying (Applause). The best way to handle this matter so that we are also informed about this report is for you to avail us the relevant portions of the report. Since you have it, I request you to avail us the copies within two or three days, then we shall discuss this issue intelligently. (Applause).

MRS. MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I agree that I should get this report, but the House has its own computer center and there is a Research Department. I thought that they could access the report on the Internet - (Interruption).
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have already decided on this issue, you do not have to labour on it.  Please avail us the copies and then we shall finish the matter.

MRS. MATEMBE: Okay, Mr. Speaker – (Interjection). Besides the report, I will make a statement that will help the hon. Members to understand the report.

MR. KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Let me take this opportunity, maybe to educate the hon. Member that, a survey only covers a particular size.  It does not go all over.  This was a sample where Uganda was included in the survey. So out of that it was ranked third.

The hon. Minister did tell us that in 1994, a metric ton of coffee could fetch Uganda over 3000 dollars, and that by close of business yesterday, it could only fetch 400 dollars.  I have looked at the Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture, and what I have grasped out of it is that, much of the funds to implement the Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture is going to be spent on training, but the required production is likely to take very long or not to come by at all.  In spite of the declining prices he has mentioned, Government has only continued to shy away from its responsibility of putting in place some of the crucial things that are needed in agriculture.  

Government is aware that what determines the price is the simple theory of demand and supply, and the farmers are subject to a lot of torture, because Government has decided to run away from its responsibility.  Assuming Government had to put in place, say, storage facilities – this is what I would expect in the Plan For Modernization Of Agriculture because this would sort of make farmers hoard stock and sell only when the prices have increased. But this is not given attention.  This is why we have continued to hear His Excellency the President talking about the falling coffee prices and rising oil prices.  Thank you very much. (Mr Wadri rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Member for Terego, I thought you contributed in the other debate? (Interjection) But we agreed to give opportunity to those who were not able to contribute in the previous debate. I will give you the opportunity, but let us first deal with those who did not.

DR. JONNY BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): I want to start by congratulating you and your Deputy upon your posts, and I stand here to support the motion.  I am inestimably surprised that what puts us at stake in most times is not budgeted for; that is the type of disaster.  I would like to say that such a thing should be monitored in village committees, sub-county committees and county committees, which should be attended to by the RDC and CAOs before they make their reports to their different Ministries.  

These disasters concern health, agriculture, famine, and earthquakes, but they vary from community to community. Unfortunately, the Disaster Preparedness Ministry handles only those which are endorsed by Government, but when there is a disaster of failing to sell the maize and coffee in Luuka, Disaster Preparedness does not handle it, and yet people don’t have what to eat!  When there is a disaster of a minor outbreak of disease in a small village, the Disaster Preparedness Ministry does not hold it!  That is why I say, if they have not been visiting these districts, this time they should do so, because, you will be surprised that most of them do not know where some of these districts are located, and the populace has not felt their presence  -(Prof Kagonyera rose_). I know he wants to inform me, but since I am also in Uganda I think I am aware –(Interruption).

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member has made a far-reaching allegation about the level of ignorance of Ministers in this Government.  Is it in order for him to make such a serious allegation without substantive examples? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the point of order is that the Ministers do not know the districts, can you substantiate?

DR. BULAMU: Mr. Speaker, diplomatically, I am also saying that since they have known from me that the people want them to visit their districts, I hope they will start going there.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, a point of order was raised, because you said that the Ministers don’t know some of the districts; you may be right, and therefore, if you are right, you substantiate. But if you cannot, then you withdraw that particular statement and proceed.

DR. BULAMU:  Mr.. Speaker, hon. Kagonyera knows exactly what it is and his friends know which districts they have never visited in the last five years. But for the sake of pleasing them, because they are Ministers and I am not, I withdraw –(Laughter)-. Mr. Speaker, the disaster preparedness should be handled on village level, and I hope the hon. Member will also not refute that the RDCs hardly go to these villages.  If Government put in place an Obligatory Committee, which must meet in every constituency every month, then the RDCs and CAOs would report what they know, not necessarily from the GISOs.  They would be bound to visit the places of disaster; be it disaster of infant mortality, maternal mortality, famine, marketing of coffee or maize and so on and so forth.  We are saying this, because most of the elected leaders don’t visit villages.  Therefore – (Interruption)

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   I am irked by the allegations of the hon. Member, because he is talking of RDCs, that they are not aware of what happens in the districts.   I am speaking from experience; RDCs handle most of the work that goes on in the districts.  They visit every village; they are responsible for security; they look at all disasters.   It is unfortunate that many Members sit in their offices and draw conclusions that RDCs don’t travel, but of all the Government officers, the RDCs are the most effective.  In fact all the information you get in Government offices is always provided by RDCs.  So I wish to inform my colleague that he should not draw conclusions that are not backed by facts, because I have the facts; l have been an RDC for a long period and I know what happens.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. BULAMU:  Mr. Speaker, I thank him for the information.   But if he was careful, he would have known that they have created enmity with people who campaigned for them in their constituencies. 

However, I am saying if Disaster Committees were formed, the Ministers in their offices would get correct information if these elected and appointed officials were there.  It is to this tune that I am saying when you read such a wonderful preamble of the Budget, and you do not tell us how you are going to finance the disaster prepared response, some of us get alarmed; because we were not ready to solve disaster by crisis.   Like the Minister said here, ‘we were lucky he has given us 200,000,000/=.’  Is it by crisis?   Is it budgeted for?  Are disasters outside Katakwi budgeted for?  I would be very grateful if they were also included.  Yes, the bell has gone; it is very unfair, because I have not come to my point yet – (Laughter).

MR. MBABAZI KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi East, Kanungu):  Thank you Mr. Speaker and the Members of the House.  I bring first of all, a message of gratitude from Kanungu people for having given them the status of a district.  That means you acknowledged their remoteness and economic viability.  

I want to comment on the Budget Speech and the emphasis that the Government is putting on non-traditional exports as a way of boosting our economy.  I think this is timely, if not overdue, because our previous attempts as a country to promote traditional agricultural products have failed consistently. Many countries who would import our commodities can produce them at cheaper costs, and also our farmers have had it rough in that they depend on land, on manual labour and on weather, which people in developed countries have already overcome.  

Although there is an emphasis on promoting non-traditional exports, tourism being a key factor, I want to comment about. I think there is a key weakness on the part of Government in that a lot is said about tourism, but very little is done to facilitate the Tourism Industry. As I speak about this, in Kinkiizi we have at least two of the top tourist attractions in this country such as the Bwindi Gorrilla National Park and the Queen Elizabeth National Park. But the poor state of roads has made it almost impossible for tourists to reach these places.  What use, therefore, is it for the Government to plan to earn more from tourism when the roads have not been maintained?  

I have a group of tourists from United Kingdom who have just gone to Kinkiizi. They bargained with two taxi operators here in Kampala, to take them to Bwindi and Queen Elizabeth National Park; they had to choose between taking a 4WD at a cost of $120 per day or a regular Mini bus at the cost of $40 per day. They opted for the latter and never reached there. 

Although Kanungu has now become a district, and the national policy on road maintenance stipulates that there should be road maintenance equipment on every district, I regret to say, and I would like to bring it to your attention that the people of Kanungu district did not inherit any road maintenance equipment, yet we have a lot of treasure. I consider this to be an economic disaster for the country to be planning to earn more from tourism, when the same district that has the key tourist attractions has actually got no road equipment at its disposal. So, I would like to beg this House and the Government to consider this as a matter of economic emergency that the new district of Kanungu gets access to road maintenance equipment.

I also want to contribute on the health service delivery in our country.  I have noted that in this Budget Speech, as well as in the President’s Address, the focus of Government in improving the health of our citizens is through increasing the number of health centers, so as to increase access to them, as well as access to doctors. This will help quite a lot.  

Indeed, one of the saddening moments I have when I am in my constituency is to see malaria patients having convulsions, being pushed on a push-bike in order to get them to a health centre.  I therefore, hail the move to increase access to health centres.  At the same time, I have noted that Government is working hard to increase medical supplies in the health centres –(Interruptions)

MRS. BALEMEZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to be clarified as to whether Kanungu District Commission completed its findings.  Maybe that could be the reason why Kanungu is not being facilitated with the other equipment as the hon. Member is saying. Could we be clarified as to whether the Commission’s Report about Kanungu and its disasters came out?  I thank you.

MR.KABUSHENGA MBABAZI: Thank you. I suppose the hon. Member is taking me off my point.  I would also be keen to know that the Commission actually reports.  My point is that, there is not enough road construction and maintenance equipment. It has got nothing to do with the Commission that the hon. Member is talking about.

I would like to continue, Mr. Speaker, by commenting on the system of health service delivery. I am saying that, although Government is trying to increase health centres as well as supplies in these health centres, the population - not only in Kinkizi, but the Ugandan population in general, has got very little power when they are seeking for healthcare facilities.  

I think there are many problems with our current healthcare delivery system in that we assume that by increasing the number of health centres, and by increasing the supplies in these health centres, we automatically generate an improved health service. But this is not so.  In the same way that we have seen ghost teachers and ghost soldiers, I think in some places, there might be ghost patients.  If not, why does one person in the queue get an aspirin, the second one is told to go to the pharmacy and the third one gets an aspirin?  

I want to propose that our Government starts looking at empowering local initiatives of health insurance popularly known as engozi in my area, where people have got their own fund, and when someone is ill, they have the power to go to a place where they receive high quality medical care.  I think instead of having a two-tier system where the wealthy can access facilities and the poor are left at the mercy of those managing health facilities, we should be moving on from there to empowering even the poor so that they have access to resources.

Finally, I would like to say that under the Privatization Programme, the Dairy Industry in Kinkizi has proved to be a disaster. The Dairy Corporation has got a cooling plant there, but has tried to control it from the centre. Therefore, it has concentrated on encouraging the people to produce more milk but has taken away the people’s responsibility of marketing that milk.  

The farmers in Kinkizi are pouring down the drain 2,000 litres of milk because the Dairy Corporation has not come for it. I want to suggest that as you think about privatization, these dairy-cooling plants should be given or sold to the farmers so that they take responsibility, both for production as well as for marketing of milk.  

I believe that in a place like Kinkizi where people consume shs.12 million worth of beer every week, shs.2 million worth of milk should be nothing, if the farmers are allowed to take control of the situation.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PHILIP NTACYOTUGIRA (Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to air my views on the Budget Speech for this financial year 2001/2002. His Excellency’s State of the Nation Address and this Budget are strongly correlated. They both bear some degree of similarity.  

I hail His Excellency the President when he says in the State of the Nation Address on page 8, second paragraph that, “Although we are committed to the liberalization and privatization of the economy, Government will intervene in some strategic sectors to put our economy on a new pedestal” He further states that, “Government shall intervene in the following areas: coffee, cotton, livestock, fish, tea, fruits, etc.” 

I hail His Excellency the President for bringing in this idea of liberalization and privatization but we cannot liberalize and privatize per se because in some cases really, we cannot liberalize.  For example, I shall speak in relation to tea growing in Kisoro District, and in particular Bufumbira North.  

The people of Bufumbira North, Kisoro District, have consistently requested the Government to assist them grow tea.  They argue that they have got enough land. The climate is very suitable, the altitude is good, the soil is good, the people are willing to put in their effort and the leadership of course is there but, Mr. Speaker, Government has turned a deaf ear. And here I wish to point out that the hon. Ministers, Prof. Kagonyera and hon. Kisamba Mugerwa are aware that the people of Bufumbira North have consistently requested the Government to assist them grow tea.  I do not know why they have kept quiet.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the hon. Minister of Finance informed us here that there is a further Shs.20 billion for strategic interventions in agriculture. Part of that money will be used to purchase clones from Kenya and Rwanda for increased tea production in the country. The areas being looked at are Kisoro, Kabale, Kibaale and Hoima for the intended expansion.

MR.NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr. Speaker, yes I have that bit of information, but I think the hon. Minister has not read his books properly. In the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture and the ministerial report on agriculture, it is stated that there are some districts, which are going to benefit from that programme but Kisoro and Kabale are not included (Interruption). You will allow me some little time so that I can actually expound more on this. 

About 500 people of Kisoro North have expressed the wish to grow tea, and over 2000 have sent their names to the Minister of Agriculture. The people of this area are poor, so they cannot start growing tea by themselves. They need to be assisted by Government. We do not have any entrepreneur who can bring in this activity. We do not have any investor coming in. Therefore, why can Government not come in to assist these poor people? This is one of the ways in which they can combat poverty (Interruption). Allow me to speak for the people of Kisoro, because I represent them and if I do not finish this point – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Just make one point and then wind up.

MR.NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr. Speaker, I will even introduce a motion at a later date. The reasons they advance are that in 1975 the Government requested the people of Bufumbira North to grow tea. They started these farms and grew tea but it has become bush. It is the fault of the Government because it did not help them to market this tea.   I will cut short my speech maybe. 

So to speak, I wish to move a motion that – this is according to our Rules of Procedure, 44(m) – that since the community living in the hilly areas around Bwidi National Park in Kisoro district have expressed their wish to grow tea as a sure means of alleviating poverty; noting that the climate, altitude, soil and rainfall regime favour the growth of tea; aware that tea growing and processing would provide employment to many people in Kisoro district, and aware that tea is a third foreign exchange earner in the country; I beg to move that Parliament recommends that Kisoro district among other districts also benefits from the Shs.1 billion which has been budgeted for the assistance of smallholder tea outgrowers and some communities, which are in dire need, to start growing clonal tea. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, while I note the concern of your people in Kisoro about this tea affair, you said you are moving this motion under rule 44(m), but the problem we have is that we have a motion about the Budget. I think you cannot bring another motion when we have not disposed of this motion. I think you have reasons, and I agree with you that you must speak for your people, but I think the best way to handle this – in any case the rule you quoted is about privileges. It has nothing to do with what you want to do.  I think the best solution for you to achieve what you want is to go to the appropriate Committee on agriculture, put your case there so that when they make their case about the budgeting of this money, they will recommend that your area should benefit from this one. 

Otherwise your motion cannot at this moment, when we are debating a motion by Minister of Finance, be allowed to stand. In any case the rule you quoted is about other matters. But thank you for your concern.

MR.ESELE JOHN (Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the programmes he is proposing to improve the economy. I would like to address myself to the projects to improve the rural incomes, especially to contribute towards the national economy.  

First, I will talk about coffee. The colonialists in the early days demarcated the country into two big sectors as far as cash crop production is concerned; coffee to the South and cotton to the North. But they did that without any scientific base. But today science has proved that coffee can be produced in many other parts of the country, and I would like to thank Government for the move that it is making to spread coffee to as many as parts of the country as possible.  

However, we do not know yet whether the coffee seedlings are going to be distributed free of charge to the farmers or they will be at a cost. Whatever the case may be, I would like to propose to the Ministry of Agriculture in collaboration with UCDA to decentralize the multiplication of seedlings, because at present, coffee seedlings are being multiplied mainly in the South, and it is very difficult for the rest of the farmers like those in Bukedea and Kumi to access these seedlings. We would like the decentralization of the multiplication of the coffee seedlings, to be taken down to sub-counties, or even to the parish levels.  

I would like to say something about cotton. I must say that I am very happy with the President’s change of opinion towards cotton production. A few years ago, he was negative but now he is completely positive to cotton production. Many of us in the East and North actually attained education through cotton. We also know that during those days when cotton production was high in the East, famines were very rare, simply because cotton was used to prepare the seed bed for the subsequent crop, which would end up with a bumper harvest. For those who do not know, the Owen Falls Dam was actually built with the revenue from cotton.  We did not have to borrow large sums of money like we have done for its extension. 

Production has increased from 10,000 bales in 1992 to 100,000 bales this year. This 100,000 is actually a drop from 120,000 last year, and this is what I want to address myself on.  The drop from 120,000 bales the other season to 100,000 bales this season is largely because of the price that fell on the world market. That also dictated on the price that was paid to farmers last season.  When the price on the world market fell, the price paid to the local farmers here also fell. So the farmers were discouraged from producing cotton last season. 

I would like to propose that the Government put in place a price stabilization fund. This can also be done to coffee. We would save money under this fund during the good years, and during the bad years when the prices are poor on the world market. We draw on this money and stabilize the prices paid to our farmers so that at no one time are our farmers discouraged from producing any specific commodity.

MR. OGOLA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving me the Floor. I would like to inform the speaker that, actually with cotton, our problem is that the price is only about one commodity called ‘cotton’ but actually there are two products in that price; the lint and the cotton seed. But the price is merged in one and it is low price. 

What I would like to inform the hon. Member is that, you might wish to take interest in that. When they set that price for cotton, they should consider the products in one because those who buy cotton from the farmers actually benefit doubly. They get the lint and then they use the seeds.  They get cotton seed oil, they make soap, and they make animal feeds from the cotton cake.  They do so many things in that respect, and they get a lot of money while the farmer is denied that same benefit.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ESELE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I knew that.  The other thing I wanted addressed on cotton is value addition. I am pleased that we have programmes towards value addition.  We are told that if we turned cotton from lint to a shirt, we will get to farmers 10 per cent in value. At present, only 10 per cent of Uganda’s cotton is utilized locally, 90 per cent is being exported. Why do we not make a deliberate effort to facilitate our local textile industries to utilize this crop so that at some point they will be able to contribute towards determining the price that is paid to farmers?  

I would like to say something about rural production credit.  As of now, there is still very little that is going to farmers as far as credit production is concerned. I know that Women’s Finance Credit Trust is trying, but it is not enough. Up to now, I do not know why the large commercial banks are not quite interested in financing or lending money for agricultural production. They are still unwilling.  Could something be done to interest them to lend money for agricultural production? Even to those banks that give credit for agricultural production, the interest rates are too high, and quite discouraging to the farmers.  

If I can say one small thing, that is on water for livestock.  Water for livestock production is lacking, especially in the famous cattle corridor. I am also told that, that is one of the reasons why the people from the northeast are making it very difficult for their neighbours to produce livestock. 

Mr. Speaker, we are used to borrowing: We borrow from the World Bank; we borrow from IFAD; we also have some friends like USAID, the EU, and Col. Gadaffi.  Could we utilize these facilities to access some money so that we start another valley dam project for the cattle corridor, for the people of the northeast, and also Teso? This way, I think we shall even reduce on the influx and the disturbing consequences from people of the northeast to the people of Teso.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me a chance. Allow me to congratulate you with your Deputy, for taking the Chair in which you have been steering the House over the last five years. Allow me also at this moment to congratulate my colleagues in this House; it was not easy but here you are.  You are now full of the problems - the problems of Ugandans are now put in a kalayi and they are on top of your heads so that we fight to clean the situation.

Mr. Speaker, I would like to start by asking the Minister of Local Government to remember what the President pledged to the people of Kaliro that come this budget, the District of Kaliro would have been created.  I am surprised when I read through the details of this budget, Kaliro District is not featuring anywhere.  I think this is being very unfair.  If we make a promise, it must be fulfilled. (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for purposes of clearing the record, you do not expect a budget for a non-existent district. So, what you can do is to pursue for it to be created during this financial year, otherwise they cannot provide a budget for a non-existent district.

MR. WAMBUZI: I have been told to make sure I speak about this particular issue, Mr. Speaker.  Now that I have finished I will do the needful.  I would like at this stage, to say that when the NRM Government came into power, it had the spirit of resistance; now, this spirit is waning.  It is waning because we are yielding to these super powers; we are being taken for a ride.  This issue of globalisation, I ask the Minister of Finance, to start resisting it seriously, because it is taking us nowhere.  You have seen Europeans in Italy; they actually stampeded and people died.  So, we as a third world country, let us not pretend that we can compete in the global market with our methods of production.  

If the Americans are saying that they are giving us this AGOA scheme, then they should do it knowing that we are not capable of competing at this stage.  I expected the Minister of Finance to have categorically put it clear that this is the way forward; that we are still in the pit and we are not yet putting our heads up to think that we can compete in the global market.  I think we are not yet there and it is the duty of the Minister of Finance to see that we get there; but we need total assistance.  They enslaved us for so many years, 300 years. It is now time for them to start paying back to these Ugandans particularly the slaves who were taken from this area.  So, I am requesting the Minister of Finance to start being resistant to the globalization theories that is being thrown on us.  

I go to the question of agriculture.  Our agricultural system is still disorganized.  Even with this PMA, we are not really addressing the problems of the farmer.  If you go now to Kamuli, let alone Bulamogi, the people have started throwing the maize and lamenting why the Vice President ever went there to ask them to plant maize, because you have to surrender two bags in order to mill one bag.  This type of economy means the farmer is just going to drop; he cannot make it.   

The American Government which is talking about globalization today, is making sure the farmers, if they produce a lot of milk, the Government buys it up-front.  Even in Britain recently, when there was mad cow disease, it was clear that they ordered them to destroy the cows. So, when I heard my friend from Luuka talking about disaster preparedness, it the duty of the Minister of Finance to see that when the weak ones are having it rough, they should be assisted.  I think the primary job of the Minister of Finance should be to create opportunities for us.

MS. AKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way.  I just wanted it on record here, unless I am otherwise corrected.  I do not think we have ever had mad cow disease in Uganda  -(Interjections)- He said that ‘when we had mad cow’; I do not want it to be in our records.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he was giving an example of a situation that occurred in United Kingdom and the kind of reaction that was taken.  

MR. WAMBUZI: I would like to conclude by saying that the primary duty of the Minister of Finance would be to show the rich, the middle class and the poor the policies that direct us to take the opportunities.  When I read the budget, I do not see where he is emphasizing that Members of Parliament should go and tell their people that this opportunity is there.  We cannot leap in the dark without proper guidance from the Minister of Finance.  I expect the Minister of Planning - I think it will be his duty to make sure the people of Bulamogi are guided properly.  

There is one thing that is going to cause us problems.  Today there is an International Conference on water.  I think as Ugandans, we should walk with our heads up, because in the whole world, Uganda is the only country that is blessed with fresh water throughout the year.  I cannot start being belittled that an Arab is better than me, because he cannot drink oil.  It is wrong for the Minister of Finance not to realize that water is the first gold and the last gold before you die. I thank you for allowing me this time.

MR. JOHN ALINTUMA (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have listened to the deliverance of the speech from the Minister of Finance, but there is one thing that concerns me.  I am a young man; I enjoy sports, but there are also other people out there who enjoy sports, and I believe that sports are our resource here in the country.  We can use that to bring a lot of revenue, just as people go overseas for example, to do what we call ‘kyeyo.’ These people abroad build most of the beautiful houses we see here and this helps our country. I do not see why Government does not see that sports is a very big resource to this country and that there are no specific funds to promote it.  For example, just imagine if we had Pele coming out of Uganda; just imagine if we had a Micheal Jordan coming from Uganda - you can name all those people.  They are getting millions and millions of dollars and I think these people did not come out by luck.  The governments and the countries where they come from have strong value as far as sports is concerned, and they invest in it.  So, I would suggest that in -(Interruption).

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to be clarified.  The hon. Member has said there are no funds specifically provided for sports in this country, yet we have a whole Minister in charge of that Ministry.  Do you mean to say that he is a hanging Minister minus funds to protect the Department for which he is serving as a policy head?  I just want to be clarified.

MR. ALINTUMA: Mr. Speaker, I am aware that hon. Okello is here, but I am not concerned about the Minister.  I am concerned about the deliverance of the speech.  I am interested in finding out whether there are specific funds and not simply funds, but a certain amount of money that is allocated for promotion of sport in this country.  This is a resource which we can use -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Minister of Finance, in his opening speech, gave you a number of reference books and there is a big book. I think you should look at the Ministry of Education and Sports and see whether it is there so that you are helped because he is going to say, “I have given you the information. If it is lacking, point out where it is lacking.” Please consult that particular book and see what happens. Maybe the Minister may help you. Do you want to or we just leave it at that? (Interruption)

CAPT.BYARUHANGA C: I have perused through the books the Minister of Finance was talking about, the only component of sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports is the Minister.  

MR.ORYEM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to correct my hon. Friend. The only component in the Ministry of Education and Sports is not hon. Oryem Okello. I am sure you know that we have other technicians who are working with the Ministry of Education who also assist me in my department. I believe that if there were no funds, then there would be no particular Ministry of Sports.

MR.ALINTUMA: So, Mr. Speaker, can I conclude please? I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, just as the Ministry of Agriculture is considered to bring in revenue, we should also consider the department of Sports as a resource from which we can get revenue into this country directly or indirectly. Thank you very much. 

MR. ROGERS MATTE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am glad that I am able to speak at this time. I will be a bit brief because of time, but I want my comments to be directed to issues concerning the future of Uganda.  

I listened to the President’s speech, and the one made by the Minister of Finance, and the President said that according to his assessment, most of the developing countries in Africa or in the world that are doing well have done it through oil exploration and marketing. In our case, we happen to have the oil but it is not given the weight it should be given as a resource that could be developed to help us to get out of the poverty trap.  

I also want to talk about the issue of the manpower plan for the country. Every Ministry in Uganda comes up with a policy to train people within its sector line, but I fail to see the overall policy governing management manpower development in the country. I think this is an area where we could invest money and  - (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr.Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Ministry of Public Service, which I have the honour to represent here as Minister of State, has a comprehensive program for human resource development. 

First, the Ministry has what we call the Public Service Reform Programme. Under this programme, we have identified all issues relating to human resource management, and this has been addressed by restructuring ministries and ensuring that the human resource needs for each Ministry has been identified. This has been completed.

We have also come up with a comprehensive programme for human resource evaluation so that remuneration and training and re-training programmes are put in place. Already, a policy is being evolved for training political leaders and Civil Service cadres so that we are able to have a human resource capacity that can propel the development process of this country. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr. Musumba Isanga): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I wish to assure the hon. Member that in addition to the human resource planning under the Ministry of Public Service, human resource planning for other sectors is also underway. In due course, this House will receive a comprehensive plan on the human resource and other aspects of the economy. Matters that have been raised here, for example, about price stabilisation funds, the price of maize and what is being done; all these are being handled and at an appropriate time, we will be presenting before this House as our way forward. 

I want to take this opportunity to say that I have now been reliably informed that we have put into the Budget, funds for the National Council of Sports totalling Shs.569.1 million; Shs.417.9 million for non-wage expenditure and Shs.151.2 million for wage expenditure. But that is not all. We send money to primary schools every month, among which there is a component for sports activities in schools. So, it is not that no money at all is made available. This is an activity that Government recognises and puts money into. Maybe a little more would have been done but if it is found, it will be put. For the moment this is what is available. I thank you.

MR.MATTE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Ministers for the information and the answers to some of the issues. My concern on the Manpower Development Plan was in relation to solving our employment problems now and in future. Let us not only focus on the manpower we need now, but let us also look at the manpower we need in future. It is necessary that at any time we know how many technical people we shall need to implement, for instance, the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture at various levels, say, this year and in three years to come. But also, we can look at how many of such people we have who have gone through the educational institutions we have. 

There are many people who are unemployed and yet many people still come from abroad as expatriates to do the same things that the people we have on the market already know. And there is no proper way of protecting the people who already have the qualifications here. I think such a plan would help us in future to provide the services we need, and also reduce unemployment for those school leavers.  

The other issue I want to talk about concerns decentralisation and planning.  I worked for about 6 years in one of the Local Governments, and what I noted was that, there is not enough link between district planning and national planning; in the sense that districts make their plans, and not all their wishes in some way can be reflected in the national plans.  You find that at the national level, they are supposed to be showing direction to the districts, and when the districts make their plans, the actual issues that should be handled, should be those coming from the districts. 

But you find that a number of projects are put in district plans, but these projects will never get funding from the national plans. Now we have the problem of the medium term framework papers, and the district development plans. At the Central Government level, we have the medium term papers as well, but this issue has not been clarified properly by the Central Government. At the central level, what is that document that is in line with the district development plans, besides the medium framework papers.

MR. MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to give information to the hon. Member that, his concerns are legitimate. It is just that the day the decentralisation process was constitutionalised, is also the day the National Planning Authority was constitutionalised.  This is supposed to be an organ that is going to co-ordinate the activities of planning, both from the district and those at the centre. 

The 6th Parliament did receive a Bill for the establishment of the National Planning Authority; but it was taken back by Government for further refining.  This year, this session, we will receive before this House a Bill for the National Planning Authority at least for the First Reading. 
In this Bill, we anticipate that the mechanism to relate the planning at the decentralised level, and planning at the central level will be co-ordinated, harmonised and synchronised.  Thank you.

MR. MAATE: Due to time, Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much, thank you. 

MR. NANDALA MAFABI  (Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you, Mr. speaker. In the Budget speech, the Minister talks about modernisation of agriculture; even the President talks about modernisation of agriculture. They are talking of production; even now we want to increase production, as if we do not have production.   

Currently, we have production in our homes, but we do not have market for the products. Take an example of maize; it is there, and a kilogram is going at Shs. 50 only. How would you tell a farmer to increase production, when he cannot even sell the little he has produced?  I think the better thing to do now, is to look for the market for the current production we have, then we can talk about more production.

You realised that some of them were talking of globalisation. True, globalisation is good; the developed nations are talking of not protecting our local farmers or local industries, but at the same time for them they are practising it.  I want to give an example of farmers here in Uganda. When our farmer loses, we do not protect, and when he over produces, we do not protect; whereas in America, if a farmer loses, the Government comes in and compensates the farmer.

Where will be the incentive for us to produce if the little we are producing, or what we have lost cannot be compensated? It should be the Government is deliberate policy to help our farmers in a form of compensation when they lose; maybe in prices or when they lose the product due to calamity. 

Employment: We tell people that they should go back to their homes and dig. For us in Bugisu where I come from specifically, the land is over. Now, you tell me to go back to till the land, where will I till?  There should be other ways of people getting employment, like in industries and service sectors.

But when the investors - an Indian comes to invest here, and comes with even the manpower of a gate-man, when there are locals who can do the same job, and they are calling themselves investors. Where does the Government come in to help the people?  We need our people to be protected from unemployment.  

In fact, right now, there are some industries which are going to close up like Cable Corporation, because of the taxes. The taxes are high on the products we produce, whereas the imported products are cheap.  When that company closes, we are going to lose employment, we are going to lose taxes among others. Unless the Government puts in place a deliberate policy to protect our local industries, we have nowhere to go.

You talked of privatisation.  When you put up something for sale here in the market like UCB, everybody will come running; but when you tell them, that why do you not venture in agriculture sector, nobody is willing. I think they have left agriculture for us. I think the Government should come up to help up us; and it is a very serious issue if you go up there.

You talked of poverty, that it has gone down to 35 percent. I think for me in Budadiri West it is the reverse.  It should be 65 percent. Getting a thousand shillings there is like getting a very expensive drug.  I do not know which statistics they used to compute - where the Minister counted that poverty has declined to 35 percent even in Budadiri West? I highly doubt if the people who were carrying out the surveys reached our place. The methodology used, I think, I would love to look at it; and to know what parameter they used to come up to that rate. 

But the truth is that, there is a lot of poverty up country. Our people are in bad state whereby they need help - (Interruption) -they talk about calories, which we do not know.   

Health: You cannot go and work when you are sick; and you cannot dig when you are sick.  In our place, health services are quite very far.  In fact, people die before they reach the nearest health unit.  Since the Government is talking of building health units at parish level, I think this should be speeded up.  Otherwise, our people are getting finished before they reach hospitals.
In fact, the death rate has increased, but the whole problem is that they are not reporting everything –(Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr. Wabudeya):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you my MP for giving way.  It is true that people of Bugisu, that is Mbale and Sironko Districts, walk long distances to get to the health centres. The problem is mainly, because of the terrain.  

Even if we construct the health centres at the parish level, we shall still have situations where people will have to walk long distances. So, the answer we shall have for mountainous areas like Mbale and Sironko, probably Kisoro and Kigezi is to strategize and have more than one health center in those difficult areas. And I hope that with time we shall solve that problem.  Thank you.

MR. NANDALA:  Thank you, my Minister.  Mr. Speaker, you can see the problem I am talking about People dying before they reach health units.  However, if you bring them at the parish level, I think the number will reduce.  But I know it is in a bad state.  

You have talked about schools, that this financial year the construction of primary schools or secondary schools is going to increase.  I hope they will not ask the poor parents to contribute to the construction of schools, because these people are too poor, they have nothing. Even the little they produce, they cannot sell it.  So they will have no money for the construction of these schools.  In fact, the rains have spoiled the little they have produced. The feeder roads are in a poor state. The people on foot are having a problem to walk; what about cars?    

Let me make one last point on what the Minister of Finance talked about on page 30, that there is going to be a speedy pay reform, and that they are working on pension, but our people upcountry - there are suffering.  Whenever they come down here for their pension, they are told to come after six months.   Maybe right now the Ministry of Public Service will help us in this case.  Otherwise, many people have walked for over a year and have never been paid.

THE SPEAKER: This matter has been explained in the past.  

MR. NANDALA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, I had given opportunity to him - but it seems you are a bit tired.  Should we hear him then we see how we proceed? Okay.

MR. CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to talk about the budgeting premise, production without marketing, corruption and security.  

I am in big support of the bottom-up approach to budgeting and planning in this country.  My people are not happy when sometimes the Budget is read and they do not hear about specific issues that affect them.  So, if we are to fairly allocate and direct natural resources to the needs of the people, issues that the Budget should address should come from the rural poor.

Now coming to production, I know that labour and power are very important factors in production, but I am perturbed by the fact that, in this country, it looks like we want to exploit labour and give chance to the profit maximizers like those who are going to produce electricity and sell it at such exorbitant prices.  Yes, maybe you are trying to invite investors by telling them that our labour is very cheap and you overlook the aspect of power.  Reduce power rates and increase the minimum wage so that the sweat of our people is paid.  

talking about power, if we are to realize low units out of our production, power being one of the inputs, definitely the rate for power needs to be looked at.  In the past, people have talked about power rates but very little has been heard from the Executive on what strategic intervention they are putting in place; so people are left hanging.  

Power is very essential for poverty alleviation.  We are talking of PMA; we are talking of increasing the income levels of our people; we need to address agro-processing.  So, since Government is addressing power supply, we need to make the power affordable so that agro-processing units will be set up in the villages to provide employment, to add value to what we produce, and therefore increase incomes.  

I come to the issue of marketing.  While PMA will address production, we shall produce. But since I was born, I have not heard of this country talking about developing lake transport inside Uganda. I am talking of Kyoga for example.  We have so many districts that border Kyoga on the Northern arm; there are no deliberate policies from Government that are trying to give those places access to the rich markets of Kampala.  So, my people are saying, the route would be shorter if there was a ferry system from Serere to Kampala. 

Then again we are talking of production, and poverty increasing in the North.  I am glad the Executive has visited the camps.  I am not so happy about the 200 million because it was not pegged to disarmament.  I hope this Budget has money for disarmament because that is what will produce the lasting solution.  Probably we should have also talked of what we need to do to Karamoja so as to give them those things that they come looking for in Teso and leave Teso secure for production.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  I think we have come to the end of today’s business, but I have information that one of our colleagues, hon. Dhugira Esther Opoti, Woman Member of Parliament Nebbi is currently in Mulago hospital in ward 6.  So please, go and see her and pray for her speedy recovery.  In the information I was given, she is in room 7 on 6B.  

We have come to the end of today’s business but I would like to know those who have not spoken so that at least, I start with those who are here because you have really stayed long. (Interjection). They have taken down your names. Thank you. So, the House is adjourned until 2.30 tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15th August 2001 at2.30 p.m.)

