Tuesday, 16 August 2011

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you most warmly to today’s sitting. I want to begin by expressing our support to the Muslim community and wishing them a very successful month of Ramadan, which they started when we were on recess. 

On a sad note, I wish to inform you of the death of His Excellency, Dr James Lukabyo, who was the pioneer High Commissioner of Uganda to Australia and I want to invite Members to observe a minute of silence in his honour.
 
(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Hon. Members, I also wish to report that last week, I went to Malawi to attend the 13th Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth African Region, which took place in Lilongwe. To the benefit of the new Members, the CPA is an organisation that exists to, among others, promote respect of human rights and freedoms, and pursue the ideals of democracy and good governance. 

The CPA is divided into regions with headquarters in London and in order to accomplish its ideals, the CPA hosts various seminars and workshops at regional and international level. Therefore, the association of the Speakers meets every two years in one of its branches on rotational basis. Uganda hosted that meeting in 2009. 

In that regard, hon. Members, my colleague the Speaker of the National Assembly of Malawi, hon. Henry Chimuntu Banda, requested me to convey warm greetings on behalf of his Parliament and to say that he is looking forward to visiting us in the near future together with a big delegation, mainly to engage in sports and they will come to compete against all the teams in the East African Region. So, I want to put our football and netball team on notice to get ready to give them a rousing welcome, but also to do justice to Uganda by defeating them when they arrive. So, I want to encourage Members who have not yet registered for our parliamentary team to do so immediately. 

The other things we discussed in the conference concern the parliamentary calendar. You may be aware that in the past, we have not had a calendar. There is a calendar in most of the commonwealth countries and I just wanted to share an example of the National Assembly of Cameroon. That national assembly meets for strictly three months in a year and that is March, June and November where they sit from 9.00 O’clock in the morning until midnight. That enables the Executive and the Legislature to work harmoniously to ensure that all the business that is lined up is handled. The rest of the period is left for Members to do their constituency work, the staff to take leave and also to do repairs and maintenance of equipment and facilities at Parliament. The Tanzania Parliament also has a calendar. 

I want to inform you that we have made a draft calendar, which is to be discussed with the Parliamentary Commission before we come to the Business Committee and then to the House so that you can endorse it. 

The second issue that came out during that meeting is that in other parliaments, there is a forum for dialogue between the political parties which are in Parliament to facilitate work. So, I propose that the Government and the Opposition would consider realigning the structure of the IPOD in Uganda to meet those expectations. I heard that it worked well in other countries. 

The third was enhanced avenues of mass communication. A number of parliaments in Africa are carrying out reforms in order for them to carry out their roles effectively. The Parliament of Zambia has a parliamentary radio, which is accessible in all the provincial centres and airs broadcasts like parliamentary debates, committee proceedings and other programmes explaining government policies. 

The Speaker of Zambia told me that they are now going to move to have a television station dedicated to Parliament. The National Assembly of Rwanda is also establishing a parliamentary radio and I think these are good innovations that we can consider to help our work. 

The fourth area is the Speaker’s panel. In Tanzania, three MPs are elected from amongst the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons to constitute the Speaker’s panel. They elect the Speaker and Deputy Speaker to chair proceedings of the House and usually serve for two and half years. 

In Kenya, the experience is slightly different. At the commencement of every session, the Speaker nominates four Members, who are not ministers, who are known as the first, second, third and fourth chairperson of committees who are equally entitled to assist the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker to chair the House. So, these are some of the ideas that I will be presenting to the rules committee to study and report back and see how we can actualise that proposal. 

There is also a very strong committee of chairpersons in all the other parliaments and the forum is entrenched in the Rules of Procedure. The purpose of the chairpersons’ forum is to provide for channels of improving effectiveness of committees and parliaments and I think that is a good start. 

Our own forum here has also requested that we look at this possibility of incorporating that forum in our Rules of Procedure - but I will be writing formally to the rules committee to study it and advise us. 

Earlier, during the induction, there was a debate about the use of electronic devices in the Chamber. I want to report to Members that in all the commonwealth countries, it is only one country – the Isle of Man - where Members are allowed to go with the electronic equipment. All the rest do not and the Seychelles are even more interesting. They have got a gadget, which they use to jam the equipment and even if you bring it to the House, you cannot use it. So, it is still an area that is not very common in the commonwealth parliaments. Most of them do not have electronic gadgets. So, again, I will ask our committee to look at it and see how we can accommodate the issue that you raised during induction. For the time being, you will have to bear with the restriction until we have discussed the best way of conducting ourselves. 

I want to draw the attention of the Members to the provisions of the Budget Act which provides that the conclusion of the budget process should be by 31 August 2011. That means we have only 11 working days, which may include Mondays and Fridays, to complete the budget process. I would like to urge all the sessional committees towards meeting this deadline. I want to also remind the chairs of the standing committees not to convene meetings during this period to enable the Members to complete the work on the budget.

 In that regard, I want to propose the following order for the reporting: I am looking at the committees starting to report on Tuesday next week. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be first and then followed by the Committee on Social Services, the Committee on Natural Resources, the Committee on Information and Communication Technology, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry and finally the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

I really appeal to the Members and the chairpersons to try and conclude this process so that we can do other work of Parliament. I thank you very much.

2.41
MR FELIX OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, in your communication you raised a number of very pertinent issues especially in the management, administration and working of Parliament. 

The points that you raised are so important to our Parliament and I would, therefore, like to propose that since you chair the Parliamentary Commission, you table that report to the commission which should then prepare a working document which should formally be tabled in Parliament and referred to an appropriate committee so that we receive the report and if need be, we review the working of our Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: I did not want to disturb the commission on that. I wanted to formally write to the rules committee to examine each of those areas and then come back here so that we can have a debate.

MR OKOT OGONG: We want your communication to be owned by Parliament and for you to go direct to a committee would not be fair. It is better that you present that position to Parliament and it is referred formally to the committee. When it goes without attention of this Parliament, then I think that procedure may not be formal. It is better that -

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that it is debated before it goes to the rules committee?

MR OKOT OGONG: No. It is presented formally and referred like any other business that is presented to Parliament by one of the commissioners. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I have reported to the House and I have said that I am passing it on to the rules committee to consider and bring it back and then we discuss it.

2.44
MRS CECILA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I just want to suggest that firstly, the Speaker makes a report to Parliament – and that is because she has already reported to Parliament and if anybody had any view contrary, maybe that person would have responded and said, “Much as we agree with a, b, c and d, we do not agree with the other points.” 

But as of now, whatever report that the Speaker has given us, we have already accepted and adopted it and all we need to do is to know how we are now going to make it a reality to our Parliament. Madam Speaker, you can still use the same authority to direct that information to the appropriate committee so that we can see how we can move forward. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, that is what I said; that I am going to pass it to the rules committee, which is the committee that must look into all those issues. I am just telling you what we received from there so that you know what I have been doing while you were also busy here. 

Hon. Members, we have a number of children in the gallery. I would like to first introduce pupils of Kitgum Primary School represented by hon. Beatrice Anywar. We also have children from the districts of Gulu, Amuru, Mubende and Tororo - I do not know which is which but you are welcome with your teachers! (Applause) 

2.46
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I must have missed a point when you were communicating the time table for bringing forward the report. I wanted to know how we are going to respond to the policy statements as shadow ministers. I do not know how much time you are going to give us. Are they going to be produced as they are producing the reports? I also wanted to streamline on that one because we also have to make responses as shadow ministers regarding the policy statements made by Government.

THE SPEAKER: I expect that your shadow minister of finance will cover your response and you can only chip in later. I expect your shadow minister of finance to be the first one to take the Floor and give all your responses, which is his responsibility.

2.47
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): I am rising on a matter of national importance in regards to financial matters of our public servants. For some time now, civil servants who ask for loans in our banks are made to pay some charge of two percent and the payment goes to an organisation called Payment Solutions Uganda, which was an initiative, as far as we know, of the Ministry of Public Service to help the banks not to pay people who have excess baggage of loans with banks – maybe to help the banks so that somebody does not borrow from bank y, x and z. 

As I speak right now, the banks have come up with a facility that tracks all the records of anyone with an account in the bank known as the Credit Reference Bureau. However, this system of getting money from our public servants is still happening and we would like to know under what circumstances the Payment Solutions Uganda is operating in a situation where the financial card is doing that job.

Secondly, we would like to be informed as Parliament as to when this system started and why Parliament was not informed. Even right now, the teachers and other low cadres in the public service are still paying this fee and the banks are also complaining that the civil servants are going to them to say that they are the ones cheating them when actually they believe it is a system that is well known and has not been explained to the civil servants. 

We would like to know from the minister or the Prime Minister where this money goes and how this system has been managing the monies of Ugandans without the knowledge of Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Public Service here – yes, Prime Minister.

2.50
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen (RTD) Moses Ali):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say on the onset that to me, this is not really a matter of national importance because I believe the House must be presented with tangible information. [Mr Sseggona: “Order!”] This issue of “Order” is also just excuses to usurp people. (Laughter) I have never stopped anybody from speaking. Let me explain. The speaker must bring documents; give us details to substantiate-

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I thought when a point of order is raised, the hon. Member sits down and listens to it. My point of order is that, is the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister in order to say that this is not a matter of national importance even when you have cleared it for him to give an answer and to mix it with matters of evidence when Ugandans are losing money in the hands of Government? This is a matter of national importance. You have ruled by not overruling the Member raising it. Is the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, therefore, in order to proceed and say that it is not a matter of national importance even when you have ruled?

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister wanted better particulars about that issue before he directs the Minister of Public Service to respond.

MR SSEGGONA: I agree, Madam Speaker. He could only then ask for better particulars.

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: I believe that nobody is going to tell the Prime Minister to think this way or to consider what according to him is a matter of national importance or not. This is my own understanding - (Laughter) -if I do not agree with you that this matter is of national importance, it is my right. I think not everything said by - (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rose on an issue that I think is of importance to all Ugandans. The workers I am talking about are workers of the Republic of Uganda. You are aware that most of our workers are threatening this country with strikes. The little they are getting is also being deducted from them unknowingly. It would be a matter of national importance and I would believe that the Prime Minister would courteously say, “We are going to consult the Ministry of Public Service and then we come up with an answer to Parliament.”

It is not much we are demanding as a nation. It is not much we are demanding as a people; it is just information to know how our civil servants should be guided on this matter. We cannot just sit to see our people being robbed in broad daylight and we say, “It is not a matter of national importance”. You are all aware that we have very meagre resources being given to these civil servants of ours. Even the little that they are getting is being robbed from them when we are looking and we say, “It is not a matter of national importance”.

I wish to bring these documents tomorrow that the Prime Minister wishes to acquaint himself with so that he can see. Maybe he will be in position to know that it is a matter of national importance. A country that does not mind about its people ceases to be a country worth called a country and if we are leaders, let us be in position to think about others first, before we think about ourselves. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker.

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I want to be understood clearly. In fact, the hon. Member had said, she had documents to bring tomorrow. I thought she would have raised this issue tomorrow when she has the documents. So, I will be happy to see the documents so that we can rely on them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde, you had something. By the way, before hon. Migadde speaks, I want you to join me in welcoming speakers and deputy speakers from the district of Kabale. They are up here represented by hon. Baryayanga and hon. Ninsiima. You are welcome. (Applause) I think they are from the sub counties.

2.56
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. For a long time, we have been addressing the issue of lightning and on a sad note, yesterday, we had another case in Buvuma Islands whereby a family of five members, at Kadinini landing site in Kitamero Town Council in Buvuma District, was wiped out by lightning. 

The deceased comprised the father Mayende Godfrey, the mother Athieno Ruth, the first son who is Athieno Ronald, aged seven years; another son by the names of Magero Shadrack aged four years and the last daughter who is Nabwire Night, who is aged one.

So, I refer to this as a matter of national importance because there may be no better way how our people may help each other or themselves without the government coming to their rescue. Even when we encourage them to have or to buy lightning arresters, they may not be able to afford the cost and we are looking at a landing site whereby every temporary house is next to each other; over 500 small houses and we cannot say that every small house should actually go and buy a lightning arrester. 

Though you, Madam Speaker, I request for assistance to the people in the different areas, not only Buvuma so that you compel either the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness in liaison with the relevant ministry concerned to find a way how we assist our people. And specifically, the bereaved families because it is not only these families that were affected but also other families were affected by the houses that were damaged by the rains. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon Members, we express our sympathies to the families in Buvuma Islands which suffered this tragedy and I do recall that, we are expecting a comprehensive statement from the government on the measures to be taken to address all these issues in the homes, schools and gardens.Maybe, if we could finish with the budget quickly, then we can arrange for that statement to be brought so that the country is advised on what to do but we express our sympathies.

2.59
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under Rule 35(1) of our Rules of Procedure, in my capacity as shadow minister of water and environment, I beg to address a matter of public concern very briefly.

The Sunday papers of 14th this month, including The Monitor, reported the President of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni while addressing district leaders and agriculturists in State House, said that Government is in the process of giving away a section of Mabira Forest to SCOUL to extend sugarcane production to meet the current shortage of sugar.

Under Article 237(2) (b) of the Constitution, forests are held in public trust by Government and local governments. Mabira is gazetted as a forest reserve. If part of that forest is to be transformed into arable land, Parliament must give sanctity. One should not simply wake up and deliver a statement that “I will give to such a group this arable land.” 

In light of that, I beg to demand for an explanation as to whether our good President made that statement because it could have been a slip of the tongue. So, we need a thorough explanation on whether Government is in the process of giving away Mabira, much as we all know that the matter has long been resolved and we rested assured that Mabira is protected. 

3.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I take this opportunity to welcome my colleagues back to the plenary session. 

In response to my good brother and friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi – I know hon. Ken Lukyamuzi more than anybody else in this House. I want to inform him together with my colleagues in Parliament and the country at large that the policy of Government on Mabira and any proposed actions Government may choose to take - Government knows very well the procedure to follow! So, I would request my colleague to be patient – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification. The scenario my colleague is talking about is not a new incident. In 2007, it also started like a rumour in the media. By then I was the shadow minister of water and environment and we engaged Government on the Floor of this House to clarify whether it was a slip of the tongue on part of the President; even a committee was formed for that purpose. But they failed to give to this Parliament a thorough explanation on how they would do what the Constitution states as the process to de-gazette any natural resource, and it ended up in a nasty way.

What assurance are you giving us this time round that you will first of all fully inform Parliament on all procedures that you are undertaking? And two, prove that the truth of the matter is that Government is not going to tamper with Mabira for which Ugandans spoke loudly and clearly in 200 - because we could have other alternatives. 

Furthermore, in the communication of the President, he has repeatedly mentioned that the shortage of sugar in the country is partly due to the riots of 2007. I would like to have this clarified. 

In the speech of the President, he alluded to me as a terrorist. And this is fundamentally painful to me as a representative of the people of Kitgum and as a mother of this country, and a legislator in this House. So I would like the Attorney-General to clearly explain who a terrorist is and whether the definition he gives applies to me as the President states. If not, I seek an apology. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my good friend, hon. Anywar, for seeking that clarification. If only she had been patient, I would have concluded my statement in a way which clearly gives the answer to that very question. 

I wish to repeat that Government is fully aware of the procedures to take and Government is still in the process of going through the policy on this issue and when we are ready, through the appropriate procedure, we will come to Parliament and inform this House.

Secondly, it is true that even last time, this matter had come up and had it not been for the rush of my sister – (Ms Anywar rose_) – I would be happy to clarify if you only allow me to conclude my sentence. 

My honourable friend, hon. Anywar, would be best advised this time round not to rush the matter as she did last time so that we can consider this matter coolly and rationally and take a decision in the best interest of Uganda as a whole.

As to the President’s reference to her as terrorist, I am not aware of that. I know her very well; where she has come from and where she is now and I would be happy to characterise her, but I will not do that now because she is my colleague. She is a happy colleague and Member of Parliament, who is always reasonable, except once in a while – (Laughter) – so I am not aware of that and I really thought we should address the question of Mabira. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Prime Minister is dodging the question. Did the President say that he is about to give away Mabira Forest to SCOUL?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my brother hon. Amama Mbabazi should help us. Did the President say he wants to give away Mabira Forest and for what purpose? And did he say hon. Anywar is a terrorist or not because you must have been there? And to whom does he want to give it to? Is it true that Mabira is degraded and if so, don’t you need to plant trees and make it better? That is what we need my brother; let us be courteous to one another and that is what we call for. 

MR MBABAZI: A terrorist is defined by law and I refer my sister Beatrice Anywar to the relevant sections of the law that defines a terrorist in Uganda. She wants to terrorise me now.

I wish to repeat that the government is in the process of reconsidering this question of Mabira. I am simply repeating what this Government is doing and what the President said. What I am saying is the position of Government that the question of part of Mabira, the degraded part of that forest which had been occupied for years by encroachers who were removed by this government and which has not regenerated - there was a suggestion that this could be used for something else. This is being considered and when Government is ready we will duly present to this House what we propose to do. Okay?

3.12
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL/STATE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I do not have much to add to what the Prime Minister has said. Suffice to say among the concerns of hon. Anywar, there are three issues. The first is what amounts to terrorism; the second whether the President said that hon. Beatrice Anywar is a terrorist; the third is where do you find the law, you yourself or anyone to judge whether oneself is a terrorist or not? 

As to whether the President said so, like the Prime Minister has said I, too, do not know and I cannot substantiate that. The second, what amounts to terrorism? Look at the Anti-Terrorism Act we passed in 2002 and you will see the definition of a terrorist and then see whether you fit that description. (Laughter) 

PRESENTATION OF THE REMAINING NAMES OF MEMBERS DESIGNATED TO BE MEMBERS OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT (UGANDA CHAPTER) IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, I wish, in accordance with Rule 12 and Appendix D of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to confirm that we submitted names of the following Members of Parliament who have been nominated by the National Resistance Movement for the Pan-African Parliament: 
1.	Hon. Beatrice Barumba Rusaniya, District Woman Representative, Kiruhura.
2.	Hon. Kakoba Onyango, Member of Parliament, Buikwe North. 
3.	Hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli, District Woman Representative, Budaka.
I wish to submit, Madam Speaker. 

3.15
MR PETER ABRAHAMS LOKII: (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Madam Speaker, I would like to raise an issue of concern about nomination of Members to the Pan-African Parliament. I would like to draw the attention of our Members, through you, to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 12 Appendix D Part II Section 4 which talks about “Tenure”. Sub-rule (1) of 4 says, “Subject to the protocol establishing the African Community and the Pan-African Parliament, the term of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall run concurrently with his or her term in Parliament.”
(2) The seat of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall become vacant if he or she-
(a) dies;
(b) resigns in writing to the President of the Pan-African Parliament;
(c) is unable to perform his or her functions for reasons of physical or mental incapacity
(d) is removed on grounds of misconduct
(e) ceases to be a Member of Parliament
(f) is recalled by Parliament 
(g) when Uganda withdraws from the African Union.”

Madam Speaker, I have not heard my name – (Laughter)- yet the rules are explicit. When this whole process began, I brought this information to your attention and the attention of the Chief Whip. I have been waiting to hear my name and I have not. 

From what I have read, I am not victimised by our Rules of Procedure. As precedence in the Pan-African Parliament, all countries where Members are re-elected send back Members to the Pan-African Parliament. Procedure therefore would have required that I be recalled since I am alive and still a Member of Parliament. 

Now that I have not been recalled, I am alive, I am physically fit –(Laughter)- I have not resigned and Uganda is still a member of the African Union – I am bringing this for purposes of putting the record right and dealing with matters of precedence. What will happen if a Member in this Parliament becomes a president of the Pan-African Parliament, and then after five years before his tenure is over, this kind of arrangement takes place? I think we have not paid attention to our Rules of Procedure. Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence that this rule be given due diligence. I thank you. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, first of all, when you look at Appendix D, their election is defined as the process of selecting them and that process started sometime back when two Members were pronounced by this House. Our party was requested to nominate the three, which we have done by submitting these names to you. 

 The issue hon. Lokii is raising is more fundamental and past the party. As to whether he is still continuing as a Member of Parliament or not – but I recall that in May between 16th and 18th, hon. Lokii swore to be a Member of the Ninth Parliament. Definitely, if he was still continuing to be a Member of Parliament, there would have been no need for him to swear in again. There must have been a reason why he had to swear in to be a Member of Parliament, which implies that his other tenure had expired. That is my interpretation but for us, we have presented our names.

MR PETER LOKII: I thank the Chief Whip for what he has said. The requirement to be a Member of the Pan-African Parliament is that you should be an elected Member of Parliament of a national parliament. I have not brought the documents but what is true is that when you read through the protocol that establishes the Pan-African Parliament, once a Member is re-elected, he automatically goes back to the Pan-African Parliament and is not subject to swearing again at the level of the Pan-African Parliament. 

If what the Chief Whip is saying is what counts, what do you say about the tenure because none of the things I have read apply to me? I have not got any formal communication saying, “You have been recalled,” which is a requirement in the Rules of Procedure. So, I am just bringing this up for the House to give due consideration. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are a number of grey areas in relation to the Rules of Procedure. We may need to subject this matter to legal interpretation because this is a new situation which we did not anticipate. I will ask the Attorney-General to give us his opinion next week about the process taking into account the protocol. Attorney-General, how quickly can you give us an opinion?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I request that I be given up to Thursday this week. I think we should be in a position, after necessary consultations, to give the necessary legal advice. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, we defer the matter to Thursday this week.

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want clarification because the matter that hon. Lokii raised, is a matter that touches on the entire Parliament. Because if the rules are going to be interpreted, it is for the entire Parliament and this would touch on the entire membership of the Pan African Parliament. The clarification I want to get is that since this touches on the entire membership of Parliament, and the names of the two Members were already approved, wouldn’t it be in order to approve our names and then if he is not satisfied, he may take legal action? 

3.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, at least for us, our MP who represented us, hon. Njuba, was not re-elected. Even the independent was not re-elected. It is your side that is holding us now. The Member who is raising the issue is on your side. So, these anomalies must be settled on that side. My brother, don’t lose heart; if you don’t go through now, you will go through next time. I thank you. 

MR NASASIRA: I want to repeat the point I made last time. When we are electing Members of Parliament, we elect them as a Parliament of Uganda to represent us in the Pan African Parliament. This issue of, “your side” might bring in a deeper interpretation. So, if the Attorney-General wants to look at the whole process of the election, maybe you will have to study Rule 12 and Appendix D and come with a proper interpretation.

3.25
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Madam Speaker, I think the best way to resolve the point raised by the honourable member is to consider the genesis that gave rise to what happened today. 

I remember that the first time we were going to deal with this matter, hon. Katuntu raised the issue of the protocol under which the rules were made. Unfortunately, this matter was not taken up and eventually we saw the selection of three Members from the NRM. The Opposition had already selected a Member. 

The matter to consider, if you have to answer his question, is what happened in the NRM. What happened is that four names were brought up - I think including the names of the Member who raised this matter - and the four Members whose names were brought agreed to participate in the selection  conducted by NRM. There was voting and one Member was dropped after the vote. So, you cannot now come here and then raise the issue of protocol. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know about the elections –

MR PETER LOKII PETER: Madam Speaker, I appreciate what the Vice-President has said but I do not want the election to be interpreted that I admitted to defying the rules. Because from the word go, I put this issue in black and white and the Chief Whip has a copy that I delivered to him in person. And that is why when they were having elections based on the regional system, the Northern region actually looked at the Rules of Procedure and said we are not going to subject you to re-election because the rules are clear. 

Now, when this element of the three was brought, we met the Chief Whip in his office and I said let us take this matter to the Floor of Parliament so that we deal with the issue of the Rules of Procedure. But when the caucus was called and Members agreed that elections take place, I would not object knowing that the House is where the answer would be and that is why I brought it here. 

If it was that I had first had to lose an election and begin complaining, that would be a different matter. But I put this in black and white, Madam Speaker, and you will agree with me. And I have a copy of the letter, which I can make available to Parliament. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, two days are not too long. We have requested the Attorney-General, who has listened to this debate, to give us an opinion. Let us hear from the Attorney-General on Thursday. I think there is no harm in this. The Attorney-General will let us know whether they participated in an election. The names have been received but let us take the decision on Thursday. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2011

(Debate continues.)

MR SSEMUJJU: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: What procedure are you raising and under what rule? 

MR SSEMUJJU: I am seeking your indulgence. I am seeking guidance as a way of procedure. We are going to continue with the response on the State of the Nation Address but a lot of things have happened since the State of the Nation Address was delivered. All of us were following newspapers and seeing ministers vending sugar. If you live in Kampala and Wakiso you might have seen police and the military surrounding people’s businesses and occupying roundabouts even places of convenience without a state of emergency being declared. 

The guidance I am seeking from you, Madam Speaker, is whether it is still relevant for this Parliament to continue debating something that has been overtaken by events or since the senior cabinet ministers are here, can we ask them to consider withdrawing that State of the Nation Address because in between the President has also delivered about three or four others including on radio where they were running adverts and announcing that the President would be addressing the nation. Will it not be prudent for them to consider withdrawing because otherwise this Parliament might be forced to engage in a worthless exercise discussing and responding to what is no longer a state of the nation? I seek guidance.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Member in order to mislead the House saying that each time the President talks to his people he is delivering a State of the Nation Address? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, to the best of my knowledge, the President of Uganda delivered the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament at the International Conference Centre. That is the state of the nation which I know about. Anything said on radio or where, I do not know. So, that is the one we are focusing on.

But in the meantime, hon. Members, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of ABC Primary School, represented by hon. Oketayot from Pader. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, we had agreed to make concluding remarks on the State of the Nation Address but there were some Members who had been asked to wait before the Government responds and I do not know which of them had been asked to wait. Who are those who had been asked to wait? I know those who contributed because I have got the list. I keep a record of everybody who contributes. Hon. Wamanga you did. You did not? Okay, hon. Wamanga, five minutes.

3.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sat here and listened to Members of Parliament contribute to the State of the Nation Address. Speaker after speaker lamented and talked about the problems that have engulfed this country. On the Government side and on the Opposition side, everybody raised issues of national concern. They talked about the economy, the roads, education and employment and you could see that everybody was lamenting. But I am going to restrain myself and talk about foreign affairs.

In the President’s speech, he just touched on the issues of the Great Lakes Region, as if Uganda deals only with the Great Lakes Region. There was no government policy or the President did not touch on the issue of North Africa and the issues of the world. There was nothing! 

This Government has no policy on Ugandans who are caught up in areas of conflict. The President did not touch on issues that concern Ugandans, for example, in Libya where there is an ongoing    war. They do not even have a policy of repatriation of our people. You will recall, hon. Members, that there was a Tsunami and nuclear disaster in Japan but the government did not come to the rescue at all of our people living in Japan! Not even those who work in missions. Members of staff working in our mission in Libya were not rescued. You can see that this Government turns a blind eye to the suffering of Ugandans. 

And they did not also talk about the foreign relations with other countries. You will recall that the Minister of Finance, while asking for the vote-on- account, smuggled in some missions for this Parliament to appropriate money to and give money to missions that even do not exist. The President did not even tell us the procedure of how the Ministry of Foreign Affairs runs. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is now run as a department of- (Interruption) 

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to discuss issues that are being handled by the Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs? Because those are the issues that have been raised by the Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs, and I am surprised that he is even discussing the question of Guangzhou here. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, not everybody is a Member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. The Members will benefit from that information but you are free to bring the final report of the committee when we are doing the budget. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was talking of the foreign policy and how missions are set up and how the Ministry of Foreign Affairs runs. I would like to remind the Member that the President appoints ambassadors who represent this country and they carry the foreign policy of this country. What I am saying is that, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that conducts our foreign policy has now become a department at the President’s Office – everybody serving in that ministry is appointed from State House, right from Grade II to Grade VI. 

I know that the President has got the prerogative of appointing ambassadors but the Public Service Commission, which should recruit people into the Foreign Service, is now rendered redundant. People now join the Ministry of Foreign Affairs from all sorts of life. So, the officers who join the civil service with the aim of reaching the highest post of ambassador are appointed from the President’s Office.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is making serious allegations, which he has not substantiated. He says that all officers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are appointed from the President’s Office. I happen to be in charge of the presidency and KCCA and I know the procedure. I do not know the officers he is talking about. Is he in order to make allegations without putting documentary evidence before this House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you please substantiate your allegations because I was under the impression that the Public Service Commission is the one that appoints officers to the foreign office. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I am speaking out of experience and I will give the information. What I know is that, the President has the prerogative of nominating and appointing ambassadors but there are people who have come in at Grade II level up to Grade VI. I want to give an example. Members will recall one officer living in London was appointed to the mission as Grade II, as a deputy ambassador, but the British refused saying they knew that person very well and had his record. They therefore said they could not accept him to go and shake hands with the Queen. The ministry had to transfer that officer to Geneva. 

Here is another example: While serving in China, there was an officer who had gone to sell coffee in a joint venture with the Chinese. But when the venture did not go well, this person was brought to the embassy as Grade II. Today, a consulate is being set up for this officer to become an ambassador in Guangzhou. There are very many officers who have been politically appointed from the President’s Office and are not career diplomats and I will bring the list - (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, you can clearly see that the honourable member has failed to substantiate and to give evidence. He said that an officer went on a coffee selling venture and that officer was not from the President’s Office. He has admitted that. The same applies to the first example. I know that even when the President proposes names, they are taken through the system legally. May I therefore request that since the Member has failed to substantiate, that record be expunged from the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are talking about people and things we do not know. Why don’t you include that information in the report of your committee so that we can listen to it in detail? It is now difficult for us to appreciate what you are bringing. Can you supply that information to your committee because - 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to give information but I also urge my colleagues to take some of these issues being raised, whether they are being raised by the other side or this side, as a good gesture because we want to improve foreign affairs. I have had a long experience with foreign affairs in this Parliament because I have been a Member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs since the Sixth Parliament and I was also a shadow minister. 

I had the opportunity to tour all our missions in Europe. During the time the late James Wapakhabulo was the Minister of Foreign Affairs, there was a reshuffle of RDCS – who are officers from the President’s Office – and all of them were deployed in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I remember vividly when our committee called him, he came and told us that the Foreign Affairs Ministry was not a dumping place and he was not going to take anybody. So, I think what the honourable member has raised should be taken in good faith because that ministry is in total mess. The manner in which officers are being appointed in these missions is frustrating career diplomats. I would like to challenge my colleagues to reach out to individual foreign officers, including at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and you will see the reality of frustration. This is because of political appointees. 

I visited Geneva where I found an officer who had not gone through the foreign service; he was wreaking havoc! He was a junior officer but would not even respect the ambassador and his deputy just because he was appointed from somewhere. That same officer was thrown out of New York because he had problems there as well. There is a problem in the foreign affairs ministry and my appeal is that we should accept some of the suggestions being raised.

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving regards the issue of appointment of ambassadors. On issues of international relations, the President is the chief diplomat in a country. That is what it is world wide. Therefore, he has the powers to appoint from within the career diplomats and also from outside. However, what has been done in some countries is to make sure that there is a system to check on the appointment of these diplomats, especially the ambassadors.

What we need to do as Parliament, and more so as foreign affairs committee, is to push for a system where we shall make sure that there is a balance, that we have enough career diplomats at the same time the President is given a leeway to appoint people who he thinks can work with him and deliver especially on issues of foreign affairs.  So, we need to work out that as a committee otherwise to say that the President will not appoint becomes very difficult.  But we need to have a system in place which will ensure that there is a balance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the reason why I proposed that you take this matter to the committee is, one, there are many Members here who do not have the benefit of your information and who were not here in the Eighth Parliament. So, if you brought it through the committee, we would have more time to debate it. I am just trying to help you and the House. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I brought up this issue because the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and our missions abroad carry out the foreign policy for this country. And I would like to tell the hon. Minister that I am talking about issues that I know. The officer who was rejected in London is called Kateera; the officer who was rejected in China is called Solomon Ruteega. So, I know the names.

But I wasn’t talking about the President appointing ambassadors; I was talking about career officers in the ministry who should go through the public service. These officers should be interviewed by the chairman, public service commission and posted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. But what is happening now in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is that career diplomats ranging from Grade VI to Grade II are very frustrated looking on as political appointees are being brought in and these are the people who are going to carry out our foreign policy while the career diplomats who have spent so many years in the ministry are frustrated. 

The issue of opening up more missions does not arise because the present missions we have are not looked after very well; even our foreign service officers are suffering. Government is not even paying school fees for them. They don’t even reach the standard of other countries. So, these are the people who carry out foreign policies for this country. We must take this issue seriously. These are the issues that this Parliament should consider very seriously because these people matter but are frustrated. 

We have proposed in our response that at least 50 percent is given to career diplomats and the other 50 percent is given to ambassadors. But the issue of recruitment of career diplomats should be left to the public service and then they are trained in the ministry so as to reach the top instead of just bringing in people who are not going to carry out a proper foreign policy for this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Wamai that is why I proposed that we might be assisted by the committee’s coming with these recommendations to be debated formally by the House and then adopted. 

3.54
MR MICHEAL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wouldn’t like to resurrect the pre-current debate but the previous speaker is the shadow minister for foreign affairs and I believe the Minister for Foreign Affairs will have time to respond to his statement. That is why I believe we didn’t need to entertain a lot of interjections. This is also my maiden speech.  

We would like to recoup what the President said in the State of the Nation Address, which we know has taken some time now. The President talked about health promotion; he spoke about maternal and child health; he spoke about prevention, management and control of communicable diseases in health and I will restrict myself to the field of health in as far as the State of the Nation Address is concerned.

I would also like thank Members of Parliament especially the Women Movements, NAWOU and UWOPA who pushed this Government so hard to ensure that it put funding for maternal and child health, and I also want to thank the President for yielding to the pressure of the women Members of Parliament -  (Applause) – and put Ugshs 24 billion for this cause. 

The President also talked about the control of Malaria by giving out mosquito nets. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the government for the distribution of mosquito nets. 

On a disappointing note, the President of Uganda who was previously rated very highly globally in the fight against HIV/AIDS has spoken on three occasions – this was the fourth occasion that he has addressed the nation without even mentioning a single word on the state of HIV/AIDS care in Uganda. I think the President has given up on the war against HIV/ AIDS, which is very disappointing.  Given the fact that the prevalence rates have presently stagnated at 6.4 and the amount of funding including the longevity of funding on HIV care has also remained very uncertain, and the President speaks nothing about HIV care which is a very daunting task to the health care system in Uganda, was so disappointing. 

On nutrition, the President spoke about promotion of nutrition in Uganda, however, he just stopped at that. We very well know that in Busoga region there was a so called “strange disease” where children had their limbs and tummies swollen. The Basoga called it a “strange disease” but it was Kwashiorkor- symptoms of protein energy malnutrition. 

Madam Speaker, you know very well as I do that we are working very hard for export production: we are exporting very nutritious foods including fish, beef and fresh fruits and the President went ahead to pronounce his commitment to support imports of nutrients in form of expensive tablets by cutting the import duty  on them.  This is a very similar scenario to what the medieval chiefs used to export very expensive minerals like gold and end up importing ornaments expensively.  

There cannot be an excuse for Ugandan children to die of malnutrition and particularly Kwashiorkor and Marasmus as it was witnessed recently. And then the President tell us in the State of the Nation Address that he will be committed to importing nutritional supplements at the expense of exportation of nutritious foods, which our children could feed on.  I regarded this as a very big anomaly of a responsible President of Uganda. 

The President did not even comment about the plight of the health delivery system although he talked about infrastructure development. We have seen a lot of infrastructure development but it is akin to shopping malls without attendants. It is in Uganda where we have seen an exodus of brains to countries which are poorer than us like Rwanda – to Kenya and the rest of the world. Ugandans are expert health deliverers to the rest of the world; it is in Uganda where we have got the brain in the drain and the brain drain. Why? It is because we do not care about the officers who deliver this health service.  

I happen to have accompanied you, Madam Speaker, to Kamuli District and we visited a health centre IV; it is very unfortunate that the district health officer passed away and some people reported to me that this officer died of poverty, and that is the microcosm of the health care delivery system providers in Uganda.

The President needed to care about the plight of the officers who deliver health care and mention it, and at least give hope that something will happen in order to address the plight of those who give health care in Uganda. I think this was irresponsible of the President and subsequently in the Budget Speech, it was also not mentioned.

As regards health promotion which the President insinuated, I have tried to peruse through all books- MTEF and even the current budget. We are giving very little attention to issues of prevention of diseases, maybe because it does not make a lot of political sense when the President and his officers are looking for votes. Infrastructure development can easily catch the eye of the voter and that is why most of the colossal sums of money go to that. 

But I do not think that health care delivery system all over the world is dependent upon treatment of the sick. It depends upon the prevention of people from becoming sick and that is where a responsible health care delivery system should focus.

I wonder why the President did not speak about these important issues when he was handling the section on health. Maybe because he was not briefed or because he does not care or because he does not know that it is important.

Finally, I presented a case in the Eighth Parliament about private, not-for-profit hospitals as I had been assured that Government is reducing its funding of these hospitals. These are missionary hospitals including the Catholic, Orthodox, Protestant and Muslim. The budget support to these private, not-for-profit hospitals, which are in 75 per cent of the most rural areas host the majority of our population. We have seen only Shs 17 billion for the last six years or so, yet most of our people who give NRM votes are in the rural areas.

Why didn’t these officers brief the President so that he mentions something concerning increment of the budgetary support to private, not-for-profit hospitals including posting or seconding of health officers to these hospitals, which care for our people? Maybe these NRM men and women, hon. Members of Parliament, want to fail the President in his support to health care. I believe that they were not very useful while briefing him on what to speak about health.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for being lenient to me and giving me six minutes instead of five. I rest my case.

4.05
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to contribute in this House with you as the Speaker of this House. I take this opportunity to congratulate you wholeheartedly and may the Good Lord give you wisdom to steer the House successfully.

I thank all the Members who contributed towards the State of the Nation Address. You really gave constructive ideas, which we feel the front bench on the other side should incorporate and make part of their plan in the execution of their duties.

I have two issues that were raised by Members I feel should not be left unattended to. There were two contributions that were made on the floor of this House as Members reacted to the State of the Nation Address. One was from Ntoroko Woman Member of Parliament when she said their dead are thrown away in the waters and members of the communities are not allowed to make comments for fear that the locals will fear to eat fish and our fish will not be exported.

I request that the minister in charge of this takes it up. It is a shame in this era to have members of Ugandan communities not respecting the dead. Let us give final rest and respect to our dead. I feel that Government should take this up and go to the ground after some time to find out whether a solution has been got for such a case.

The other concern was the Woman MP for Luuka who raised a concern that locals were leasing out land at Shs 300,000 per seven years. Madam Speaker, if this is allowed to continue uncontrolled, then we should not cry of food insecurity and some communities going without food. You cannot have a proprietor leasing land at Shs 300,000 in a lapse of seven years. I think this is injustice of the highest order. We request that Government follows this up and residents of Luuka District are helped out so that they do not get a raw deal out of this beautiful resource.

My comments will touch strictly issues of social welfare of Ugandans, and I begin with the question of agriculture. Cash crops like tea, cotton, coffee have almost been neglected. Farmers strive and fight on their own. One time, on TV, farmers were being forced to pour their coffee berries because they did not follow right mechanisms of drying them. I think this is really uncalled for and we call upon Government to take farmers through what to do and help them out on where they have failed instead of punishing them by having coffee berries poured out because the coffee does not meet exportation standards. I think the farmers try their best, so just help them produce the best.

On cotton, Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that your region and mine are some of the areas that produce much cotton for this country. The cotton industry has completely failed. This woman who is in charge of the Cotton Development Authority - every year Parliament votes money for the Cotton Development Authority but if you see what is on the ground, you really wonder where over Shs 5 billion goes. 

So, can something bring back sanity to this country because the cash crops have been neglected and farmers have resorted to selling food crops. The West will depend on selling milk, matooke and Irish potatoes, depending on what they produce and we end up having a lot of food insecurity in the whole country with some families living on porridge because they have to sell food crops in order to raise fees for their children and treat their sick ones.

Will Government take this up seriously so that in the absence of cash crops, farmers have some other thing they can depend on? They should not sell all they have and starve the following day.

This is connected to the question of markets - (Member timed out.)

4.11
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech in this Parliament. May I take this opportunity to thank God for granting me the opportunity to serve this country in this capacity as Member of Parliament! I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your elevation to this high office as the Speaker of Parliament. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the Members of Parliament for having successfully gone through elections and come to serve this House for five years. 

As you are well aware, my department has a number of issues which are cross-cutting. I would like to raise an issue on rehabilitation. I am aware that we had a number of industries that existed in this country, and they used to produce many products and this contributed to the development of this country. In the State of the Nation Address, I noticed that the President did not pay particular attention to the rehabilitation of industries in this country. We all know that Jinja was the industrial hub of this country and some factories, save those producing alcohol, have run down and have not been rehabilitated, including the textiles. We, therefore, call upon Government to follow this up.

Secondly, in the North, we have the question of Lira Spinning Mill which used to employ many people from the whole of the Northern region and these factories have been run down. Even the machines which were in these factories have been sold away and we do not know to whom they were sold. We call upon Government to seriously take up this matter and rehabilitate these factories so that our people can again get meaningful employment, pay school fees for their children and improve their welfare. 

Another aspect is in regard to relief and disaster preparedness. I am aware that Uganda has always, in the recent years, welcomed refugees from other countries. In this regard, I would really like to commend Government for the effort they have put to welcome other people from other countries like Rwanda and Kenya. However, the exercise of repatriation has taken place and what is worrying is that in some of these internally displaced camps, the issue of environmental degradation has arisen and there is really no meaningful programme to rehabilitate them so that they can become productive again. The areas which have been allocated to these refugees were actually productive places for agriculture - cash crops and also for subsistence crops. But at the moment, these places are not rehabilitated and our people do not have enough land for producing more food. (Member timed out.)

4.16
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, thank you. I want to first of all say that we are all Ugandans and that we are here in the spirit of building our country. We are not here to joke. I thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak and to also give my views about the State of the Nation Address, specifically following the docket which I hold. 

In the State of the Nation Address, the President did not make mention of what it takes for the housing sector in this country and yet we know that housing has not only become a need but also a right for the citizens of this country. 

First of all, I want to congratulate the hon. Members for their contributions and also acknowledging that there is a problem in the housing and urban development sector. In this country, we have a phenomenon of satellite cities and towns and we are faced with the so-called satellite cities developing in the midst of the capital city, and yet a satellite city is supposed to be a one-stop centre before reaching the major city. When you look at the set up of most of our urban centres in this country - and specifically, I want to address myself to Kampala - you can see that this kind of confusion in our urban setups and lack of planning for urban centres has led Government to make decisions, which do not favour the citizens of this country. 

I want to quote the Nakawa-Naguru demolitions which were done not in the interest of the occupants but in the interest of the individuals who are actually now benefiting from the facilitation of the taxpayers’ money. We also realise that in the same status, most of the buildings that are being constructed around the cities and towns of this country are not planned. Some buildings’ structural plans are simply forged and they are erected but no one takes concern on where they have come from and yet we have had people lose their lives out of such constructions which are not approved when buildings collapse. 

I was expecting that in the State of the Nation Address, the President should have mentioned that he shares grief with the people for there are authorities in these cities and town councils doing a disservice to this country but I never heard it.

The status of the roads in our cities is very alarming. The difference between an urban and rural road is just the vehicles – and this may be the number of accidents occurring on these roads. Our roads are dusty, pot-holed and not worth being referred to as urban roads. The President did not give us the status of physical infrastructure in urban areas and strategies to address the challenges.

Today, in Kampala, petrol stations are everywhere and yet you cannot see water points anywhere meaning that we are sitting on a time bomb. I would have also loved to hear from the President his position on that; that in the event that petrol stations are coming up anywhere, then we should have water points also being put up so that we know that the people in this city are safe. (Member timed out.)

4.22
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do fully associate with the reply given by the Leader of the Opposition and will therefore restrict myself to the issue of local governments.

In his speech on page 2, the President congratulated Ugandans upon successfully completing the general elections. However, the President did not say anything about the local council I, II and IV elections which have been pending for over 10 years now.

Uganda chose as a matter of policy to decentralise powers from the centre to local governments, which include local governments at the district, a local government at the sub-county and then local councils at the LC1. I hope my colleagues will know that this is my maiden speech – (Interruption)  

MR MULONGO: The hon. Member refers to the President’s speech on page 2 and when I opened the State of the Nation Address on page 2, I saw the table of contents – (Laughter) - I just wish to seek clarification to which document the hon. Member is referring to. I thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: Page 2 has the contents so let him know that it is not included in the speech. This is the content which shows what is inside. But for clarity, if you go to page 3, then you will find that the President was congratulating the country, which is also on page 4, that we had gone through the elections successfully. 

The Constitution of Uganda, Article 176 properly provides for decentralisation as a policy and the operation of local governments as a basis of getting power from the centre to the local governments. Article 181 (4) of the Constitution provides that all local government councils shall be elected every after five years. But we have not had elections for local council 1 -    

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, just a minute. I had forgotten to introduce hon. Baguma Isoke, a former MP who has been listening to the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

MS NAMBOOZE: We have not had elections for local council 1 for over 10 years now. The Resistance Council Judicial Powers Statute of 1987 establishes local council 1s as courts of law. 

When you go to villages these days, there is a lot of mob justice, conflicts and we have so many cases piling up at the magistrate courts because we do not have the local council 1 in place to adjudicate into these matters.  

The people working as LC1s are impostors and most of the councils do not have the required number of executives which is nine. Some of them died, others migrated while some people even abandoned their offices or are in prison and so we do not have a government at the basic level of LC1.

The Electoral Commission has been coming out to tell Ugandans that they do not have money to conduct these elections but one may wonder that if the NRM party is richer than the Government of Uganda – the NRM party held elections throughout the country right from the village to the districts and then how can we then say that a country called Uganda cannot fulfil a requirement, which is a constitutional demand that we hold local council elections every after five years?

These days, people are asking for districts but I also think it is partly because the LC IV does not operate, as there is a vacuum at that level. You find that there is no government at the county level and the first thing people will think about is to ask for a district because they have no political government operating at the county level. (Member timed out.) 

4.28
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will try to restrict myself to my docket which is the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs -I am reminded that I am a shadow. I seek protection from hon. Moses Ali.

I thank the President for meeting the constitutional demand of delivering the State of the Nation Address but I also want to state those areas, which I think were not properly addressed in the area of justice, law and order which appear from page 41 of the President’s speech. 

With gratitude, I note that the President addressed the area of the manpower and supply of labour in the police force through the establishment of a number of important units in the Police, among others, the Land Protection Unit. The President, with due respect, did not go ahead to tell us the mandate of this unit and I am raising this because the Police in Uganda are governed by the Constitution and the Police Act. 

Now, this is a unit which in practice has constituted itself into an appellant court that each decision of court must be approved and sanctioned by this unit before it is executed. This unit does not only intervene but also interferes with court decisions and that does not promote justice in this country.

If you go to Central Police Station today, the office at Kampala, the office of the commandant who is doing his very best, to say thank you to him, has over 100 people in the corridor waiting for him. Some are court bailiffs and others are litigants. In other words, it has also become an arbitrary forum in the country even when the matter has been concluded by a court of law. 

Secondly, the President at page 43 in paragraph 8, “In the prisons’ farms, Government was able to save Shs 2.4 billion on feeding prisoners”. That is commendable but the President does not go ahead to tell the country about the conditions in prisons. People are dying on a daily basis. I have the opportunity, as a lawyer, of visiting some of these prisons regularly and you see how many people are dying. 

The prison warders are sleeping in very abhorable conditions and the President does not tell us about this. His Excellency tells us in his same speech that in one of the police barracks, that is point No.7 on page 43, they established duty free shops. I do not know selling what? Posho or beans? 

These are people who have never experienced any increment in salary, wages and allowances for the last, I think, three years or more. The cost of living is going high. These are people sharing unipots. I have had occasion to sleep in one of these unipots as an abductee of the state. I mentioned for the benefit of hon. John Nasasira but I slept in this unipot as an abductee of the state. They are extremely hot during the day and extremely cold during the night and somebody is telling me that that is a balance. Yes, a person can afford to play around with that. I am told of a gentleman who was a vice-president in this country and was asked to improve the conditions in the prisons and he said, “When we send people there, we do not send them to hotels” and one day, he was there and he was told, “All we have is a plot for you. Six feet is enough for you”. So, someone can afford to say, you are balancing by making it cold in the night and hot during the day.

The President also informs us of the Shs 52.9 billion as awards Government intends to pay in form of compensation. But who causes this loss to the government is not addressed because when a policeman conducts himself in a disgraceful manner and shoots recklessly, the Attorney-General will defend and the government, you and I, colleagues will pay - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I now invite, Gen Ali.

4.36
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to say I am making my maiden speech. (Laughter) The rest were not maiden really because I was interjecting here and there, being forced to talk. So, this is maiden speech.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity and for protecting me. 

Secondly, I want to, like many of my colleagues, congratulate you and your deputy for the elevation to high offices and I would like to congratulate His Excellency for having been elected by Ugandans to that office.

I want to borrow from what you said last Sunday that elections happened at once. The President was elected; all those who stood for presidency were elected on the same day. Even the MPs were the same day so the decision was made there and then and therefore, the outcome was what I am thanking His Excellency for, the decision of the people of Uganda for deciding what they have done.

I also want to thank the majority of us here especially the old faces I have seen around me. I thank them for coming to give guidance to the new faces who are here whom I have also thanked for making it.

I think we will be around to guide and share with you our experience and we believe the new faces will help us together and the country to develop and implement the manifesto of the country.

I want to inform the House - and I am sure my colleagues know that I am proud to be one of the senior citizens in this country although during the vetting, people were doubting whether we would make it or not- (laughter)-but what would the young ones start doing before even experience? I was wondering! I am glad to be around as one of the senior citizens and key players in Ugandans politics. You can take this; may be bitter or not but this is a fact.

I also want to say that I am grateful to His Excellency for appointing me as Third Deputy Prime Minister and a Deputy of the Leader of Government Business. It does not matter really whether the House has recognised or not - (Laughter) - because it does not stop me from performing my duties. So, that one is okay. I am the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business. If this is also bitter, you have to swallow it - (Interjections) - under what law? You can go to court.

Apparently, I am not First Deputy today. I was First Deputy since 1994 and I was Third Deputy up to 1996. Then I become Second Deputy from 1996 – 2001. First Deputy from 2001 – 2005. So, whether you recognise me today or not, it does not matter. I have already been there; do you want to recognise me in arrears? (Laughter) 

And from all these years, I have acquired a lot of experience which I want to share with my colleagues. I have been listening but I did not hear any Member thank the President or the people of Uganda for working together to bring peace which we are enjoying now. Many people think this peace has fallen from heaven. So, once you fail to give credit where it is due, then it becomes a problem. 

There are also many statements made here and many of them are allegations, which are not substantiated at all. If you accuse some people who are not here in this House and you do not substantiate your statement, then it is not fair. So, I call upon colleagues to always be prepared when coming here. They should even write a statement and then it can be followed up from there – (Mr Wadri rose_) – it is my maiden speech. 

Let us learn to appreciate what is done and the peace which has been achieved. And if you take this peace for granted, then you will only realise its importance when it is not there anymore. It is like water in a pot; when you want to drink water and there is no water in the pot, then you begin wondering, “What happened, this madam did not bring water today?” 

So, peace is mentioned in the speech, but none of you even mentioned anything about it; you took it for granted. I am speaking on your behalf; to thank the President for all of you. We must recognise this peace and defend it because it is for every one of us irrespective of where you are. 

First of all, you need peace to stand as a Member of Parliament and it does not matter who you are or what party you belong to; peace is a pre-requisite. We must agree that we need peace – (Interjections) – this is my maiden speech and for your information, I am Deputy Leader of Government Business.

THE SPEAKER: The microphone will go off automatically.

LT GEN.(RTD) MOSES ALI: As I end my speech, I humbly pray to my colleagues and Government officials to teach the citizens how Government is run so that they are educated. They should show them how Government is run and how things are achieved rather than spreading violence - (Member timed out.)

4.46
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, while reacting to the President’s State of the Nation Address, the Leader of the Opposition and several other Members of Parliament raised issues concerning the education sector. 

We took time to look into the issues that Members raised including, among others, inadequate curriculum, underfunding of the sector, the students-loan scheme, low completion rates, lack of schools or vocational institutions in some districts or constituencies, poor performance in UPE, teachers’ salaries and hardship allowances, inspection of schools and closure of PTCs. 

I wish to give a summary of our responses to the above issues. To the curriculum, our primary curriculum has been reviewed and the secondly school curriculum is being reviewed while a strategic plan for business, technical and vocational education and training sub-sector has been finalised focusing on skilling Ugandans. 

Secondly, it is true that the sector is not receiving adequate funding, but Government is heavily subsidising the private students - my responses are a brief summary and I would straight away go to issues on students-loan scheme. 

A taskforce is in place to work out modalities of operationalising the scheme in 2012 academic year. Hon. Members will appreciate that this requires wide consultations with stakeholders and to learn from the experience of neighbouring countries since we are starting this scheme for the first time in Uganda. 

Fourthly, as regards the completion rate, available statistics show a steady improvement in the completion rate over the years. For instance, between 2006 – 2010, from a percentage of 42 percent to 45 percent - prior to 2006 – 2010, it was 54 percent.

Hon. Members, on the infrastructure, Government has plans, resources permitting to construct schools and vocational training institutions in areas that have no government-aided schools. In the short term, however, Government is partnering with private schools participating in the USE programme with private providers of business, technical, vocational education and training. 

As regards the poor performance of UPE, the NAPE Report 2010 by UNEB showed that the proficiency in numeracy and literacy in English had reached the percentage of 72.8 percent and 57.6 percent respectively; UNEB results show a pass rate of 80 percent. 

On teachers’ salaries and hardship allowances, these matters fall within the docket of the Minister of Public Service and in consultation with finance, they have been notified. Currently, there are negotiations with the teachers to come up with a logical conclusion on this matter.

On the inspection of schools, it is vital in ensuring quality education. I would like to thank Members who raised this issue. The response from the sector is that the Directorate of Education Standards has been strengthened with provision of extra resources to improve the modality of inspection. In addition, the Ministry of Finance now releases inspection funds directly to local governments to minimise any delays.
 
On the issue of the closure of PTCs which was raised by almost everybody, it was resolved in a week’s time. The Minister of Finance found money and in a week’s time, all the PTCs opened. 

In conclusion, the ministry is very grateful to honourable members for raising concerns about the education sector which is key in poverty reduction and a vehicle for supplying the essential human resources required for our economic development. All the concerns raised have been noted and will be addressed conclusively at an appropriate time. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. (Mr Okupa rose_) I thought this was a maiden address. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we allow that, it means other Members will open the debate. 

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, my minister is finalising and will be able to deliver her reply tomorrow. She asked me to apologise so that you give her a chance to do it tomorrow. 

4.53
THE MINISTER OF WORKS & TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to give responses on issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition and Members of Parliament. Let me congratulate the President for a wonderful State of the Nation Address he gave us. I think the people of Uganda were satisfied. 

Members raised concern over the poor quality of works. The alleged poor quality of works is not based on the scope of work or the specifications. People do not know what the scope is and then they start making allegations. But my ministry is going to make it a point from now on, to give this information to the leaders, including MPs, local authorities, RDCs and DISOs so that you can understand what is happening. 

The other issue was – some of the works we do are just stop-gap interventions. We do not do full blast remedial works. We just do small works to keep the roads passable. But because of lack of information, people - also I think that we have not done a lot of work. When I come to the 10,000km which Government took over, if you remember, we were given Shs 50 billion. That translates into Shs 5 million per kilometre of road. But to do a rehabilitation or full regravelling of a road, we need about Shs 25 million. In other words, the money you gave us was just enough for us to do remedial work to ensure that these roads are passable.

Value for money
There is good value for money for the roads my sector is handling. When you look into reports by the Auditor- General - I can cite a few. If you look at the Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe Road, the Auditor-General’s report on the Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima, they highly-rated the issue of having value for money. I totally disagree with my brother, the Leader of the Opposition, for alleging that there is no value for money. These projects are handled under the PPDA Act and procedures and even the development partners and everybody sees that things are done correctly. 

The delay of the contract

There are a number of reasons why these projects are delayed. One, the land acquisition, the right of way. As you know, the law says you must compensate before you do the work. We have no control over the values for compensation. Whenever the chief government valuer gives values people keep on arguing, going to court. You will be surprised to know that up to now, even on the Northern Bypass, there are areas we cannot work on because people have gone to courts. 

Design changes

This is an area where there have been some weaknesses within the sector. They were paying the consultants minimum money and you get what you pay for. But now, I have put in place that we must be prepared to give adequate money to the consultants and my officers will have to sign on the drawings saying, “I have approved, I have accepted,” so that they can take responsibility for the poor designs, if any. 

The other issue is about heavy rains, disruptions like the ones we had in Kenya. These are issues where we do not have any control. The rains we have now in Karamoja, Butaleja – even if I have a contractor there, he cannot go ahead and inevitably, the works have to delay.

The other issues are the administrative reviews. Administrative issues are complaints people make after evaluation. For many years, any evaluation is done at the time of award when you display. People have made it a fashion to ask for administrative reviews but I am happy to report that as of now, we are finding medicine for this. We have upgraded the PDU to a directorate. We have also engaged experienced engineers. We have also separated for procurement of goods and supplies – the sugar, mats - we have left them to other people but the key ones, works and services, have been separated so that they are handled by people who really understand what works and contracts are.

Lastly, on this issue, I have introduced for the first time in Uganda - because people were complaining of parallel evaluation; where the legal one is there, the contracts committee and what have you - I have now put up consultants evaluating in parallel so that we have somebody as a reference to see that things are done very well.

Poor absorption capacity of the funds allocated to the sector - this is history. As I talk now, my ministry has many roads already designed ready to be tendered out. Not only that, as at the moment, there are many projects where we have gone to tender, we have evaluated and we are just waiting to award. But I cannot award because I do not have funds. If I had funds I would have had so many projects going on. 

So, this question of poor absorption is history. As long as I am in charge, this issue of -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Let them reply. Any other issues will come in the Budget debate. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, the other issue was on poor management of contracts by the technical arm of government. We are taking care to ensure that contracts are handled well and we shall employ good supervisors, managers, technicians to ensure that things are done properly.

Local governments have a problem of capacity and my ministry is going to find a way of assisting them to see that things move on well.

In Kampala Capital City Authority, we have a problem -

THE SPEAKER: What is it, hon. Katuntu?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I have a problem. The minister is replying to the issues raised by honourable members. For example, the very last one he talked about, local governments, he says, we are going to assist them. Can he explain to us how he is going to assist them? We are not gossiping hon. Minister. We raise specific issues and we need answers. It is like the minister is not taking seriously the issues raised by honourable members from both sides. We need specific replies and answers to the queries raised and explanations and not this general talk he is indulging himself in.

MR BYANDALA: I thank hon. Katuntu. I thought by circulating my response, I would just – but for the benefit of hon. Katuntu and the rest, on local governments, my ministry has produced manuals. I hope you understand what manuals are. These are documents to assist them on how they should do work: design, drainage, the pavements and the rest. So, we are assisting them in that area. And I hope that those who were in the Eighth Parliament remember the money we borrowed from China EXIM Bank to buy equipment for local authorities. 

I am happy to report that very soon this equipment will be in the country and local authorities will be in position to do a lot of work by Force Account. Force Account, hon. Katuntu and the rest, means you do it in-house.

On urban roads, my ministry is in charge of the sector and we are trying to get a marshal plan for the urban roads, especially Kampala Capital City Authority. However, there is a lacuna in the law we passed. The law we passed, in Section 7, listed the responsibilities of KCCA. In Section 22, they said it would be the Ministry of Works and Transport to handle these roads. There was a big debate here but the people who finished writing this never cleared this matter. So, it has created a problem. The executive director was not happy and what we did, if you saw in the press this month, we handed over the works until this issue of who should do what is cleared. And very soon I will be presenting a paper to Cabinet to ensure that we know who is responsible for what. The Solicitor General gave an interpretation that it should be – but we didn’t want the two bodies to get into an argument. We want to handle the matter like civilised people.

In the same way with KCCA, we are allocating reasonable funds for them to handle the roads in the urban centre, like Kampala - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think the areas you are going to are important so I will give you three more minutes.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, on road safety, my ministry has short term measures, where we are to have sensitisation campaigns in schools and conduct public awareness campaigns about road safety. We are also going to start inspecting vehicles. In the medium term, we are going to have the Road Safety Policy and Strategy brought here -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let him finish. What is not cleared in this response should be addressed when we are discussing the Budget. The policy statements are coming. If I allow clarifications, we shall have to re-open this debate. 

MR BYANDALA: In the long term, my ministry is working on setting up the National Road Safety Authority. Right now road safety is spread in works, for the engineering aspect, in enforcement, education and health. What is missing is somebody to coordinate this and that is why we are coming up with this National Road Safety Authority to ensure that things can be implemented. 

We are introducing mandatory motor vehicle inspection. This would have started but when we advertised, people went to court. There is an injunction. We hope that this will be addressed soon. 

On the upcountry aerodromes, we are doing a lot of work on aerodromes in Kasese, Arua, Gulu among others. The Ntungamo aerodrome is there for all to read in the report. I do not have time to go through it.

The railway is something Government is seriously thinking about. The Uganda Government is doing works on the railway. We want to rehabilitate the Kampala-Kasese railway. We are now on the study of a standard gauge for Malaba to Kampala. We also want to build a standard gauge from Tororo-Packwach-Gulu-Atiak-Nimule but at the same time under RVR, we are going to rehabilitate the Tororo-Packwach railway line.    

On water transport; MV Kalangala and the dry dock are being worked on and by November this year, MV Pamba will be in operation. We have several ferries that we are working on. We have the Bugondo-Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido; the famous KBB ferry. We have already mapped out the route. We have made the design. What is now remaining is to build it. We are about to advertise for the building of this huge ship to ply Lake Kyoga. 

We already have the ferry for Lake Bisina on site in our yard but we are finalising with the landing sites.

We have the Rwampanga-Namasale; it is also here and we are just finalising with the landing site.

Kayunga-Kamuli; there was some technical problem but this has been solved. I had a meeting with the MPs from the two districts and we shall now go ahead as planned. 

Madam Speaker, I think that is enough for today.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not know whether all the MPs from Kamuli and Kayunga were consulted. You will satisfy me on that one later. 

I want you to join me in welcoming pupils of Hillside Annex Primary School in Lira, represented by hon. Joy Atim Ongom. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Now shall we have the Minister of Health and then water? Hon. Members, I want you to use this document for the next debate on the Budget. This is the property of Parliament. Whatever is missing here, use it in the debate on the Budget. You see, if I allow clarifications, I will have to open the debate for everybody. Please, just store them and I will see you in the other one. I will make sure when we are talking about infrastructure, I see you and hon. Namayanja. Yes, health and then water and then tourism.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also want to thank colleagues for raising a number of issues about the health sector. Indeed, the issues were very many but I have categorised them and I am going to summarise them. 

There were issues on human resources for health, medical equipment, medicines, decongestion of Mulago Hospital, reproductive health, districts without general hospitals, functionalisation of health centre IVs, health centre IV theatres, affirmative action for health facilities along the highways and our borders with the neighbouring countries and lastly, the National Health Insurance Bill as was raised in the speech of the Leader of the Opposition.  

These same issues have been raised in the Committee on Social Services, which this time round has taken two weeks to consider the ministerial policy statement on health. As I speak, the meeting is still going on. We started Monday last week and we end on Friday. These same issues have come up and we have done justice to them in as far as the debate on the way forward is concerned.  So, I would like to be brief this time round because I know when the report of the committee is debated here, we are going to debate the very same issue.  

On human resources, the main issue was first and foremost non-availability of certain cadres of staff in the facilities especially in the so-called hard-to-reach areas. But really, when you go around you find the same problem even in big towns. The facilities experience the same problem of non-availability of certain cadres of staff, not that they are not completely unavailable within Uganda but it is not very easy to attract them to go and work in those health facilities mostly because of poor remuneration, the general poor working environment, lack of staff accommodation, lack of equipment and lack of medicine and other health supplies in some cases. Where you have workers you find that there is still a problem of absenteeism, late coming and poor attitude of staff. 

What the ministry is doing especially about those last three issues is to strengthen the inspection capacity of the local governments. When we decentralised it was assumed that the local governments would have the capacity in terms of human resource and also in terms of financial resources to be able to move and regularly supervise and inspect the health facilities. This however, has not come to pass mainly because of lack of requisite human resource which I have already pointed out but also non-prioritisation of the inspection function of the local governments. Also, the quality assurance department at the ministry headquarters has for some time been with skeleton staff well knowing that we cannot effectively supervise and inspect the so many health facilities from the centre. So, what we want to do this time round is to allocate more resources to the local governments and strengthen their capacity to supervise and inspect the lower health facilities and in so doing we think we will be able to curb absenteeism, late coming and the poor attitude of the health workers towards the patients.

In terms of equipment, we are steadily improving. We are now able to equip our health facilities with mattresses, beds, delivery beds, examination couches, patient screens, et cetera. This was a very critical area and we went in very seriously but we first requested the local governments in turn to request health facilities to indicate the equipment they required. We had however guided that we should start with beds, mattresses, delivery beds and the rest that I have already mentioned because it is not enough to just put up structures and lack beds and mattresses for patients to lie on.

On medicine, I want to report that there is a general improvement. The stock-outs have reduced. However, we are not yet where we want to be but we hope to be there especially with the new policy, which NMS has undertaken to deliver medicine up to the health facilities. 

Now, there is still a complaint about other health supplies apart from the medicine and this is also being experienced by the regional referral hospitals, which are not many. The problem we have identified is that the procurement plans do not reach National Medical Stores in time for it to plan because the supplies like sundries are not procured within the country. They have got to be ordered for and procured abroad. So, we have encouraged the health facilities to make sure that the procurement plans are sent to National Medical Stores in time and orders are made in time then we can follow up where National Medical Stores has failed. But as of now, we think the problem is still with the health facilities not ordering in time.

On reproductive health, I know this is very dear to many of us. There is something I want to clear because it has appeared in the media that the Social Services Committee of Parliament will not pass the budget until issues of reproductive health are properly explained. We are really sorry that we were let down during the presentation to the Social Services Committee of Parliament, because what we had agreed on as priorities were not corrected. The technical staff had come up with certain proposals which we did not like and therefore, we amended. Now, when it came to presentation, which was a power point presentation in the committee, the same things were still there. We have, therefore, agreed with the committee that we shall sit down with them and do justice to the financing of the roadmap to the satisfaction of not only Members of Parliament but also the whole country.

On general hospitals, there is a general belief that every district must have a hospital. I would like to explain as follows: Hospitals are not allocated according to the district boundaries. We have a policy that a health centre II serves a population of 5,000 people; health centre III serves about 30,000; health centre IV about 100,000 and a general hospital serves 500,000 – I am emphasising the word “general” so that it does not give a connotation of a district. What you used to know as “district hospitals” are now known as “general hospitals”. Regional referral hospitals serve 2.5 million people. This explanation should help colleagues so that they do not come to the Ministry of Health to demand, “This place has been declared a district and it used to be a county with a health centre IV. Therefore, upgrade the health centre IV to a hospital status.” (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three more minutes.

DR NDUHURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will tie this with the functionalisation of the health centre IV theatres. You will agree with me that Government put up many structures out there in form of theatres for health centre IVs, wards and the rest. But since we are still experiencing challenges in attracting and maintaining health workers at that level, especially doctors and anaesthetic assistants who are very critical in the functionalisation of the theatres, it does not make a lot of sense, where you have failed to recruit just one doctor for a health centre IV for you to come and demand for that very health centre to be upgraded to a district hospital, which requires, on average, seven doctors. So, we shall have to move very slowly and cautiously. We should first consolidate the health centres we have to make sure they have adequate staff before we can think of upgrading these facilities to higher levels.

Regarding affirmative action or health facilities along the highways and borders, this is a very good observation. We have taken it very seriously and so in terms of allocating medicines and other health supplies and the non-wage recurrence funds, we will take this into account.

Concerning the National Health Insurance Bill, what had originally been designed was a social health insurance scheme for Uganda. This was limited to government workers and those in formal employment in private sector. During the course of drafting the Bill, it was found necessary to expand the scheme and cover everybody: community health insurance initiatives, the private commercials, the third party health insurance administrators. So we have now incorporated all these but we need Cabinet – that is where we are – to pass the additional principles because those which were initially approved were for a social health insurance scheme. The Bill is already drafted but we are only waiting for Cabinet to clear those additional principles and the Minister of Finance to clear the financial implications of the Bill. After that it will go to Cabinet and later we will come to Parliament with the Bill.

As I have already pointed out, we shall debate most of these issues again when the Social Services Committee presents a report. These are the same issues that are in it and, therefore, I request that I rest my case until that debate comes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister for Water? What about the Minister for Tourism? Hon. Members, it seems the Third Deputy Prime Minister has lost his troops. I, therefore, adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. We will start with the remaining ministries so that we finish by Thursday and close this matter. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.27 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 17 August 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

