Tuesday, 19 August 2003 

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this plenary. I also welcome you from the committees where I have no doubt you have done a lot. You should be able to deal with the budget process so that we are able to be in time. Because, as you know honourable members, according to the Budget Act, the reports of the committees in respect of the budget should be in by August 31. Last year, we were able to complete the exercise before the end of August.  We should now do better than we did last time.

Honourable members, I quite appreciate that this session is going to be an important session because I see a lot will have to be done including this year’s budget and other constitutional developments, as I have heard from the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs. I think the Ssempebwa’s Commission is finalising its report, and the minister has said that this year he may table the necessary bill to effect changes.  

My appeal to you, honourable members, is that in handling the work during this session, we should be cool and sober. Emotions and tempers should not be part of us because if we do things with emotions we may affect our views. As you know, the Hansard will not capture the temper; it only captures the substance of what you say. So let us handle the business coolly. Let us listen to each other; let us not show temper; we shall do a good job. You should know that decisions made here are your decisions; therefore, if you do not make proper decisions because of temper, you should not blame other people. So this is an appeal, which I thought I should make at the beginning of this session.

Honourable members, the Business Committee sat on Friday and plotted how we should handle the business available. I am sure you have received a copy of what we decided in that committee and the kind of business we shall handle. Of course, there may be other matters coming up. We shall always adjust our Order Paper so that we can accommodate the new business coming up.

Honourable members, you remember before we went to the committees, I informed you about the visit of the Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons, Sylvia Heal. She has sent me this letter, which I should read to you:

“I am writing to thank you for the excellent visit that was organised for me by your Parliament last week. In the course of a couple of days, I had the opportunity to meet many of your fellow members, and also to see something of both the rich cultural heritage and the beauty of the countryside of Rwanda. It was a wonderful experience, which I enjoyed greatly.  

In the course of this visit, I had many interesting discussions, and I shall be sharing these with Uganda’s many friends in Parliament here and, where appropriate, with Ministers. I was particularly struck by the efforts made to ensure that your Parliament is as inclusive as possible, and it was clear to me that these are bearing fruit.

It is my intention, in the course of the next few weeks, to write and thank personally, all those I met formally. I should, however, be grateful if you could see that my thanks are passed on to all who were concerned with the visit, particularly the staff who worked so hard in the background to ensure that everything went smoothly, and to the Police for the security arrangements.

Signed:
Sylvia Heal.”

This is an expression of thanks to all of you, and I wish you fruitful deliberations, honourable members. (Applause)

MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Leader of Government Business. Mr Speaker, you may recall, and you are aware that last Friday, a former leader of this country, Idi Amin Dada, passed away in Saudi Arabia. You are also aware that Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada was buried in the Holy City of Mecca. 

It has been the culture of this Government to pay respect and tribute to past leaders and leading personalities. I was told, Mr Speaker, to get clarification from the Leader of Government Business as to when the motion is going to be put for debate.

Secondly, I would also like to know whether Field Marshal, Idi Amin Dada is covered under the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act of 1999. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On top of what hon. Latif has said articulately, with reference to Article 98 of the Constitution, part one, Field Marshal, Idi Amin Dada was a former President of Uganda. If he was a former President of Uganda, he was a former Head of State, a former Head of Government and former Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces of Uganda. He was also the fountain of honour -(Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, without going very far into the matter, as articulated by the Imam of this Parliament, is it not prudent, since according to the Bible, the living cannot judge the dead, the main judge is God, that we observe one minute’s silence in honour of Field Marshal, Idi Amin Dada? Because we will all die and we cannot judge ourselves. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us exhaust this matter, if there is any other member.

MR GEOFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I have two issues, but since you have said we exhaust this one, I will respond to it. 

With your guidance, I want to speak passionately, and I look at Uganda. What my colleague has said is very important, but how do we approach it, Mr Speaker? Some of us have always recommended for the truth and reconciliation commission for this country. Because, if we sweep issues under the carpet, tomorrow, for example, if God allowed my colleague, hon. Sebaggala, to become a Head of State, he will try to undo what we are sweeping under the carpet. And because we have not moved to establish the facts of what happened, those who will be injured by his action may promote an act, which may result into a cycle of violence.  

Therefore, I would urge the Government of this country to establish a truth and reconciliation commission to assess the acts that have been committed by our past leaders, and then we see how to address them so that the current leader, in case he leaves power, he or she is not treated in a manner that he or she is treating those who are now out of power. I think this is the way forward to handle the scenario we are facing, Mr Speaker.

The second issue: I come from Malaba border and I want to thank Government for building Malaba Inland Port. I would like to bring this to your attention. Malaba is the entry point and the gateway of this country. Uganda Revenue Authority with its contractor has put a gate, which local people, tourists and all investors, who are on foot or on wheelchairs are supposed to go through. If that gate is not changed, first of all, it is going to cause the death of Malaba town.  

Secondly, persons who are disabled will not pass.  I have had discussions with Uganda Revenue Authority and the Ministry of Finance, but they are not showing any signs of accepting my proposal. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: As you remember, honourable members, we discussed what you are supposed to say after the communication from the Chair, in that it must be relevant to what has been said or something very urgent. I quite appreciate that this is an urgent matter, but I think it is something that can be handled by the relevant committee of this House so that a solution can be found. So we should restrict ourselves on very urgent matters because the man died, and therefore we should not postpone it.  

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for urging us to debate during this session with a lot of soberness. I thank God because while we were away in this short break that you gave us, one of the ministers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am not cutting you short, I will give you an opportunity. Is it relevant, because I want this matter of the former President – let us clear this one and then I give you more time to –(Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the writers pointed out that a man will always be judged by what he does while he is still alive and all the bad things that he does will always follow him. 

There are many of us who were in this country when Idi Amin was President. We saw one of the most brutal atrocities this country has ever experienced. This is a man who did not even have the shame of murdering a Chief Justice of this country. This is a man who went ahead and murdered an Archbishop –(Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleague and neighbour is raising a very important issue, but he has not brought such a case to the courts of law so that it can be judged. Is he, therefore, in order to raise it here when he does not have sufficient information?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know whether he can substantiate. Maybe he can.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, this debate was raised by hon. Lukyamuzi asking hon. Latif if he is bringing a motion before this Floor. Now it is like we are getting into a debate. I do not know what we are debating before the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are right. What we should do – I thought members were supplementing on what hon. Latif had said, but since it is not forthcoming, I would request the Leader of Government Business, the Rt. Lt. Gen Moses Ali, to respond to this.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (LT GEN MOSES ALI): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, in my own capacity, I must convey my personal condolences to the family of the former President of Uganda, the late Idi Amin Dada, who died in Saudi Arabia, as we all know, and was buried there. 

Since the news of his kidney failure reached this country, it aroused a lot of talk and comments from different sources including me.  Amin being a human being, he reached his end. He is dead, and in Islam we say, “Ina lillahi Wainna illayihi yurajiun.” That indeed it is from Allah that we came, and it is to Allah that we shall return; and this is what happened to Amin. As for us, when our time comes, that is also what will happen.  

It is also true that the moment you die, you take your last breath with you; you cease to contribute to your good or bad. That was the end of Amin; even if we wanted to try him, we would not because he is dead. So, we only leave him to answer to God because the only judgment left with him now is the judgment day where he has to answer like all of us will answer. Not only Amin, all of us. (Applause)

I come from West Nile. I worked under Amin and people are entitled to their views; so am I. As the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Disaster Preparedness and as a Member of Parliament, I would say, Government has not yet taken a position on whether we should stand for one minute’s silence. We shall communicate to that effect later. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was saying, thank God you have not lost a Member of Parliament; otherwise, today there would be a coffin in front of us.  

Mr Speaker, while we were transacting business in our committees, I went to my constituency. I had heard some news that a certain minister was going to open up a health centre in my constituency.  We heard a rumour that there were drugs in the National Drug Stores, and that there were some healthy centres being created in my constituency, and they were using these healthy centres, which do not exist to take drugs to Kampala market. I could not take on this matter because I had no evidence, but I had to wait and see.  

I was told at the district that there were boxes of drugs coming to my constituency, and they mentioned a health centre, which has never existed at all.  As I was entering my constituency, I saw the minister’s car following me - it is not the Minister of Health - I stopped him, as a senior colleague, and greeted him. He said he had a meeting at the sub-county headquarters. I asked him, “Honourable minister, how come I do not know about this meeting.” He replied, “You are not concerned”.  

But, of course, Mr Speaker, I was monitoring my constituency, I followed him up.  Reaching where he was going, he pretended that he had got lost, but my people had already informed me where the Pick-Up carrying drugs had been taken. Actually, before we reached that place, the minister asked one man called Kakooza; “Is this your Member of Parliament?” The man said, “Yes, he is”. The minister said, “This Member of Parliament is not clear, but we are investigating him in Kampala. You should also investigate him in this constituency”.  

Mr Speaker, I reached the venue and welcomed the minister. He asked me, “Are you part of this function?” I told him, “Honourable minister, this is Mityana North, and I am a Member of Parliament of this constituency. He asked, “Were you invited to this function?” I told him, “No, I do not need to be invited; if they did not invite me, they made a mistake.”  

Mr Speaker, I introduced the minister to the hosts. Of course, he is a new minister; he is not known in my constituency, about 20 people knew him. We sat in a small room, and then the minister asked the lady, the own of the house, “Do you know this boy?” The lady said, “Yes, he is our Member of Parliament.” He asked her,” Did you invite him?”  The lady said, “No, I thought he is in your company.” The minister replied, “No, I did not invite him, he followed me and even my security personnel were asking me whether he was not going to create some danger for me.”   

Honourable members, the minister asked me to go out of the room with him. He said, “okay, they have told me you are the Member of Parliament, but you are not invited to this meeting, so you should leave”. I asked him, why? He said, ”This is a family meeting.” Then I asked him, “Why is the district vehicle carrying lots of boxes of drugs; and why are you driving a vehicle which belongs to Government, and I am seeing a Director of Health Services in your company? 

Mr Speaker, after some time the minister asked me, “Have you decided to stay here by force?” I told him, “No, not just by force, but legally I am supposed to be here.” At that time we were out. So I went back to the house before him and we took our seats. What annoyed me most is that he asked the lady again, “Did you invite this boy to this function?”

The woman said “no”, then the minister ordered her – The lady has a house in the constituency but she is not even a constituent; she is not a voter from that place, but she normally comes from Kampala and - I may not go so much in that.

After some time the minister persuaded the woman to force me out of the house. The lady came where I was seated - It has been published today in Bukedde newspaper. She held my collar and pulled me with the support of the minister and I fell down. We were still in the house, and I wanted to clean myself in order not to feel so small before my constituents who were outside.

When I went into the temporary structure, which they had constructed outside, I met some ladies who asked me what was taking place. The minister remained in the house with a man called Dr Ssematiko, who works with the National Drug Stores - he is a pharmacist - and other people. Of course I know all of them.  

After about 20 minutes, the minister came – (Interjections)

HON MEMBERS: Shame, shame!

THE SPEAKER:  Order, order.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, as if this was not enough, when he came out with the lady and the other group of people he asked; “Is this boy still here? I told you to chase this boy out of this place otherwise I am going.” Then the lady pulled out her shoe and got a big stick to chase me. Poor Member of Parliament, without security personnel, without even a driver, the only thing I had to do was to run for my dear life!

According to the information I got later, the minister blamed me that I hosted multipartists in my constituency during my victory celebrations on 1 August 2003. Secondly, that I was promoting Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, yet the minister is supposed to be the next President. I was so – (Interjections) 

HON MEMBERS: Shame, shame!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the beginning I appealed to you that this will be a very important session and we have to be sober, no emotions, no tempers. I said the Hansard would not capture your temper. Let us listen to him and then proceed.  

MR KIWANDA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I came back on Saturday and on Sunday I spent the whole day here but there were no Members of Parliament. I called hon. Lule Mawiya and I shared with him my experience. I could not even share it with my wife or else I could be taken as a coward.

Mr Speaker, if this is the way Members of Parliament are going to be treated in their own constituencies by ministers, you are going to see many coffins here. My life now is in danger.  When the minister left my constituency, he left a paper urging my people to make a petition to get me out of parliament that I abused him. 

My only humble appeal to this honourable House is to seek for your protection. And the minister is none other than the hon. Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka. I thank you, Mr speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is his personal statement.  Can we proceed?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have looked at the Order Paper. I know it was made before I could put my input in it. I was requesting that after some time you allow our committee to put to Parliament a status report and the loan request before it, because they have very big implications on the budget. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, true honourable members, when the Business Committee sat to plan for the business we did not have your input. But we shall be able to adjust to allow you to put in the report because it is part of the budgeting process. But today was earmarked for the Committee on Finance. Let us see how to proceed, then later we may be able to accommodate you. 

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to respect your ruling and our Rules of Procedure that a personal statement should not be commented upon. But I want also to respect the issues raised in the statement by hon. Kiwanda and they concern yet another honourable Member of this august House. More importantly, bigger dignitaries have been mentioned by the names of the Vice President. If it is not against any rule, I would beg that the issue be forwarded before the disciplinary committee and maybe for somebody to get an opportunity to give a defence if there is any. Otherwise, I think the whole august House is hurt by this act (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is the problem: Are we going to turn this into a trial? Before I came in, I had asked hon. Kiwanda whether he intended to make a personal statement and he said yes and he was conscious of the rules but he preferred to have an oral personal statement without having planned for it. He has made it and we are going to examine it, because we do not make decisions here now. We shall examine it and if it is necessary to send it to an appropriate committee that will be done. But if we turn this one into a trial, then I do not see how we can really end it.

MR MULENGANI: Mr Speaker, I am of the view that it should not even be considered whether it is worthwhile or not. Because, according to the information we have received reliably, it does not need considering that it is worthwhile or not worthwhile. I will propose that you go ahead and declare this a worthwhile issue to be handled by the necessary committee.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: On the evidence I have, I will handle it. (Prof. Kiwanuka rose_). No. But Professor, unless you want to make   -(Interruption)- Order, honourable members. Prof. Kiwanuka, Minister in charge of Luwero, is a Member of Parliament. In case he is interested in making a personal statement, I will also accord him an opportunity to do so. It will not be today because if I do it now, it will be a trial, and I will not permit it. You will requisition time, then I will see how to do it.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing up on two issues. One is to welcome you back from Kenya where you accompanied us to the CPA meeting. I think our team leader, who happens to be you, will report in due course of what transpired in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association in Nairobi.  

Mr Speaker, I did not stand up specifically for the issue of welcoming you from Kenya to handover the flagship of the CPA of the region, I stood up because of the tears of the people of Kamuli. As we speak now, the CAO of Kamuli has been forced out of his seat by some big wigs. In a situation where I do not have a single road in my constituency; in a situation where all my schools have been denied SFG, where the CAO’s hands have been tied; I need intervention in the Kamuli issue at this moment so that the crisis is solved. 

All teachers are not receiving salaries. In a situation like this, we are denying democracy; we are denying service to the people of Kamuli. I do not know for how long the situation will go on. But as you know, in my position, I have been clamoring, in this Parliament, to the Minister of Local Government at least to help the people of Kaliro to have their district. The situation is getting worse, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you have put the point across. The Minister of Local Government is here; he will be required to make an appropriate statement. Let us proceed with the business.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i. The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2002/03.

ii. The budgetary proposals for the fiscal year 2003/04 estimates of revenue and expenditure.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/04

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you remember, the motion was carried. After the general debate, we agreed to form ourselves into a committee of supply and we shall immediately start a committee of supply. But before we do so, I would like to know the position of the chairperson whether he is ready to proceed with a report to the committee of supply. 

Maybe before you proceed, in that meeting of the Business Committee, we considered how we should handle the matters of the budget. You have done a lot of work in the committees, but we observed that overseeing your respective ministries does not only end when we are dealing with the budget. Committees are free, if there is an important matter affecting the respective ministries, to requisition time so that we can always have a general debate, instead of thinking that matters affecting the supervision of ministries end during the budget time.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report of the committee was ready, based on the information we had. However, there was some fundamental information that the committee required to make reasonable conclusion, and this information was received this morning and the committee had proposed to make an addendum.  

Mr Speaker, in the spirit of fairness and also to protect the image of Parliament from being seen as a rubber stamp, we request that we table our report after we have consulted with the Minister of Finance. And I want to inform the House that we have agreed that we meet tomorrow morning, and the only area to amend is the last page of the report.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard that the committee is not ready. There is an important issue the committee has to consider, and he wants to table his report tomorrow.  So, in view of that, we cannot proceed with the report because it is not ready. I would then say that if the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy has a brief report to give us, we could utilize this time. We cannot waste more time on this.
 
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am standing on a point of procedure. As we sat in the Business Committee and looked at the busy schedule whereby we have to beat time to pass the budget, each committee was given one day and we have two committees presenting in a day. I am wondering about this adjustment of the Committee on Finance. Which committee is again going to forego when we have the Committee on Finance fitted on the programme? As far as I am concerned, tomorrow we are supposed to receive the report on Works, the next day, Agriculture, on Friday Social Services, Monday we shall have two committees and we have to beat this programme by 1st September.  So, I want that guidance. When shall we find time for Finance? Or we shall go by our timetable and then they come at the end?

THE SPEAKER: I entirely agree with your observation that we are conscious that the reports must be in by the end of August and this is in the law itself. But there you are; we are faced with the problem that there is an important issue that has to be discussed and be included in the report. We shall try to accommodate each other, but certainly tomorrow we earmarked it for Works; we shall see how we handle it. But what do we do? He says he is not ready. 

Now, honourable members, we had decided to start with the Committee on Finance mainly because it is also responsible to give us reports on other bills that go together with the budget. So, we wanted it to dispose of its report so that it can have time to deal with other amendment of Excise, Customs Act and so forth. That is why we had planned it that way. But we have been told that the committee is not ready and it is an important matter, we shall see how we can adjust our time.

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Given the importance of reports on ministerial policy statements, can I seek your guidance whether it would not be possible for the committees to distribute the copies of their reports at least two days ahead of time for those who are not Members of these respective committees to have had chance to read through and cross-check references for effective debates on the Floor of the House? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This is an observation, which the committee also made when we met, and we agreed that Members should have sufficient time to study the reports. This would help us to spend little time on this or the other. I agree with you. The committees are requested to expedite distributing copies of their reports to the honourable members.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am presenting to you the Status Report of Loan Requests before the Committee on National Economy. The following Loan Requests were referred to the Committee on National Economy by this august House for detailed scrutiny as mandated by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Article 159:

• The Islamic Development Bank loan for co-financing with Government the Rural Micro-Finance Support Project and the amount involved is US$ 2.95 million.

• The African Development Fund loan for the National Livestock Productivity Improvement project, which amounts to US$ 29.6 million.

• The IFAD loan for the Rural Finance Services programme and the amount involved is US$18.3 million.

• The IDA Supplementary Credit for Lake Victoria Environment Management project. The amount involved is US$ 4.5 million. 

• The IDA Credit for Phase II of the Local Government Development programme and the amount involved is SDR, 36.7 million.

• The IDA Credit for the Poverty Reduction Support, No.3 and the amount involved is SDR 120.0 million.

The analysis:

All the above loans have been analysed and below is a brief analysis for each loan:

The Islamic Development Bank Loan:

Hon. Rukutana, Minister of State for Finance (General Duties) withdrew this at a committee level last year. However, the committee had seen it as a poorly structured loan because it was discriminatory and it was to be used by a few selected micro-finance institutions in 13 districts only. We have written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to integrate this loan with the IFAD Loan, which is to support rural finance services programme.  

The IFAD Loans for Rural Finance Services:
This loan is meant to reach every sub-county in the country to support Ugandans with micro-enterprises needing the micro-finance to fund their businesses. 

The committee supports the overall loan objective, to reduce poverty and the loan request should be tabled as soon as time is allocated. Members should take particular interest and see that these funds reach all constituents for the benefit of all Ugandans. 

There is a micro-finance programme component in every ministry.  For example, we have Fisheries, we have Lands and Environment, we have Lake Victoria Management Project, we have Forestry among others. All these have micro-finances.

The committee has requested that the Ministry of Finance centralizes and harmonizes micro-finance for proper monitoring and effective utilisations by placing them under one ministry. The problem here is that every ministry now is giving micro-finance, which is a duplication of services.

The African Development Fund loan for the National Livestock Productivity Improvement:

The committee had a joint meeting with the Committee on Agriculture and also met the Minister in charge of Livestock. However, the following are still outstanding:

• The restocking exercise is being implemented by the Prime Minister’s Office and it is important for the committees to know the gaps and how many animals are going to be purchased and how much each district is entitled to receive.

• How far, in the past, did the Prime Minister’s restocking exercise go and at what stage is it?  This will tell the committee what it has done to-date and what remains to be done.

• This project is a continuation of an old project, which requires end of project and audit reports.  We await the audit report and end of project report. You recall this involves the valley dams report, among others.

• The committee also learnt that on 2 June 2003, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed a loan agreement with the lenders before parliamentary approval. We are awaiting the response from the minister on this matter.

Lake Victoria Management project:

The committee visited the sites to see what the initial US$37 million had done. The committee found out among others that at Luzira, there is a factory, which is discharging most of the bulk of the waste in the lake. And the project has not achieved its goals in this particular case.

In Entebbe, there is a fisheries laboratory, which was built at a cost of US$ 200,000 and yet it is small and already has cracks.  

In Rakai, there is a forest of trees being grown but the trees looked very young and yet the project has been around for a long time. 

The number of equipment acquired like vehicles among others, are many and still the project is requesting for more equipment to be acquired like vehicles.

In the fisheries sector, we approved a loan of ADB of UA23 million in this Parliament for fisheries department, to handle fish fries at Kajansi and the same project plans to do the same implying double funding. Because of that implication, the committee still needs more information.

The committee wants to see what sister countries such as Kenya and Tanzania, have done with their share of funds. Therefore, the committee is still waiting for more information to be able to dispose of this loan request.

Local Government Development Programme (II), which needs 37 million SDRS:

This is a continuation of LGDP I, and the committee wants the outputs of LGDP I project to be presented. 

This one, in the committee’s thinking, was meant to implement the projects left by LGDP I, but much of the resources are going to training workshops, seminars and consultancy. Consultancy alone is going to take US$19 million; you can imagine! We need the exact units going to be achieved out of this project, say number and length of roads if that is the case. Of course this may call for redesigning some of the components of the project.

The IDA Credit for the Poverty Reduction Support No.3:

The committee has requested for satisfaction of the conditionalities that were set up for it to qualify. The committee awaits response from the Ministry of Finance on this matter.

In conclusion, most of these loan requests consist of training, workshops, seminars, consultancy and vehicles. It is imperative that some of these should be seriously scrutinised to save resources to be utilised elsewhere where there is greater need. 

Uganda needs to critically examine the need for seminars, workshops and consultancies, as it appears to be abused. The country has been building technical capacity since independence and much of the local capacity is not being fully utilised.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, what will budget support loans be? When do you intend to complete these, if they are budget support loans? 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. As soon as we get this information, the committee is determined to dispose of the cases as quickly as possible.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for giving us a briefing on a very important sector, the economy. I need some clarification on the following. 

Mr Speaker, the criteria we are using to decide on these loans, in my view, need re-examination. I have not heard of any occasion where we have rejected a single loan. It means we are not carrying out sufficient scrutiny, because some of the terms for borrowing this money are not very good for the people we represent.

Lastly, I was at one time acting chairman of the Natural Resources Committee. I remember the problem we had with that committee. Many of those loans, if you re-examine them, create an impact on various sectors of the economy. For example, you talked about the Lake Victoria Environment Management Programme. You may find that there is insufficient capacity to evaluate that loan on Lake Victoria without the input of the Natural Resources Committee. In so doing, if you go ahead to approve the loan, you injure the taxpayers because you leave out some salient factors that would have helped you judge the appropriate loan.  

In light of that, I would like to propose very seriously that as time goes on, the committee should alter the trend it is using. When it finds it absolutely necessary to seek the advice of a committee, like the Natural Resources Committee, it should do so, instead of going ahead to approve a loan that will eventually become a catastrophe to the taxpayer. I hope he understands.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  If I remember very well, this House has approved a number of loans and with these loans there is always talk of capacity building. I request that this committee carries out a very special audit on this capacity, because we may be talking of capacity building when no capacity actually exists on the ground. 

Almost every loan has capacity building. You go to PMA, they talk about capacity building, but in the constituencies there is no capacity on the ground.  Mr Speaker, we may keep on building capacity and yet this capacity may never exist. We may have to rethink whether instead of building capacity we should divert some of these funds to actually buy implements for people on the ground. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we shall need a special loan to audit our capacity. I am really very concerned about this capacity. We want to see it on the ground and have it audited. This House wants to be assured that the capacity we are talking about for this loan is actually there and has been built. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the issue of critically reviewing our loans is very important. It needs to be given very serious attention by not only this House but also other stakeholders. I think it is very important for other people at the lower levels of government to actually account for the money, which has been approved by the Parliament. 

We are seeing a situation where a few people dream of a project, they connive with some foreigners, they are able to come and sell it to this Parliament and we approve. The money is reflected in this country but bounces to other countries. 

A situation like this, Mr Speaker, is not tenable especially when Uganda is still poor. We are still below the 300-dollar GDP level. Therefore, if we borrow money, it must be seen to be conquering poverty positively. At the moment, the money we are borrowing is actually worsening the situation. It is just creating a syndrome of borrowing and dependency.  

I think it is very important that when we borrow money, we account for its usefulness ourselves, not only the Parliament, but also the lower levels. 

This money is borrowed so that every village gets a fishpond. We are not going to be dependent on Lake Victoria or Lake Kyoga, but now on every rivulet there should be a fishpond, which has come as a result of the wise decision of Parliament to approve a loan in the Fisheries Department. 

If you move around, you will find that there are no fishponds being created. In fact, people now are eating heads of fishes instead of eating the whole fish. Ugandans are being left to eat only the heads and the good parts are being sent for export. This situation is not tenable, and yet we borrowed money to refurbish this fishing sector so that everybody abroad and all of us here enjoy the fruits of nature, which exist abundantly in this country.  

I think this is very important, and I must thank the chairman of this committee for having come out to point out to us that there is sickness here. We are borrowing endlessly, but we are not deploying the money carefully and we are not measuring its returns. I think it is now time that the Parliament puts pressure on whoever is in charge to critically review and monitor the impact and result of our borrowing. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking clarification from the chairman regarding Lake Victoria Environment Management Project. I am bringing this up because I know the advantages of this project. I know what the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project has actually done as far as protecting our lake is concerned. 

However, of recent, this project has employed soldiers from President’s office who go around the lake soliciting money and beating fishermen. There are various boats on the lake. I do not know whether this loan they are applying for this time will buy a boat, which will be well labelled. When you contact them, they say, “No, we are not the ones”. But when they are soliciting for the money, they say, “we are protecting the environment and the fishing methods are not good”. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether this is the work of the Environment Management Project or another section within the Ministry of Fisheries, because our fishermen every time are being told different things. For example, today officials can come and say that the required fishing gear is six inches and fishermen must comply and buy that. After a month, they come and say that six inches are not allowed. If you have six inches, they say they want 10 million shillings from the Island and they collect the money and go. 

We do not know whether the money we are actually approving is going to help our fishermen or it is again going to put them backward. The Lake Victoria Environment Management Project should acquire a boat and mark that boat. The boat should have a flag such that if anything goes wrong, the people of the islands can say that it was such and such a boat. They should do this rather than have soldiers as employees. 

They have talked about capacity building, I do not know whether capacity building means recruiting officers from State House to solicit money from the fishermen. I thank you.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the committee and I just wanted to react quickly to the suggestion by hon. Lukyamuzi. He said that we might not be doing justice if only the Committee on National Economy are the ones assessing the effects or needs for this loan. 

I wanted to propose something. I think we had the opportunity to meet with the Committee on Agriculture, where the fisheries sector is, and we had a detailed discussion with them. Even when we went round, we thought we had a deeper insight on this. But if the Committee on Natural Resources feels that it should make some input, I think we would not refuse. 

Circumstantially, we appreciate that these concerns being raised by members should appropriately be addressed, maybe before we have a final say on this loan. That is what I wanted to add.

MR ANTHONY YIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the LGDP II. When the chairman of the National Economy Committee was talking, I got the impression that the Ministry of Finance had not given them enough information to enable them recommend to this House to approve the loans. This   baffles me! Why should you take this long?  

The LGDP funds are funds that local governments are using for development work in our constituencies and sub-counties. So, the more we delay these funds, the more we shall get problems and the impact on the ground will not be there. I think the Minister of Finance should give us an explanation so that Parliament is not blamed for delaying to approve these loans. Parliament should not be blamed when the problem is with the sector ministers and the Ministry of Finance.

Mr Speaker, the other concern is about the resources, which are going to be spent on capacity building. First of all, I would like to thank the chairman for revealing this. I also want to request that when he is considering the LGDP II loan, maybe he could invite some members of my committee and liase with them so that you are able to understand what LGDP II is going to be spent on.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of capacity building, you find that much of the money for capacity building remains in Kampala here. We end up buying luxurious vehicles that cost millions of shillings. Four-wheel drive vehicles, which should be in the districts, are in Kampala. I think we need to come out with a policy on capacity building so that much of the capacity building funds should really be spent in the districts. (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: I want to seek clarification from the honourable member. He says that this money remains in Kampala, but I want to state that this money is not anywhere in the constituency of Kampala. I think it is in the offices. I wanted this to be clear.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, it is a coincidence that the headquarters of the central government and all central government ministries are in Kampala. That is why I am saying that all these luxurious Pajeros, Land Cruisers, cars above 4000cc capacity, are here in Kampala. I spoke in that context. 

We need to actually follow up this issue because my committee is also concerned about capacity in local governments. Every ministry complains about capacity in local governments and yet in every ministry there are funds for capacity building. These funds are meant for local governments, but this capacity is never developed. So, we should find out what the problem is. 

There is a lot of money for capacity yet capacity is not developed in local governments. We need to take this issue seriously, Mr Speaker. Otherwise, we are really doing a disservice to this nation if these funds are not put to proper use.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I just have two points. One, I think the question of capacity building is not bad. We should all agree that we need it if a country is to develop. We have young people coming up and they need to be trained, and once they are trained they go to another sector.  

Even us Members of Parliament, need capacity building. It is training that has to go on until one dies. For example, former MPs, maybe after 20 years, can all go to the constituencies and then they become part of the civil society and they can monitor the issue of corruption, become board members and become advisors. 

Because of the politics we have in this country, we have local councillors serving for four years, then they are voted out and the new ones come and they need capacity building. You have new technology coming in, new knowledge, new plans, and we need all of them. But the problem we have is coordination and implementation, and that is what we need to address. 

At times you go to a district like Tororo, you find the Ministry of Agriculture, the water sector, the ministry in charge of roads, the ministry in charge of fisheries; so, there is poor co-ordination. You find the CAO who is supposed to co-ordinate this programme being invited to Kampala, being invited to attend fisheries meetings, being invited for agricultural meetings. This duplicates work, and they also have little time to implement and monitor programmes. Otherwise, capacity building itself, if well structured and well co-ordinated, is good for Uganda. (Interruption)

MR HENRY BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the member on the Floor for giving way. I would like to tell this House that actually, capacity building should be planned. Some time back, we visited some hospitals in western Uganda and found patients not being cared for because the doctors were always going for workshops. In fact, the doctors complained that these workshops were too many and they wondered what was happening. 

So, Mr Speaker, there is a need to consolidate these workshops and to plan them so that resources and time are not wasted. 

I was also wondering, Mr Speaker, whether the education system does not build capacity, because people learn everyday and yet they go for workshops.  So, what is our education system doing? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Thank you for your information. I think, Mr Speaker, he is saying the same thing.  

I will go to the LGDP issue, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This loan was badly structured. There are provisions with names of people to implement it, and even the amount of money they are supposed to get is indicated next to their names. For example, there are consultants who are supposed to get Shs 400 million each, in a period of three months. Some of these people are civil servants in the Ministry of Local Government, and that is why the LGDP II is being delayed. 

We want the ministry to restructure the loan instead of putting Ekanya Geoffrey as a consultant, who is entitled to this in three months. We think this is very unfair to others.  

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. We realised that the budget support loans should be passed before we pass the budget otherwise we will do ceremonial work of rubber-stamping. Even if there is a problem with a loan and Parliament has passed the budget, it becomes very hard for the Committee on National Economy to say no, we cannot pass this loan because we have already passed it here.  

Last year we recommended that the Minister of Finance brings all these loans and we pass them before the budget. Otherwise, it is a waste of time for the Committee on National Economy to continue delaying with these requests once the budget has been passed. Therefore, Mr Speaker, we shall seek your guidance to see that the budget support loans are passed before we pass the budget.

Lastly, we have also requested the Minister of Finance to lay the debt payment strategy in this House, for members to discuss and adopt. When we requested for it, they gave us a debt payment strategy that ends in 1999 and yet we are now in 2003. The people of this country want to know what our current debt portfolio is. Show us whether it is US $ 4 billion or US $ 3 billion and how Government intends to pay it. It should be an elaborate document, which the Members of Parliament understand. Once we bring a report on any loan, it will become easy to save. 

I hope, Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance will lay on Table the latest government debt payment strategy as it stands today. This will enable us operationalise and speed up the process of approving loans in our committee. Thank you very much.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now we are implementing the Budget Act, which provides that Parliament participates in the budgeting process, and I think the Executive has taken it fairly well. Why then shouldn’t it be possible for the Executive, before they have gone through the process of negotiations with the lending institutions, to involve Parliament in structuring a loan? So that by the time they come to seek for official permission from Parliament to go and get the money from the lending institutions, the relevant committees of Parliament have participated. That way, the concerns of hon. Ekanya, Member of Parliament for Tororo, will have been catered for. 

Mr Speaker, many times the Executive has brought loan requests to this Parliament and they say the loan has been structured in a certain way and they cannot change because they have gone very far with the lending institution. And many times how the loan has been structured is not in the interest of this country. Parliament would have given in some good input; they can say so much should have been put here, so much here, and so forth.  

Parliament should have some input, rather than bringing a loan here, which is already determined and we just have to give a go ahead to the Executive, even when we know that much of the money we are borrowing is not going to be helpful to this country. I thank you.

THE MINISTRY OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I just want to thank the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for his report on the status of the loans.  But I want to say that this report has taken me unawares. Of course, there are very good reasons for every loan that we may not have pursued. There are very good explanations for all the issues that have been raised here. But as you saw, the chairperson was reading from a report and I was not notified about it before. I did not have a copy of the written report and I find myself unable to respond to the concerns raised in the report.  

Nevertheless, I want to thank him. I think it is very good for us to review these loans continuously. It is really very good that the committee has taken it upon itself to see that all the loans we are pursuing are taken to their logical conclusion. 

Mr Speaker, at a later date I will give responses to the issues raised by the chairperson and the concerns raised by the members in respect to these loans. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All these concerns I have raised are already with the Ministry of Finance and the ministries where the loans fall. 

I will start with hon. Ken Lukyamuzi’s concerns - I am sorry he is away - but the Committee on Natural Resources has been involved with the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project. We were with the chairperson on all the tours we had. It is unfortunate if hon. Lukyamuzi never attended, maybe because of other commitments in environment, but the committee was involved. The committee is still reviewing the loans and he is free to come join us.

Of course, I have to produce the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project end of year report, and the audit report. This is very vital and it will show the success and the failure of the first one.

Hon. Ssengo talked about capacity building. True, there is a lot of capacity building but we should know one thing: if we advertise the job of an accountant, there would be basic minimum requirements. And everybody who is short-listed for that job has got the basic minimum requirements. So, we are building the capacity but it is true we do not know what it is. I think this has been the concern of everybody. In fact, they are saying Uganda has been “over workshopped” and “seminised”. So, it is time the Government came up and – (Interjection)- you see I come from the mountains of the sun. That is perhaps the Lugisu, and the English, from the mountains.  

So with time the Government has to come up and see the capacity we have. It is also important that the Ministry of Public Service carries out a census and assesses the manpower we have in Uganda, in conjunction with the Ministry of Labour, because this is quite important.

It is true there are a lot of workshops. Everyday you see district vehicles on the road, and I think they go to the districts once a week. And basically when they go there they sleep while they wait for a podium, which is not the best for this country. A friend told me that during workshops, that is when work on his friend’s house goes on, but when the workshops end, the construction work on his house also stops.  

Eng. Gagawala, yes, it is time now to evaluate all the loans. All those we have passed, we need to evaluate them. The Committee on National Economy is on this seriously, together with the sector committee. They have drawn up a programme, and they want to look at all the loans seriously and the output they have produced so far. Of course they will come and make a report to you, but it is also quite important that all members of committees scrutinising departments, which implement such projects, provide an oversight function in that area. Come and tell Parliament how such an activity or programme is being implemented.

It is true many of the loans may bounce back. And of course lenders know their business is to lend money, and everybody wants to lend money if he has it. Sometimes, however, they can lend money, which may not be necessary. So we ask our government officials to be very careful and get money, which we need, and not get money for the sake of coming in with money.

Hon. William Nsubuga, I do not know about the beating on the lake but as far as I have seen this loan, there is no element about beating. I am told the boats were procured under the Lake Victoria Management Project, where we got US $37 million. So, you better find out where those boats went. If they are beating people and taking bribes, that is a crime. It should be reported quickly to relevant authorities.

Hon. Zziwa has proposed something but I want to tell my colleague that the Committee on Natural Resources has been invited. And nowadays before we pass a loan, we are inviting all committees. Whenever we write a letter to the Minister, we give either a blind copy or a carbon copy to the relevant committees. I hope hon. Yiga is aware of this. You have been getting letters about LGDP II, and we have also invited you to come and attend. So, we have not left you out. And yes, the Minister of Finance has said they are going to provide the details. 

Hon. Ekanya, yes, training is necessary and it exists for minimum qualifications for jobs. Unless we want to train people in specialised areas, the workshops are too many. Every year you have a workshop on water, next year you hold the same workshop, and the other year, water! What capacity are you building? Why don’t you take some of those resources to another area?

There is need now for Uganda to look for its basic needs - the training needs we have. Assessing the training needs is necessary before they can start doing this. However, capacity building is very important and it is good for everybody.

Well, the LGDP trolley is poorly structured. We anticipated LGDP II to come and implement what LGDP I had done because now it was for results, not training again. If LGDP I trained and did consultancy, do we again need more consultancy in LGDP II? It should now be for results not for training. We hope the Minister of Finance and his counterpart will handle it.

Hon. Kasirivu, what you have brought up is very important. We hope when the Government is going to negotiate loans it should come and tell members that, “we are trying to get loans in this sector. Is it necessary or not?” But of course we are not supposed to participate in the negotiation part because we shall be compromising our adverse functions. However, so long as the loan is well perceived and Parliament is informed in time about what is taking place - like in the budget process - it will take away many of these problems, and this thinking. We can even restructure it at that time, get capacity building involved and say, “but we do not need this area”.

I have got the concerns of the Minister of Finance, but all these things we have talked about already. You have all our communications to you, and it is quite important that you check in your pigeonhole or in your office in the Ministry. You will be able to see these comments. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. However, I suggest that you should have a system of continued interaction with the Ministry throughout the year, so that you know what is going on. I think that if that is established, you may not have the serious problems we are facing.  

Honourable members, in the other Parliaments they start on time. If we are to start at 2.00 p.m., it should be 2.00 p.m. Do you really need to adjust? Alternatively, if we are to start at 10.00 a.m., we could do a lot. I will try to be on time. If it is to be 10.00 a.m. or 2.00 p.m., I will be here. Let us adjust.

I think there is the thinking that, “yes, they said 2.00 p.m. but we could start 30 minutes after that”. But I appeal to you to try and keep time - 2.00 p.m. should be 2.00 p.m., and 10.00 in the morning should be 10.00 in the morning. Then we will be able to accomplish a lot. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 August 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)

