Thursday 16 August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr. Eriya Kategaya

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember yesterday, I informed you about our colleague hon. Opoti, Woman Representative for Nebbi. She was in Ward 6B but now I understand she has been transferred to Ward 3D, Intensive Care Unit. So, the address has changed, but pray for her speedy recovery.

Again this is to remind you that you have a standing invitation from the Uganda Investment Authority for a meeting at Sheraton at 5.30p.m. You are advised to go and attend this important meeting. I will adjourn the proceedings early to enable you to travel to the venue.

MR.WADRI:  Mr. Speaker, when we left to go home yesterday, I received some of my constituents who had come with a special message for me and also to seek my guidance on what happened two and half weeks back. That is about a report, which was written by the Director for Information from the NRM Secretariat where this august House was categorised into four groups. There were those who were described as being Reformists, others were described as being Liberals, others as hard-core Multipartyists and Movementists.

When we are in this House and we begin having such categorisations, we are at crossroads to know whether Article 269, which binds all of us to be in the Movement, has been secretly and functionally amended.  

Secondly, I would also like to seek your clarification as to whether the information in the media by the Director for Information from the NRM Secretariat can be seen to be the official version of Government. My people are very, very eager to know what the position is. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, whereas I have noted your concern, and probably justified concern, unfortunately, as a mere Speaker of Parliament, I do not think I can speak for the Movement Secretariat. If you have realised, we have a Minister without Portfolio and National Political Commissar; maybe that is the proper person who can authoritatively explain what happened and allay your fears.  But since we have other Ministers present, they may help me in this issue to explain. But if they cannot, I will give you opportunity when the National Political Commissar and Minister without Portfolio comes to ask. He was here yesterday, and if he appears, he may be able to speak for the Secretariat rather than the Speaker.  

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, you will recall that yesterday I sought your guidance about my motion on Uganda Commercial Bank. I want to get a specific date when we could debate this motion.  We had a pledge from the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that nothing in either direction will happen about the privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank. I request for your indulgence that I formalise my request and I get a formal commitment from the hon. Minister of Finance under rule 42(1), that this House resolves that until we have debated and decided on the matter of Uganda Commercial Bank, nothing shall happen about its sale. I am requesting your permission to move a motion.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know whether a motion is necessary but you are entitled to move motions. What I know according to the records - and I am a witness to this -  is that a pledge was made that the status quo of Uganda Commercial Bank will remain until the disposal of your motion which has not been disposed of. You may have some fears outside Parliament but what I know is that the position will not change. With regard to your motion I know you negotiated for a period, and I assure you that if nothing has been done next week, your motion will be on the Order Paper and will be debated.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to that, I take it that you are also affirming the pledge for the Government.

THE SPEAKER: I am affirming what Government said here, l think we proceed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr. I Musumba): Mr. Speaker, I want to inform to this House that Government still stands by the pledge that was made by the senior Minister of Finance in this House.

MS. KIRASO:  The information is for the consumption of the whole House and the Mover of the motion in particular.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Finance held a meeting yesterday, with the Minister of Finance, and this morning we had a meeting with the Governor of the Bank of Uganda and the top management of Uganda Commercial Bank.  From what the Committee learnt, it was very clear, if I am not wrong, that the process is going on. The sell may not have been effected yet, but there are things which are happening in regard to the process of the sell of UCB.  So, in that regard, lam seeking your guidance to allow the hon. Member to move his motion, so that there is a precise resolution from this Parliament, and it is on record.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, a pledge was made and a Minister from Finance has confirmed it, so whether we move a motion or no motion action will be taken.  Since there was a pledge made and it is not honoured, then I think we shall have an appropriate time to deal with that person who has floated the sell of UCB. I would rather wait for that situation instead of making resolutions, because even if you make a resolution, the Governor will tell you, “the law allows me this and the other.”  Therefore, let us wait and see what happens, and then we shall have a basis of making an effective remedial action.  Can we proceed?

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i)THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001. 

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002     ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

 (Debate continued)

MRS. BEATRICE BYENKYA (Woman Representative, Hoima):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In contributing to the motion of the Budget Speech, I wish to point out that this time the speech of the Minister of Finance was quite short in relation to the other speeches and more interesting than usual.  

On the Health sector on page 4, having pointed out that Government has constructed a number of health units per parish, and that there is a program for malaria control and childhood immunization, there is also a positive measure of trying to combat the sleeping sickness.  Well, I wish to point out, especially to the Minister of Health who is not here, that Hoima District much as it has malaria, we do have a problem of the black fly which causes river blindness, and in some instances it has caused epilepsy.  The black fly is found along the rivers of Wakii that is in Bugahya constituency, and then river Wambabya in Buhaguzi, but the impact is more on river Wakii in Bugahya, where we have the villages of Kapapi, Sibawakii, Mbaarara, and Bineneza. 

 The people affected are 27 percent of the population of Hoima, and being people of a resounding history, our population unfortunately is rather small.  So, having an affected population of 27 percent, we feel that we are greatly affected and the future of the district will also be affected in the same way.  

Therefore, I am appealing for Government intervention to sensitize the population in as far as this health hazard is concerned.  There are some drugs, which people are supposed to take every six months to help them identify whether they have been affected by the black fly, but the supply is very irregular and people have negative information about these drugs. Therefore, they don’t endeavor to take them. 

I want to talk about decentralization on page 8, where the Minister said that: “We need to ensure that Local Governments strengthen their tax administrations to mobilize as much revenue as possible and become less reliant on transfers on the Central Government.”  Well, that is a Government position, but then when we try to look at tax collection, we find that there is a lot of political interference right from the top to the bottom.  When there are a series of elections taking place, the first one has been that of the President, and you know during the season of the campaigns for the President, the people who pay the graduated tax were supposed to be handled properly. Then we have the LCs elections; the people supposed to collect taxes, are also busy looking for votes.  Therefore, taxes will not be collected, because each candidate has a political interest from the people we are supposed to get the taxes from; that is the political interference I am talking about.  

Then on the other hand, much as the tax level has been reduced to Shs.3000/= for the beginners, there is a tendency of the general populace not wanting to pay taxes. It is just in them, even if they can afford it. One of the factors, which I think we should endeavor to do, is to sensitize the people about the benefits of taxes.  Some people argue that they do not see the benefits, but now with decentralization brought nearer to the Local Council III, they can see the services. On the other hand, they tend to have a fear that the people are going to collect the taxes and eat them.  Therefore, I feel that the Government should put in more effort as far as tax sensitization is concerned, so that the revenue can be collected. 

When you look at the Local Governments, most of them have not even realised a target of 50 percent of their targeted revenue; therefore, more effort should be made. Otherwise, the objective of the Central Government of wishing the Local Governments to be self-reliant will not be realised.  

The last point I wish to make is just a remainder, as far as the Busunju/Hoima road is concerned. Well, the contractor has already come, but then we are being told that we have to wait for a period of about two months or so, until the equipment is got. I feel that this contract was got a long time ago, and the equipment must have arrived, apart from some lorries and the Pajeros that we see moving around. 

I feel that the Government should really be sincere; we want to see this road done. They should really implement the promise that was made to us, before the end of this five-year term.  I thank you.

MR. OGOLA AKISOFERI (West Budama South, Tororo):  Thank you, hon. Speaker, for allowing me to speak at this time.  I would speak on a few points taking account of the little time available.  First of all, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Finance for his elucide presentation.  

However, I am not thanking him entirely for what he said. I have to say something about what he did not say, and what in my opinion is of concern to the people of my concern. I appreciate the Minister’s concern about promoting development in Uganda.  He talked well in the area of agriculture modernisation, and he talked well about other areas in education and health. 

What was singularly left out is the question of industrialisation in this country. I feel that for the people of my constituency in Tororo District, industries used to be the basis of their survival, and of employment. However, these industries have been systematically eradicated. Out of about 7 industries that were there when the NRM Government came to power, today there is only one.  I would consider some of these industries to be of strategic importance to Uganda, and indeed to Africa.  

We used to have a cement industry, fertilisers and chemical industry, the jute and hessian bag industry, soap factory, iron sheet factory, and cotton oil factory. However, apart from the cement factory, all the others have died. The jute factory was systematically killed by taxation. The Government taxed that Jute industry, and yet it was allowing importation of jute and hessian bags from Bangladesh, and Thailand without tax. So, this factory could not compete - it folded.

Today, Tororo has limestone which can last for 200 years; consultants called in by the Government have scientifically determined this. Cement is not enough in this country and it is being imported. Nevertheless, cement is a capital investment of a large scale. The ordinary people cannot indulge in that investment. 

I would have liked to know what the Minister of Industry is thinking about all that deposit of cement in Tororo. When in fact, the building industry is being squeezed, cement is expensive, and yet we have the raw material to last for 200 years.  I would like to know and my people would like to have the answer to that. 

 Hon. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE & INDUSTRY (Prof. Rugumayo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Member for giving way. The issue of cement industry in Uganda is an issue which is being tackled vigorously.  We have two cement factories, one in Hima and another one in Tororo. At the moment, we are producing under capacity; and Tororo factory will soon be upgraded to produce more than enough cement; I think in the next three years. 

The issue of phosphates in Tororo is being handled, and the matter is under control.  I will tell you what is happening at the moment. There is a company, which is called Foskor in South Africa, it took out of Tororo 400 metric tons for assaying or analysing, and they found out that this ore in Tororo is first rate. 

I work hand in hand with Madhvani company; and we are in the process of giving them permission or licence to undertake a feasible bankable project. That is where the matter stands. With bankable projects we may need to have about two years of grace. They will have exclusive rights of the phosphate area, so that they are sure that whatever they do is within their control. 

So, really give us another two years, you will see the phosphates ore processed into fertiliser. The phosphate investment is about 400 million dollars; and that requires good environmental impact assessment studies, and a lot of work to attract the investors. We are also negotiating with the Government of Kenya, to allow the investors to use  dedicated railway to the Port of Mombasa.

There is a French company, which is working with Madhvanis and Foskor. This company has assured us that if we complete the studies, it will be able to sell all the phosphates we will produce. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OGOLA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for the information he has given to the House. I have no reason to doubt his assurances, and I have now a good ground to report back to my constituents. But two years seems to be rather long; and I do not want my words to be doubted. 

Mr. Speaker, now that I am contented on that line, the other issue that I should talk about again is this question related to industrialisation, which we talked about -(Interruption)

MR. BYABAGAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, when I raised the issue of taxation, he was not around.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, my disposable syringe factory was also killed by taxation. The jute factory he is talking about was killed by taxation  - Mr. Speaker, are we building or killing this nation?

MR. OGOLA: I note that the information is given in a form of a question mark. But I would also be glad to know further the reply, but let me continue with my own statement, hon. Speaker.  
I was saying that industries need power.  The recent talk here up to yesterday, about the increase of the rate of electricity is very troublesome. The reasons given by the World Bank and the Minister of Industry do not seem be convincing.  It appears the World Bank is pressing for this high rate, because we borrowed money from them.  And if this is the reason, and yet there are some investors who want to come here, but do not seem to invest in the areas of electricity as they are talking.  Now, is it likely that this money is actually what World Bank has been waiting for, to lend it to foreign investors who are coming here without money? (Mr Sebalu rose_) Mr. Speaker, maybe you will consider my time.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have given you more than you are entitled to.

MR. SITENDA-SEBALU.  Thank you, hon. Ogola for giving way.    Mr. Speaker, allow me to move slowly a bit, so that I am understood.  Yesterday, I received a small note from honourable Minister Baguma Isoke that I was moving very fast, yet he was interested in my contribution. 

The Minister of Finance in his maiden speech mentioned the need to have more foreign investors from abroad, to come to Uganda in our quest to alleviate poverty.  We have a crisis in our foreign missions abroad.  As I speak to you now, our embassy in London is soon to be closed.  Our other embassies of Italy and Paris have already been closed.  One wonders how one would expect to market Uganda abroad when those concerned, who do this work less expensively are being faded out 

On a serious note, the hon. Minister of Finance talked very little on protecting the “nkuba kyeyo” whom I call the ‘immigratory labour’. The President accepted that these people are an important source of foreign revenue to this country.  According to the Bank of the Uganda foreign exchange in flow study, these people bring in more foreign revenue than any export.  Therefore, we demand an explanation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, why Government has not come out with a clear policy of requesting these Governments of USA, England and Japan to offer working visas or work permits to our people. Mr. Speaker, protect me from –(Interjection)
THE SPEAKER: I thought you made your contribution, and what you are saying is not regarded as information.  

MR. OGOLA:  Mr. Speaker, I do thank the honourable member for his information.  Indeed I had a point to emphasize on the question of Foreign Service, and I do so with a lot of emotion, having been attached to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a long time.  What is happening in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs must worry this country.  If we talk about bringing investment to this country, and we are closing the window to the outside world, which is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the people who speak in the name of this country; the people who can interpret the interest of this country to outsiders, we need further explanation on this. And I am hope that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will come up with convincing explanations, on how to promote the interest of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to recruit the right staff, to pay them and motivate them.

Finally, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is time.

MR. OGOLA:  I hope the Minister of Foreign Affairs is here, and he is ready to answer this question.  Thank you very much.

MR. PAUL LUBOWA (Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion.  But, first of all, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his speech, which has rural oriented development strategies.  However, I have a number of comments to make.  In the first instance, I would like to comment on the seven percent projected growth rate, which is quite decisive if you are to consider the entire Nation.  There is an apparent balance of payment difficulty, regarding the rural areas and urban areas.  This is, because what is produced in the rural areas is paid at very low prices.  For instance, a kilo of maize - this has been said by every honourable Member here - that a kilo of maize in the rural areas is at Shs.50 shillings; and yet the price of the manufactured goods is increasingly going up.  So, there is an apparent balance of payment difficulty, which is internal or local.  

However, despite all that, I would like to thank the Minister and Government for their plan to improve production in the area of agriculture, livestock, fisheries and forestry.  I would like to say that, in order to improve agricultural production, there must be A reason why we want to do it.  The purpose of increasing agricultural production or output is for the purpose of improving people’s welfare. 

 For that matter, I would like to echo the comments by the Mover of the previous motion hon. Mwandha, that there is apparent lack of a comprehensive national development plan.  We should prepare, that in case we over produce, what happens to the farmer?  Is there a way of buying that excess produce, so that he is paid a reasonable price?  Otherwise it would be useless. For instance, doubling production and using greater acreage of land, and then the returns are just half or a third of the expectation.  Such a situation is very appalling, so there is need for comprehensive development plan for this country.

MR. MUSUMBA ISAAC: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am obliged to give this information, because this matter of prices for agricultural products in the villages has kept on coming up.  We have started addressing this matter very seriously in the Ministry.  We have devised two strategies; one is to reduce on the middle manning, because maize here can go for Shs.120-130/- a kilo, in the village it is as low as Shs.40/- and not everything is attached to transport; a lot of money is going to the middleman.  So we have addressed this, and measures will be announced very soon, on how we want to organize the farmers in groups and maize will be picked from them and directly delivered to the commodity dealer.

MR. ERESU:  Mr. Speaker, arising from the explanation the Minister has just given, I would like the Minister to clarify to the House, as to whether the marketing of crops is now going to be taken over by Government? In other words, we are going against the policies that we have already had that there is liberalisation into –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PLANNING) (Mr.Isanga Musumba): Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting. On the one hand people are asking what is Government doing about the prices, the ordinary man and woman has been left to the wolves of the market forces? On the other hand, somebody thinks that Government is intervening. Government is not intervening in the pricing, no. Government is unbottling the constriction in the flow of commodities from the farm to the dealers, reducing the middlemen and their user –(Interruption)

MRS.MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker, I feel sorry that the Minister has taken courage to confuse the House. The Member before him was calling upon Government to devise a way of how to help farmers in case there is a supply, in case there is some depression in prices but it seems that the Minister misunderstood him.

I have a message from the people of Masaka, especially the coffee growers who do not have middlemen –(Interjection)- yes, my point of order is coming, I have to explain it first. The people of Masaka are calling upon Government, especially, the coffee growers to be assisted because the price of coffee is so low that they cannot sustain their farms. Is it in order for the Minister of Finance to come and confuse the House that middlemen are the ones causing low prices and therefore the Government can act from that angle?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, if there were a deliberate attempt on the part of the Minister to confuse the House, he would be out of order. But my understanding is that he was providing a solution, which you may or may not accept. Therefore the Minister was in order to assist the House in formulating a solution to the problem which the Member who was holding the Floor had alluded to. 

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now move to the second point because I said two aspects are being examined. The first one was to reduce on the middlemen, and the second one is provision of money on soft terms to enable dealers during times of plenty like this, to clean the excess produce off the market. They would then keep it and may be release it when there is a shortage, or when the crop is not in season. This will maintain confidence levels in prices so that we do not have this fluctuation of Shs.50 now, Shs.200 shillings a kilo in two months’ time. We have already discussed this and agreed with some friends abroad and the US$5 million has been availed. In two weeks’ time, we should be able to sign these agreements.  This money will be given to the banks to be able to lend commodity dealers to clean off the excess from the market.  So, Sir, Members of the House, measures are being taken to address the situation. (Interruption)

DR. MALLINGA: Point of clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: To who?

DR.MALLINGA: From what the Minister has been saying, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

DR.MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister has not been specific. I would have been happier if he addressed specific problems in agriculture, if he explained the Government plan to deal with excessive production of milk in Ankole, for example. I would have been happier if he told us that the silos in Jinja are going to be rehabilitated so that maize can be stored to wait for favourable pricing; if he explained that agriculture is going to be improved. But ahead of that Government is planning marketing of the products of the peasants from the countryside. I beg that the hon. Minister specifically deals with those three aspects. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: No, while the points raised are very valid and very important, I think this will require an elaborate Policy Statement on the issue. It just came in when some other Member was addressing the House, so it will take time and that will be a substantive contribution. And therefore, I would like the Member to wind up.

MR.LUBOWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I request that the time used up in between be put elsewhere other than on my account.

Furthermore, the population of Uganda is very anxious about the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, particularly because Government’s agricultural extension service delivery system has failed the farmers. When you go to the villages, the extension workers are no longer serious at their work. Presently, it is very common to find in the rural areas cotton plants still in the garden after two years. In fact, it has become a perennial crop and that is very dangerous because it spreads disease. For that matter, the population is very anxious about how the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture will work.

On the fisheries Department, the situation is very alarming. I was brought up near a lake, but now and again, the fish population is going down. This is because of poor methods of fishing. Bad gears like Kokota and others are used. So it is important that the Ministry comes up with measures, just like those used in eradicating the water hyacinth. We need to come in seriously and fight the use of bad fishing gears. 

The Minister’s speech indicates that there is hope to get high returns from that the Forestry Department; but what is the implication? It means there is going to be deforestation. I also suggest in this connection that Government should come up seriously, whether putting in place a special fund, it should be conditioned so that afforestation is taken very seriously in the rural areas.  Otherwise, there is threat of bad weather in future and hence poor production in the field of agriculture.

There is a problem in livestock. Whereas the President indicated in his speech that by the time the Movement Government came into power there were about three million heads of cattle, and right now the number is about 5.5 million heads of cattle, but there is a problem in this connection. Whereas there is a mechanism for multiplying the number of cattle, we cannot stretch the size of the land. So it means we need modern methods of livestock keeping. 

I recall very well about thirty years ago, I belonged to a polygamist family with 18 children. Right now, there are ten small – (Interruption)

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, I am happy that at least people have been sensitised that there is something called ‘Modernisation of Agriculture.’  Now, the challenge we have is to implement it. The issues he is now raising are exactly that in livestock, people have not applied measures regarding Modernisation of Agriculture. 

Modernisation of agriculture is about increasing productivity through using improved stock, seed and planting materials in good gardens or farms, pasture or fishponds. It also means minimising post harvest losses, maintaining gardens or fishponds or ranches, and ensuring that you add value through processing as a means of storing, self-sustaining and also marketing.  

The crucial problem we have in Uganda is that, as you mobilise, marketing becomes the constraint, and the mandates are in different places.  But all the same, we shall have to overcome this through organised farmers, who can market their crops. That is why we are going for concentrated zoning and facilitating farmers groups and forums, which are not hijacked by the Government. 

Mr. Speaker, I will find an appropriate time to sensitise Members on this matter, because they are the right people who can help us in the field. We have been working on a theoretical framework that is now finished.  The challenge is to get it implemented.  Thank you.

MR. LUBOWA: Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank the hon. Minister. I would like to say that, while the urban areas are suffering from unreliable power supply, which is a very serious deterrent to investment, the rural areas are suffering from total lack of power supply. I really wonder!  Because somewhere, the hon. Minister on page 54 of The Background to the Budget said, “this project scheduled for completion in 2005” - (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I quite appreciate that you had many interruptions, but when I add up the time you have used, I think you have now spoken for 10 minutes. So please wind up so that others can also contribute.

MR. LUBOWA: He says “this project scheduled for completion in 2005 will meet forecast domestic demand until 2009.” I really do not understand what this means, because in Economics, demand refers to that want or need which is backed up by the ability to pay. But if the rural folk cannot meet the electricity bills, how can you say that you have estimated a certain amount of demand?  In other words, this one does not cater for the rural population, because they do not have the means to pay for the electricity, according to what is happening right now.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I congratulate you and your Deputy and the colleagues, who joined the Front Bench.  I want to address myself to the issue of the performance of the economy. 

The Minister quoted the performance of sugar and honey, and to an outsider this might sound great.  With good increases in GNP of 5 per cent and 7 per cent projected, the inflation is down by 5 per cent. But, Mr. Speaker, I think you know that inflation goes down when prices stabilise. But we are mistaking the stabilisation of prices to reflect a favourable and good economy.  

We can also look at it from the other side of the coin, that because people have no money, they do not buy; things expire in the shops and so things remain as they are; yet we are proud that we are developing!  So, we should look at all facets of development rather than deceiving ourselves that things are going on well.  The money is in the hands of a few individuals, including us - (Interjections) -Yes; we are among the few.  Let us agree we are among the few individuals.  There are those who eat their dinner at 7.00 p.m. because they cannot buy paraffin.  

This brings me to another issue of the increase in the prices of fuel and of paraffin. So many people have talked about it and I will also talk about it. It is environmentally unfriendly.  People are using charcoal, and more firewood. We are talking of industrialising the rural sector; we are extending electricity to the rural countryside but we will not be able to achieve it because those we expect to use it will not be able to pay.  So, Mr. Speaker, however much we push that aside, I think it is an issue to be considered.

The issue is worsened by unequal or unfair allocation of scarce resources. What I call unfair is that those Ministries that are consumptive are the ones given a lot of money. For example, look at the Ministry of Finance; it is given so much money - 187 billion shillings. Look at Defence, 215 billion shillings!

With due respect, I am saying that with the Ministry of Defence, it is very difficult to monitor the expenditure.  Again with due respect, it is the most confused Ministry we have in Uganda. Yes! You find that everybody in this Ministry is a spokesman.  We have the official spokesman, hon. Katirima here, but then also Kakooza Mutale is a spokesman. The next day you hear Kazini also coming in.  They talk about the junk Jeeps, the junk whatever have you. Everything is junk, but the more they spoil, the more money they are given!

I know it hurts. I am from Luwero and I know what wastage in war means. So, let us call a spade a spade. What I am calling for is more order, and I pray that the new Minister  – because now there is a Minister who is full time, with a full time Deputy – I pray that he will make sure that this money that is wasted - people running away with billions, and you hear they are in the USA - is used properly.

I also want to look at the Ministries, which are marginalized.  We always talk about the Ministry of Gender, it was packed with six Ministers, and only shs.17b/= allocated; which means the money will always remain scarce.  If we don’t allow them to do their job, then why appoint them?  Why not facilitate a few who can do the work. It is very pathetic to see that women who contribute 90 per cent of the labour are given so little.  Of course, I know one could say, ‘Gender does not mean women’, but I am saying, the word ‘Gender’ came into existence because of the imbalances between men and women.  If you are removing imbalances, you start with the one who is being marginalized and those are the women.

On a more favorable note, I am very happy with the Ministry of Health.  I went to Nakaseke Hospital, and I was informed that we were given an extra shs.50m/= for cost sharing, and I think this has been for the whole country.  I went there purposely to see what has been done, so that I come and present.  What we are requesting is that they should monitor the balance between what has been lost through cost sharing and what has been topped up. 

About the equalization grant, I saw that it was only a few districts that were given the equalization grant. Others have nothing like, Mpigi, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Kapchorwa, Mayuge and many others.  I do not think there is a district, which does not qualify to receive an equalization grant.  The difference should be how much does each district get.  So, I think they should be alert on the issue of the equalization grant, so that each district gets something. For Luwero, we got something, however little it may be.

MR. KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way.   Can I be clarified by the Minister concerned, about the shs.50m/= given to Nakaseke Hospital to compensate for cost sharing?  Was this applicable to all hospitals in Uganda?  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Brig. Jim Muhwezi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform the hon. Member,that the policy of government and the Ministry is to compensate, to top up all hospitals and health centers, in order to cover up the cost sharing shortages that have been created.  We had to start somewhere, and I hope you are not surprised that it started in Luwero, but we are on the way.  Thank you very much.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I feel credit should go where it is due.  I have also note another aspect, and that is moving from indebtedness to donor dependence.  When you look at the budget, you look at some Ministries with a bigger contribution from local funding, and then there are those which are totally dependant on donors.  Look at the Ministry of Health, Shs.122b/= is from donors; only shs.48b/= is from within, and you know that donor money always has strings attached.  Therefore, if you run into problems, you will not be able to solve it quickly, because the big percentage of the money given is actually not ours.  

When you look at Finance, shs.133m/= is from Uganda Government; only shs.57m/= is from donors.  There, they have a way to maneuver. Again that is inequitable distribution of resources.  The only Ministry that is balanced somehow is Education: shs.10b/= from Uganda and shs.50b/= from donors.  At least there you have a way of maneuvering if there are problems.

About NARO, the Minister said that, “Most of the funding from Agriculture is from other departments”, but even NARO, only shs.6b/= comes from local funding; shs.24b/= is from donors.  As we develop, let us avoid this donor dependence.  You say you are getting out of debt, and then you replace the debts with dependence. When shall we ever grow?  Let us tighten our belts; I know it is very painful to say that slowly by slowly, we will reduce the debts, but also we should reduce our hands being tight.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to support the motion.  First of all, I want to talk about the control system that the Ministry of Finance has introduced.  It is a very good system. We should be encouraged; and defaulters to that system should be penalized maybe by withholding funds released to them, if they don’t report by the 15th of the new month.  I also wish to comment briefly on the asset management in Government, particularly in regards to management of vehicles.   There is still a lot to be desired, and I urge the Ministry of Finance, which gives the funding, to be serious. 

I also wish to comment briefly on the linkages between spending and outcome.  A number of spending is done, but what comes out of it is extremely meager.  There is no point, passing this budget and you don’t see the outcome.  

This is the Seventh Parliament and in the Bible, the figure ‘seven’ is the perfect number.  I am glad to mention that His Excellency is also closely associated with the figure ‘seven,’ and I hope that in truth and in spirit, this Parliament will assist His Excellency to fulfill this Budget.

Having said this, the theme ‘Economic growth and Structural transformation’ sounds very loud and very convincing, but I shudder to mention that you can have growth without development, and therefore it is important that a document like this should address more important issues. And in this case, not merely growth but also development. I would also wish to mention that this growth and structural transformation should be equally distributed, and should also respect the human development index. And to this extent, this country has benefited from debt relief services and this should be very strongly translated into poverty eradication, if it is to have meaning to this country.  

Permit me to now to come to these beautiful people of Jonam.  Jonam constituency, I shudder to mention, is the headquarters of bilharzia. This is a very serious disease.  For every ten people you meet, four of them have got this problem, and it is a disease that takes very long to manifest itself. The problem has come about because of lack of water for the people, and along the Nile the water table is so high that even if you put up pit latrines, the water will still percolate and go into the Nile, and therefore bilharzia will affect the people.

The second one that we require of the Minister of Health is to turn Pakwach Health Centre into a fully-fledged hospital. Right now the people of Jonam are 90,000, and from the President’s report to us, for every 18,000 people, there is a doctor. That means that the people of Jonam qualify for five doctors and the ratio is supposed to go down. If we can be given these five doctors, we will definitely be able to get this hospital. Right now, the constituency does not have a single doctor.

I now come to poverty eradication. I am sure you would like to hear that the people of Jonam had their canoes destroyed; the people of Jonam had their cattle eaten and their crops on the eastern side of the Nile eaten in 1987.  Not all these have been compensated. And if you expect these people to get out – (Interruption)

MR.LODOU: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to be clarified by the hon. Member holding the Floor as to who ate the cows belonging to the Jonam people?

MR.GAGAWALA: Further clarification. I have been listening to the hon. Member from Jonam and he has mentioned that even if you dig a pit latrine in Jonam County, you will still infect the Nile with bilharzia. I was expecting the Minister of Health to stand up and tell us what measures he going to take, because those people eventually will leave Jonam and go to Mukono and Mukono is also connected to the River Nile. I was just imagining this scenario. But I was looking carefully at the Minister and he was putting his head down and I have been forced to stand up.

THE SPEAKER: No, the Minister need not stand now because the member on the floor is making comments about matters falling under the Minister’s portfolio. I think the Minister is taking notes and he will be given an opportunity to come and comment on these points.
MR.OMACH: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The soldiers who were there at that time ate the cattle.
 
On the issue of poverty eradication, we have the problem of the war in Northern Uganda. You cannot expect us to get rid of this poverty if we are having this problem of the war. (Interruption)  The bell is telling me to talk about the infrastructure, which is –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, the bell is telling you to put a full stop.

MR.OMACH: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. But you cannot jump from Karuma to Pakwach. You leave Karuma un-tarmacked and then jump to Arua and you start tarmacking. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much.  I come from a place where people love the President so much but they do not vote for him because they have a message to pass. I got a chance to comment on the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. I have three cardinal observations to make.  

On page 20, there is what they call ‘the Pillars’; ensuring security and good governance. However, I relate what we call good governance – there is a report released by Human Rights Watch from which I have to quote a simple part to the House, and let us compare how we are making parts to what we call ‘good governance’. This was a statement by President Yoweri Museveni while addressing a rally in Western Uganda on 12Th February. Human Rights Watch documents it and I quote; “I am not ready to hand over power to people or groups of people who have no ability to manage the nation. Why should I sentence Ugandans to suicide by handing over power to people whom we fought and defeated?  It is dangerous, despite the fact that the Constitution allows them to run against me. At times the Constitution may not be the best tool to direct us politically.” 

Now, where does good governance come in? We have been singing a very nice song on violence. Who is the architect?  Who built the house and who painted it? My statement will answer this very well. I have another observation to make, I like going intellectual – (Interruption)
MR.KABAREEBE: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I wish to seek clarification. When he talks about electoral violence - because we have two categories; we have those who were talking about the bus and those who had earlier talked about pangas and axes. So who pre-empted whom to do what in terms of electoral violence? The state would not keep quiet of course. So please, help us to clarify that. Thank you.

MR.ODONGA: Thank you very much hon. Member of Parliament. Kakooza Mutale did not hold a panga, but you saw what he did during election time. 

On election violence, the biggest factor responsible for it was the role of the army. In my constituency, Pader in Pader district, the President came there when I was campaigning during the presidential campaigns. I had replaced the Minister and the most interesting part was the role of the army, which is making a lot of unpredictabilities in elections. 

I have a humble submission to make to this House. The British did not involve the African army into politics.   They knew why. Obote brought the army into politics hoping it would make him a little bit stronger. Now we can see the role the army is playing. At a certain time, the people supporting the Minister would say, ‘you are wasting your time; we know what we shall do’. In every election, the army is used as a third force, and I have a feeling it is deliberate. It is just like any other Government might not wish to totally eradicate illiteracy because that is the tool it needs to win elections. You need illiterate voters. I will soon believe the role of the army is like what I have just said. So, I suggest the army would rather vote for their representatives and leave the local peasants, who have not even held guns, alone.

CAPT.BASALIZA ARAALI: I would like to inform my brother, hon. Otto, that in this House, we are about 10 Members of Parliament who stood and contested as officers of the army and there was no violence in our constituencies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information, my hon. Friend. When you have guns and others do not have, it is very hard for it to take off because the other parties are always at stake.

I would now like to comment on what we call patronage and ‘clentainism’. There is a mannerism in which the Government has been handling development. It appears like a rainbow and disappears to the extent that when Members of Parliament go for elections, people see them as those who are responsible for their welfare. I would go for campaign rallies and people would move with red pepper in their pockets hoping to eat meat. Is it my problem because I have never been part of the Government? People have constantly been made to believe it is the Members of Parliament concerned for their welfare. I beg to be informed what the Public Relations Officer of Parliament is doing. They should help us to sensitise this public. When we go for an election, it is like we are entering the guillotine house.   People see us as those who are eating their money. I am even afraid that I should not grow so fat because accountability will become hard. 

My last observation is about the war in northern Uganda.  People voted for me so dearly simply because they wanted new faces with ideas; those who were not here to defend the past but to build the future. Very soon, I will begin lobbying Members of House. The problem of northern Uganda is geo-political. If Buganda was in northern Uganda, it would have security because as I talk now, the SPLA are very comfortable in northern Uganda. That is the same thing the Sudan Government is doing to the Kony rebels.  

I make this statement strongly that Kony does not know what he wants but at the same time he knows what he doe not want. I repeat; Kony does not know what he wants but he knows what he does not want. As a new breed from Aru county, I just come to tell you Members of the House, let us not defend the past, let us not raise issues of the pangas and the bus if we are to forge a future. One Member of Parliament asked me two days ago that, ‘hon. Otto, why do you not go and call Kony home’. We are not here to defend the past, our people are also in camps; they are used to camps. 

So my humble submission is, we cannot come to Parliament to talk about fruits and flowers because there is too much poverty. In my village, local dances cost Shs.500 and a packet of condoms also costs Shs.500. Why would I say this? You find people dancing from outside the dancing hall because they cannot afford the dance at Shs.500 shillings. How then will they afford condoms Mr. Minister of Health? (Laughter) This is serious. How then will they afford that? People are so poor and they are at risk. As I talk now, insecurity and AIDS are doing very well in northern Uganda simply because of the war and poverty. Let us have a break; let us forge a future. Poverty anywhere is insecurity everywhere. Thank you very much.

MR.MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand here to make the voice of the people living in camps very loud and clear. Whatever we are talking, the internally displaced people living in camps are less concerned. I have read the Budget speech. I also read and listened very carefully to the President’s speech. There is no specific programme for the people living in these camps, be it Katakwi, Bundibugyo, the mountain ranges of Kabarole in the great kingdom of Toro, Kasese, Kitgum and Gulu. How are we going to benefit from the national cake?   

Well, we commend Government’s efforts because ADF is no more, but what next? The effect of ADF is going to live with us for next 40 years. We kindly request the Government to give us support, otherwise the lives of our people will never be the same again. For us in the Rwenzori region, we demand very strongly and very seriously that we should be given a similar special programme like the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme. I propose that the Government gives us in this budget - otherwise I will not participate in passing it - a Rwenzori rehabilitation programme to uplift the lives of our people, and Government should put in money.  

We expect this programme to address the issues of poverty, issues of the vigilantees and home guards who offered their lives to protect the Constitution of Uganda. They are just forgotten. The vigilantees, home guards, LDUs and SPCs joined hands with UPDF but they are not part of UPDF. The casualties of those groups cannot go to the casualty unit in Mubende. What is their fate? These people suffered, they became the first targets of ADF. Their homes were destroyed, others have lost their limbs and there is no assistance. I pray that the Government addresses this issue of vigilantees and SPCs. 

The Rwenzori sub-region is not easy, the moment you abandon these people, another negative force is going to jump on them and I do not want to be blamed. I am warning you in time. The President said that Government was going to fund the Amnesty Commission to make a follow-up on peace and reconciliation. I want to see this reflected in this Budget.  This Commission should not only sit here in Kampala, it should not be -(Interruption)

PROF.KABWEGYERE: Mr. Speaker, are we safe in this House? It looks like the Member on the Floor is threatening us. Are we safe? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: The Member is representing his people of Rwenzori, and he is expressing their plight and giving you consequences that may follow if it is not addressed.

MR.BESISIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor. Supposing the Government of Uganda does not respond in the way he wants, will he form another ADF in the Rwenzori Mountains?

MR.MBALIBULHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  But, Mr. Speaker, I thought I am a people’s representative and I must voice their concerns to pre-empt wrong actions in this country.

THE SPEAKER: I think I ruled on that.  I think the question was clarified.

MR.MBALIBULHA: About the ADF business, I am not a leader of the ADF, and even if Government does not act upon these warnings of mine, I have no intentions to use violence so that Government can listen, but I will continue voicing this in this democratic august House until Government responds.  I kindly pray that Government pre-empt this disaster. 

The concern of the vigilantes; they are trained, they helped us and they are there abandoned. At least a token of appreciation for what they did to help Government to defeat ADF should be extended to them. 

I was on a point of the Amnesty Commission. I was saying, it should not be a Kampala-based Commission. It should tour these places where we have problems, to preach about peace and reconciliation. The President told us that ADF is no more, and it is true.  Indicators are on the ground that ADF can no longer cause trouble, but Mr. Speaker and hon. Members -(Interjection)- of course I commend Government efforts and our people down there. It is very hard to destroy, or to eliminate, or to kill the last rebel. I know the remnants of the rebels have crossed to Congo and others are in the mountains pretending to be engaging in their private business. 

I thought that this would be the time for the Amnesty Commission to reach these people, tell them of the need for peace and reconciliation so that they can surrender completely. This is not the first time in the mountains. You remember the Rwenzururu; we surrendered but NRA used some of our commanders who remained there, and after capturing Kampala, they were forgotten. NALU used them, and after defeating NALU, we kept quiet. Now the ADF used the remnants to cause trouble and I suspect - although hon. Kabwegyere is warning me - that another negative force can use the remnants of the ADF to cause more trouble. So, I am asking Government, through the Amnesty Commission, to make an effort to reach these people, especially in the Eastern Congo.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NSUBUGA WILLIAM (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion.  In reference to paragraph 14 of the Budget Speech, sub title “Inland water transport,” the ferry landings of my counterpart in Kalangala district are going to be constructed. I even informed this House last week that the people of Buvuma kindly request Government and this august House to also consider constructing Kiyindi and Kirongo ferry landings. You cannot relate the road status of Buvuma Islands to any road elsewhere.  The major problem is that the ferry we have is in a dangerous mechanical condition, and cannot transport the graders. 

Still on the same issue, there are six ferries that the Budget considered.  I am kindly requesting this House and Government to at least allocate one ferry to the people of Buvuma.

Still on page 30 of the Budget Speech, the issue of life jackets and fishing gear is touched, and I quote: “The hon. Minister was pleased to announce that during the pre-budget consultation meeting in Arusha, East African Community Ministers of Finance decided to remove customs duties on life jackets, fishing gear and other equipment.  This is intended to make life jackets and other life saving devices more affordable, and therefore, to enhance safety on lakes and rivers.”  

I want to inform the hon. Minister of Finance and Members present that here in Uganda, we are used to the ‘no change’ system.  So, despite the fact that the Minister of Finance removed the duty, our traders kept the prices constant, and at times increased them. So there was no effect. I kindly request the hon. Minister to particularly classify life jackets under Schedule 2 of the Value Added Statute in addition to being import duty free. 

I also urge Government to import or procure these life jackets such that you can save the islanders from the profit-motivated businessmen.  Otherwise, even my life is in danger because when you wear a life jacket and other passengers do not have, you are the target. Should any problem arise, everybody wants to get hold of you and the capacity of the life jacket cannot sustain more than one person. As you know, we represent the people; there is no way you can say that ‘Nsubuga always travels alone.’ You cannot do it. So that is the life that we are living in. At the moment, as we talk, a life jacket costs about 80,000/=, but if somebody can fail to pay Shs.7000/= graduated tax, what about Shs.80, 000/=?  On that note Government should work out a mechanism on how to save the Islanders.

Let me comment briefly on security. The people I represent from Buvuma Islands, have 54 residential Islands, with only one Police post and inadequate facilities.  And you know criminals on the main land, when they chase them, they take refuge on the Islands. So imagine such a situation where you don’t have personnel security and most of the immigrants are criminals; they can hide for years without being traced.  

Let me inform you about one thing that you have observed, the contribution of fish in this nation. I want to inform Members that Buvuma Island contributes over 75 percent of the fish catch in this country, so we have the potential to help this Government.  In that regard, I am just requesting Government to work out a mechanism of establishing a Police post in every sub-county.  You know, for us we have very many Islands, and they have a large population.    

LT.COL.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member, whether the fish is got from the Island or the water.

MR. NSUBUGA W:  Thank you, hon. Member.  You know Islands cannot exist without the water, and our potential business is fishing. So when I inform this august House that we contribute more that 75 percent of the fish catch in this country, I am actually correct. It is like when you say we have cows in Ankole; I think you cannot dispute that. 

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My constituency happens to go up to the shores of Lake Victoria, and I am aware that Buvuma Islands don’t constitute even half of lake Victoria; we know that there are other lakes and rivers in this country where there is fish.  Can the hon. Member clarify the source of his information, to confirm that actually 75 percent of fish catches are from Buvuma Island? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NSUBUGA W: I want to inform the hon. Member that when we talk of lake Victoria, we take more than 75 percent of the waters.  So, what I am stating is actually correct, you can verify it with the Minister of Fisheries, you will get the true information –(Laughter).

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Yes, actually, many Members in this House may not know the map of Uganda. When you go to Iganga, Mayuge and Mukono, part of their land goes down to Tanzania; so, Buvuma on the map maybe holding more than what an ordinary person knows –(Laughter).

MR. W. NSUBUGA : Thank you, hon. Minister, for that information. Still on security matters, the fishermen had improvised a mechanism that is very expensive. For every fishing boat, you have to hire a local guard or an LDU, and in some small fishing Islands, we have about 300 boats and they pay Shs.100, 000/= per month.  So, how do you expect such a person to get rich?  I think it is the duty of this Government to protect the lives of people and their property. By virtue of our contribution, I think the Ministers concerned will take it under consideration.  

Let me conclude with the issue of hospitals. We are glad we have one health center and there is one which has been constructed of recent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the population of these Islands?

MR. NSUBUGA:  About 80,000, but as regards to hospitals, they are under equipped in terms of staff, and there are no drugs.  I am appealing to Government and the august House to have a mobile ambulance. In case of any problem, we can bring the patient to the main land.  Thank you very much.

PROF.  TARSIS KABWEGYERE  (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise to support the motion. I wish to speak about three points, but I am going to concentrate on two.  The first point arises from what happened yesterday in the debate on Karamoja, Katakwi, and Teso.  It seems to me that leadership in that region has actually failed the people of that dry ecological zone. There is history of failure, which goes back to the colonial days, which has continued since independence up today.  Even when we have set up the Ministry of Karamoja, in the neighboring country you do not have a Ministry of Turkana. Therefore, the problem across borders cannot be handled in Uganda, because it is not a boundary problem; it is an ecological problem.  It is a pastoral economy that has not been understood either by the colonialists or by those who have taken over power since independence. 

I think if we are talking of people who have been marginalized, these are the pastoral people in Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya, Somalia, Ethiopia and Sudan.  This is an area that needs special attention and it cannot be handled by one country.  That is why some of us think that, a regional approach will be more effective than simply a national approach.  Even within the country -(Interruption)

MR. OGWEL LOOTE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to seek clarification from the honourable member, whether the problem facing the countries that he has mentioned, is to do with the pastoralists. Thank you.

PROF.  KABWEGYERE BANZAANA:  Mr. Speaker, if you have a wound on the leg, and another one on the arm, if you treat one on the leg and ignore the one on the arm, you cannot cure the body.  What I am saying is that the efforts of Uganda will not arrive at a solution, because the problem is big Uganda cannot handle it alone.  That is what I am saying. It is a regional problem that should be handled regionally.  

Secondly, even internally, it may not be enough to have a Minister of Karamoja when you have Teso, when you have Katakwi, when you have Kitgum, when you have Lira; because these problems are not going to remain in Karamoja; and I was not so happy to see the MPs in this House -(Interruption)- if I could conclude the sentence.  I was not terribly happy to see the MPs in this House almost thinking that the problem was not part of them. The people from Teso assume that the problem is with Karamoja, and the Karamoja representatives think the problem is with Teso.  I feel that internally we must address this problem, because it faces all of them; and if I could be allowed to say more -(Interruption)

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Thank you, Mr. speaker, and I want to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I wish to inform the hon. Member that the Karamoja disarmament is a Government programme to ensure that there is peace in Karamoja, and this involves the counties and districts that border with Karamoja.  There are meetings that have been held between Uganda Government, and Kenya Government, the Minister has come here to discuss some of these things. The area MP of Turkana has been around and discussions have been held in Karamoja and in Kampala.  So, it is not that Uganda is trying to solve this problem alone; our neighbours are handling it. Of course, it has its own problems, but it is being handled that way.  Thank you.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  To supplement on what the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs has said. You see when some people talk about Karamoja, they think that Karamoja is only in Uganda.  There are people called Karimojong in Sudan and in Kenya.  Just before the Parliamentary elections, we had a Karamoja group from Kenya, Ethiopia, and Sudan of the same ethnic grouping discussing these issues in Mbale, and previously they were in Kenya.  The next one will be in Ethiopia.  So, all other countries are involved as a region, because we understand the ecological issues.  

MR. ARK LODOU:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the concerned Ministry, how the situation on the common border between Sudan and Uganda in as far as trafficking of arms is concerned, is being handled? As far as I understand, in that part of Sudan there is state, we don’t know who is in control, and how the Government of Uganda is going to handle this problem, just like it is in consultation with Kenya.  

THE SPEAKER:  I think the Minister will answer.  You want the to answer now?  

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Sir, I don’t know whether that question was directed to me, because I am not the Minister in charge of trafficking of arms. I think the hon. Member wants to know, who is in charge in that area.  I wish to inform him that Government of Uganda is in charge of the area within its borders and the Government of Sudan is also in charge of its area within its borders.  Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE BANZAANA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think there is a problem of under investment in solving this problem.  I am aware of these meetings. When I was in Foreign Affairs, I arranged some of those border meetings, but I don’t think it was handled as a regional problem.  It remained an individual national problem, because of lack of effort from the whole region.  Now, you include Ethiopia and Somalia - you know when the Mengistu Government fell, millions of guns spread in this region.  I do not know how many of us estimated the number of guns in the region.  So, when we are talking about handling the Karamoja question, we are talking of handling millions and millions of guns, which are exchanging hands in a much bigger area than Karamoja.  I think we have not carried out anthropological study, about the basis of this economic and political violence in the area.  The studies we have had were carried out during the colonial period. I do not think we have updated studies to show what are the new bases of conflict.  Even this business of guns, if the Ugandan Government takes a position on how to handle the gun situation, is it equally taken up by the neighbors?  

My last point, Mr. Speaker, is internal. One day I attended a meeting in the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister’s office, at which they invited some of us for professional reasons, and Members of Parliament from Karamoja and neighbouring districts. I think that collective approach is likely to be more effective than individual constituency pleading, as if the problem is there and ends with a border. 

If the boundaries between Kitgum and Karamoja; between Lira and so on were not there, people would be moving about. Even there would be no more, the so called ‘these people’ and ‘the other’. They would have intermarried and mixed; and the cattle would have moved to different pastures. So, we have to check on the boundaries, and the importance of boundaries; and worse still, the international boundaries, which still make our Nations so unviable and poor.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, this country is poor.  This country is poor.  It is poor.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we balance up with gender..

MRS. AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for picking me to contribute to this debate.  In the first place, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for presenting this nice Budget Speech to Parliament.  After going through the Budget Speech, on page 31, Section 109, I was interested in the area where the statement was made on the raise in the revenue collection, particularly in the area of tobacco.  And it is stated that “raise in tax revenue, I am proposing a modest upward adjustment in the excise duties levied on tobacco”.  I would like to inform you that tobacco growing is one of the practices, which has derailed Arua District. This is so in that, tobacco consumes a lot of fuel, it has depleted our soil, it has consumed a lot of our farmer’s time, and it has even reached the extent of causing divorce in families.  

I would like to get clarification from the hon. Minister, whether he has plans of making the Central Government have an equal share of the revenue collected from Tobacco, with the districts concerned. I remember early this year, the district authorities decided to levy a tax on BAT.  But in the meantime, the Central Government decided to stop it.  I wanted to get clarification from the Minister, whether we shall have equal shares with the decentralization effect; the district is thoroughly beaten by the exercise.

Secondly, as he stated that the theme of this year is “Economic Growth and Structural Transformation”, and as he mentioned rightly that taxes will be raised, but it will be modest; I wanted to find out whether he is having plans of toppling the decentralized districts, because in the Budget Speech he did not talk about graduated tax. 

I very well recall that, graduated tax with effects of other events was reduced to Shs. 3000 for some taxpayers.  And when you study the Local Governments Act thoroughly, it is clearly stated that, some percentages of the graduated tax shall be remitted to the Lower Council levels. Then, when it is reduced like that -(Interruption) Can you allow me finish articulating the point, and then you will inform me after that point? 

Thank you very much. You will find that after the reduction in tax, that is the graduated tax; definitely, the districts will be having a smaller portion. I wonder at what percentage we are going to decentralize this graduated tax to the LC IIs and LC Is. I need clarification.  Thank you.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me to clarify on this issue. Graduated tax as the name implies is graduating. In other words, it is graded. It is graded to be shs. 3000. This is the minimum to be paid by those who are not really gainfully employed or have very little employment. For the rest I think, it raises up to about Shs. 80,000. 

So, the issue is to broaden the tax base for each district in question.  If you broaden your catchment area, then your revenue will improve. Once again, Shs. 3000 is not the only tax. It is the minimum tax, after which it goes up in gradations.  Thank you.
MRS. ANGUPALE: Thank you very much.  I would like to inform the Minister that, our effort of trying to raise our taxes by taxing tobacco was objected to by the Central Government. And now, my fear was that –(Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, will I be in position to receive some more minutes, for purposes of time, and since I need really to – (Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the speaker holding the Floor, for giving me an opportunity to inform her.  The information I would like to give her is related to the worries, which have been expressed by so many people from West Nile, regarding tobacco. As we stand now, under the decentralization arrangement, you cannot guarantee that the growers of tobacco will effectively benefit from it.  

The only way, through which they can benefit institutionally, is through the adoption of a federal system, which gives them the opportunity to effectively share from their struggle. If we had a federal system, noting that from tobacco the West Nilers raise Shs. 60 billion yearly; Shs. 25 billion would remain in West Nile to develop it in its physical nature, and Shs. 35 billion goes to the Center. And what is wrong with that? (Laughter)

MRS. AANIMU ANGUPALE: Thank you very much for that information. Unfortunately, Arua District is still green about federal. I do not need to base my argument on that.  

I still need to bring our view to focus on the remittance to the Lower Government system.  That is to the sub-county, parish, and village as pertains to the reduced tax collection in the district.  I want clear clarification on that. 

On page 24, the Minister also emphasized that Shs.800 million will be sent to schools to support the girl child. The girl child Education has been theoretical.  When you go to District schools in primary one and two, you will find girls are more than the boys, but when you reach Primary six, and seven, you may end up getting only two girls.  I do not know what is happening.   I want to get clear guidance as to how these monies are used in schools, because you rarely get Headmistresses in primary schools.  I do not know the rationale they use when appointing heads of schools.
To conclude, I wanted the Minister – unfortunately she is not here - to allay my fears on the privatization of utility consumption, particularly on power.  As it was mentioned last time, people are already striking over high tariffs in the consumption of power, and now we are moving towards the construction of Nyagak. When we were signing the agreement there was the generator aspect, the supply and the transmission.  I do not know whether the high tariffs will affect us as a new district, and yet here, we are singing of the West Nile counties suffering from poverty.  Are we going to manage power in our district?

Finally, I would like to comment about the arrears.  As I am talking here, some Primary teachers have not got their salaries for about two months, and in the Budget Speech, it was clearly stated that Shs.127 billion is to be used for clearing the arrears, and we are in the deficit; are we not going to incur more arrears to confuse the whole system?  Are we not going to frustrate UPE programmes, because if teachers are not paid they cannot be effective in class. A teacher will not teach when the family is hungry and yet the salary is meager.  By the time the Ministry pays their salaries, they will be having a lot of debts.  I would like the Minister concerned to explain on that.  Thank you very much.

MR. NYEKO OCULA  (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.    This is my first time to contribute in this House.  Let me also go on record by congratulating you and your Deputy for attaining that high office, and my colleagues for making it to this House. I cannot forget to thank myself for making it here, because my race to Parliament was the toughest in Uganda.

My first point is about election violence. If you heard about a young boy who was blocked from going to Atiak close to the Sudan border; it was me.  If you heard about a young boy who was being pulled away from a bus when he was going to address a rally; it was me. If you have ever heard about the boy who was shot at at a polling station while going to vote; it was me.  So when I am talking about the election violence, I talk with seriousness, Mr. Speaker.

When you ask, why all this election violence?  In all respect, everything narrows to the State.    Like for me, I was standing against an Army colonel; l think that was the major reason for causing violence.  So for that matter, Members of the UPDF who are in this august House should apologize on behalf of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, because we were offended.

Besides that, I would like to talk about the Budget Speech.  I appreciate it very much –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Mr. Speaker, I would like first of all, to give information and then later on seek clarification. The hon. Member from Kilak County says he suffered most at the hands of UPDF; that we should apologize on behalf of the Commander-in-Chief to this House.  In Kilak County where he won, we had 5,000 soldiers, 5,000 local guards, and 3,000 LDUs - the total was over 10,000. The hon. Member, who is here, defeated a colonel, Col. Oketta, who is a Reserve Commander of the entire Northern Region.  I would like to know what magic he used to defeat Col. Oketta who was commanding 10,000 troops, engaged in violence?  Did he use witchcraft? What did he use?  Therefore, the information I am giving him is that, if there were acts of thuggery and intimidation, they were done on individual basis. If there weas institutionalized violence of the armed forces, the hon. Member would not be here, I can assure this House.

MR. NYEKO OCULA:  Mr. Speaker, when I was going to Atiak, it was the UPDF with an Armed Personnel Carrier who put up a roadblock and escorted me back to Gulu, just three days before voting.  My manifesto was very clear; even some army men liked it and voted for me, that is how I won.  But let me talk about issues that are important to this Parliament.

About the Budget Speech, the statement made by the hon. Minister of Finance, concerning the Local Councils collecting more revenue so as not to depend on the funds from the Central Government; my experience in the local council is that, however much the Council is trying to collect much revenue using whatever means, the capacity is now very low.  A case study is in Gulu district. For the last three years, local revenue collection has never gone to about Shs.100,000,000. For that matter, however much they will try, I do not think they will achieve much. 
To add on that, when His Excellency the President, was campaigning, he went to Gulu district, and on the radio ordered, that people living in camps should not pay taxes.  Much of this has not been implemented.  I see that the future of payment of taxes, especially in Gulu district is going to be really very low.  

Let me comment very briefly about poverty vis-à-vis the decentralisation process. I have been a bit keen to hear from hon. Members on the Front Bench, who have been very fast in defending that, there is equity in distribution of resources from the centre.  Yes, I know for sure the centre is trying its level best to distribute resources equally, to the decentralised districts. But the problem is the formula being used, which I think must be revisited, if we are to get equity.  

The parameter being used is based on purely population.  That is the real parameter being used. For that matter, you will find that the sparsely populated areas like the North, always end up with little share compared to other areas. Therefore, that can easily lead to the disparities.  

If we are to address real issues of poverty in Northern Uganda, I think what we need is what is called ‘the big push’ in terms of the infrastructure, and real intervention by all stakeholders. I appreciate very much the concern of Members of this Parliament, for the way they have been talking about poverty in Northern Uganda. This is a sign that poverty in Northern Uganda is not just a matter of the people coming from Northern Uganda but it is a national concern.

I have already heard the warning bell going, but let me summarise on one more point, that is payments to Home Guards and LDUs, especially, in Gulu district. A colleague from Rwenzori - I have forgotten the constituency - talked about the problems facing these vigilantes, the Home Guards and LDUs who are helping the UPDF to combat insecurity. 

As I talk now, the Home Guards who are in Gulu district are getting only Shs.40,000; and they are the ones always on the frontline. Whenever there is any insecurity in any part of Gulu district, the first people to be sent on the frontline are the Home Guards.   But the UPDF are getting Shs. 130,000. 
I do not know whether in this current Budget - I seek clarification, whether in this current Budget  - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MR. NYEKO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do not know whether in this Current Budget - if the Minister concerned could be around - whether provisions can be made to at least uplift the status, and the suffering of the Home Guards, who are actually doing the major work of combating insecurity, in some of the insecure districts.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have been standing for quite some time.  Despite this size, I think at last I have got your eye -(Laughter). I would also like to join my colleagues, in thanking everybody who made it to this House, and all those who were appointed and elected to the various posts in this House.  

I am here on behalf of the people of Buyaga. I stand to support the Speech of the Minister of Finance. But I have also got a few points to note, which I would like the Members of the Front Bench to take note of.   

I have heard in this House people talking about poverty in Northern Uganda, but it is also in other parts of the country. Buyaga is not isolated.  I have got people who live around the lakeshores of Lake. Albert. These people have got a lot of fish which they are not able to sell, because the road to the Lake is not there. They have the fish, it is there, but they cannot sell it.  So, my appeal is to the Minister of Transport, to see how best to help the people of Buyaga to get a road down to the Lake; and to see how best they can utilise that fish, which they have, to possibly fight the poverty that is terribly biting them.

Hon. Members have talked about the issue of security.  The speaker who has just gone off the Floor has been talking about the poor remuneration of the Home Guards, the Local Defence personnel and all the others. There are a few remnants of ADF in my constituency, and the people left behind to get rid of these remnants are these poorly remunerated people. Just as my colleagues have said, these people are trying – I cannot say they are not doing anything - they are trying, but I think the morale is really very low. 

So, these ADF remnants have constantly come back to hit at my people of Buyaga, and some have been abducted.  So, I appeal to the authorities to see how best, to boost the morale of the Home Guards, because really when a man tells you that he has gone without salary for the last three months, and yet he is told to go and attack a rebel in the forests of Bungoma, it becomes a little bit difficult. 

I hope the call of every Member here will be heeded to. I would like to thank the Government – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (DEFENCE) (Ms. Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. Member for giving way. The problem the Ministry of Defence is facing regarding remuneration of the Home Guards is that, the Home Guards started on a voluntary basis.  They are not officially recruited under UPDF, while the LDUs are officially recruited.  

That means that even Public Service does not recognise Home Guards, until we officially recruit them. And that means that they will be ready to be deployed anywhere.  As far as the situation is now, these Home Guards stay in their homes while the LDUs are deployed in camps.  But if we recruit them into LDU or UPDF, I am sure they will also be catered as the UPDF are catered for.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, the Home Guards have been paid up to July. I do not know what is happening in Kibaale. I wish to know if those ones in Kibaale are not yet paid.  I pledge to follow up the matter.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to get the clarification from the Minister of State for Defence.  Because as far as we know, Home Guards in Gulu district, are actually recruited by the Army; they are commanded by the Army; they do not stay in their homes, but they stay in the barracks; and they are transferred at will by the Army. 

Others went as far as in DRC; they fought, they returned, and they are still getting the salary of shs.10,000, and a cash ratio allowance of shs.30,000. Are you using our Home Guards as a reserve for cheap labour, or what?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KALULE SSENGO: Mr. Speaker, as we speak now, even the LDUs do not have a law to protect them.  They are neither Special Police Constables – they are not covered by the Police; they are not under Local Administration Police; and they are not in the Army.  So, the situation is still confusing, and we do not know where they fall.   I request the hon. Minister to throw light on this.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (SECURITY) (Mr. Mukasa Muruli): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There is a law which handles the Police; and there is a law which handles the UPDF. Those two laws are used to cover the LDUs. There is a section in the Police law which allows the area Police Commander or the DPC, to declare somebody as a Special Constable. Once he is declared as a Special Police Constable, that law now covers him, and he is treated like a Policeman. He can now enjoy the privileges of a Policeman, and he does the duties of a Policeman. 

In the Army law, there is a section that allows the Commander to declare somebody as an auxiliary; and once he has been declared as an auxiliary, he is treated in the law like an Army man.  


However, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has looked at this problem of the LDU, and it is in the process of actually bringing a law to Parliament to cover the LDU.  But for the time being, there are some laws which can handle sections of the LDU. Thank you.  

MAJ. GEN. TINYEFUZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to give additional information. I basically agree with what the hon. Minister of State for Defence, and the one for Security have said. But in essence, there are about two things, which have been happening.  

We have been operating under the 1992 NRA Statute. This statute did not substantively provide for the creation and employment of LDUs and Home guards.  This is the position.  However, as the situation went on deteriorating, because of insurgency and so on, these forces were created. 
So, there has been a lacuna in the law, which basically should have been addressed by the 6th Parliament, because all along, this was a standing problem of dual belonging.  They either belong to the Police, because LDUs were at times residing at Police Stations; and when then there were operations, they would go to Military camps.  

Many of the Members who were here, I am not apportioning blame, but I think they ought to have seen this controversy. It never did happen.  However, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To inform you, since I was a Member of the 6th Parliament, this matter came up and we asked that if LDUs commit something wrong against a citizen, where should the citizen go for redress?  I think we were given an answer that, they are taken as Army and therefore, you can sue the Government. That was the answer which was not backed up by the written provisions. 

Therefore, since we got that explanation, there was no way individual Members would have moved to regularize that one. But now that you have pointed it out, and the Front Benchers have heard that there is that lacuna, I think something will be done soonest.

MAJ.GEN TINYEFUZA: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker.  The other information I wanted to give is that, LDUs and Home guards actually do receive pay.  Local defence units or local defence, whatever they are, when they are guarding Police Stations and so on, they get shs.60,000.  Now, this is not far below what an ordinary Policeman normally gets really.  So, it is a problem of living wage for all Government workers.

Secondly, Home Guards receive between shs.20,000, and shs.40,000, depending in the areas they are operating.  Now, the problem comes in that this payment normally is supposed to be got from the Police, and not necessary from the Army, when the Home Guards are guarding their villages.  

So, there has been a problem of synchronization between the two Ministries – Defence and Internal Affairs.  This is what the new law which - I hope during this Session of Parliament, it will be brought. We are trying to synchronize this position of where LDUs and Home Guards should fall; what should be their terms of service, and what should be their status. Should they be in the Army, should they be auxiliary forces like Police or whatever? But somehow they have been getting their pay, and they have been very, very useful in maintaining the security of this country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, having heard these explanations, do you not think that this matter requires a very comprehensive statement?  Because we did not know.  Now, you are telling us that LDUs have no legal basis; Home Guards have no legal basis, but they are getting pay – pay for what, under what circumstances would they be paid?  

These are matters now that have come to our knowledge, and definitely, one would say it is irregular to pay somebody who has no legal basis in the Police; who has no legal basis in the Army; but since he has done some work, he has to be paid.  Therefore, I suggest that maybe in a week’s time or so, we get a detailed statement on this matter, and a way forward. (Applause) Hon. Member for Buyaga, can you conclude your speech.

MR.BESISIRA: Mr. Speaker I had just talked for about two minutes when I was interrupted, so when you tell me to conclude – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not think they were two minutes.

MR.BESISIRA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I hope the Front Bench has seen that they have been paying people who are illegally operating and I hope they are going to put right whatever has not been there. 

I come to the issue of electricity. There is a saying in my language that when you tell a barren woman how you had a sleepless night because the child was giving you a lot of trouble, she says “I wish I would have one to give me similar trouble.” The people of Buyaga are hearing of tariffs and the people of Kampala are demonstrating on the streets, when will they get this electricity and they also join the others in the struggle against these tariffs? (Laughter) Because they have heard the promise of electricity but it has not come. Let them get it so that they can also join the others in the struggle against the tariffs. So the people of Buyaga are longing for the electrification of that part of the country, especially the big town of Kagadi where we get some of these very good things that you usually see across in many parts of this country.  

I would like to talk about – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENERGY) (Mr. Migereko Daudi): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to assure the Member for Buyaga that electricity to Kagadi will soon be there under the Rural Electrification Scheme. Some work regarding rural electrification has started. As soon as we are through with the budget, work should commence and we shall be in a position to get power to Kagadi. I thank you.

MR.BESISIRA: I hope the Minister will live by his word, because we were told the same thing in 1996 when the President came to look for votes, and even in March this year, the same thing was said. So, I do not know how soon.

I would now like to talk about the Local Governments. This House passed a law – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The problem I have, hon. Member - it is true you think you have spoken for three minutes, but you have spoken for over five minutes irrespective of the interruptions. At the same time, during my communication, I reminded you of the invitation you have with the Uganda Investment Authority starting almost at this time. I do not want to prejudice this invitation because it is equally important for you and for the entire country. So I will ask you to wind up within one minute and we see how we can proceed.

MR.BESASIRA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me another minute. I am talking about the Local Governments and the law that governs the people who are elected to these offices. This House passed the Local Governments Act, and at one time Members of this House were urging for a qualification to be attached to the people who go to these Local Councils. But I read in the newspapers, because I was not a member of this House, that it was not possible for an attachment to those posts. But it is very sad to find a whole LC III being headed by someone who can hardly read English, yet he is in charge of university graduates. 
The same law provides that for someone to be made a vice-chairman, he must be qualified to be a chairman in the District Local Government Council. But then you provide for the people who are to be elected to the local council with no qualifications. What if all people who come do not qualify, what happens? Is there no vice-chairman? 

In the same way, new districts have been formed. What if none of the counsellors in those districts qualifies to be a chairman, what do you do? I think these are all omissions in the law; the learned people call them ‘lacunas’ and I think there is need for them to be addressed. I think I will have another opportunity. I thank you for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in view of what I had earlier stated about the Uganda Investment Authority meeting, I think this is the proper time for us to adjourn today’s business. The House is adjourned until 2:30p.m. on Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 5:36p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 21st August 2001 at 2:30p.m.)


