Tuesday, 10 August 2010

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this special sitting. Last Thursday morning, 5 August 2010, Uganda lost a very prominent son in the name of Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, QC, who died in his sleep at his home in Makindye, Kampala. The late Godfrey Binaisa has been a former President of Uganda. He was President between 1979 and 1980 and has been living in Uganda.

Earlier, the late Godfrey Binaisa served in many important positions in the country. In Parliament, we have several records where the late Godfrey Binaisa’s name greatly features and positively too. It has been deemed that Parliament, the place where the late Godfrey Binaisa served and an important institution of Government, holds special proceedings to pay appropriate tribute to him and also express her very deep condolences to the family and the entire nation.

Hon. Members, this is the reason we are here and I thank you for the time you have given this important occasion. There are a number of prominent Ugandans who have come to witness today’s proceedings. Among them, I am informed, there is hon. Mayanja Nkangi, who was also a minister and former Katikkiro of Buganda, hon. Kanyomozi, hon. Henry Kyemba, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi -(Applause)- and the other honourables who I will mention after getting the details; they are also seated here. I have also seen Prof. Wavamunno who has been close to the late Godfrey Binaisa and members of late Godfrey Binaisa’s family are with us. You are welcome.

(Entrance of the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, QC, former President of the Republic of Uganda)

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLAIMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE GODFREY LUKONGWA BINAISA

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business. 

2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa (QC), former President of the Republic of Uganda.

THE SEPAKER: Okay, supported by the Leader of the Opposition.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: “WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief, the sad news of the death of His Excellency, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, a former President of the Republic of Uganda, which occurred on 5 August 2010 at his home in Makindye;

NOTING that the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa was a President of Uganda from 20 June 1979 to 13 May 1980 and served Uganda in many other capacities as Uganda’s first Attorney-General in 1962; Vice President of the Uganda Patriotic Movement in 1980; Chairman of the Uganda National Congress Party in 1956; started the United Front Umbrella of all African political parties in 1958; became the first African Queen’s Counsel in East Africa; was a member of the International Committee of Jurists in 1966;

MINDFUL that the late Godfrey sought to unite all Ugandans during the turbulent times of 1980 using his ideology of the Umbrella;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, friends and people of Uganda on the loss of this former Head of State;
2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered by the former Head of State.” 
 
Justification

His Excellency the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, the fifth President of the Republic of Uganda, born on May 30 1920 in Mityana by the late Rev. Canon Anania Jjuuko and the late Mrs Naome Binaisa, enjoyed a religious upbringing. He attended King’s College Budo and Makerere College. He joined Makerere University to study medicine, but did not complete the course. He went to Ankole and Kigezi and got occupied with mining in Kigezi for seven years. In 1949, he obtained a scholarship to study geology and mining in the United Kingdom.

In 1952 to 1953, he joined London’s King’s College to study law and later became a member of the Bar at Lincoln Inn. In 1963, he became the first African Queen’s Counsel in East Africa, a major legal recognition to Uganda’s first Ugandan Attorney-General.
He became the fifth President of Uganda on June 20, 1979 when he replaced Prof. Yusuf Kironde Lule who led the country for 68 days.

Binaisa faced the following challenges: First, he replaced Prof. Lule who was very popular, especially in Buganda, and who was removed because he disallowed the National Consultative Council, the then legislative body in Uganda to vet his proposed ministers. 

The removal of President Lule sparked off riots especially in Buganda, demanding for his restoration under the slogan, “No Lule, No work”. Binaisa restrained the military from shooting into the irate crowds. He pointed out, “Here are a people who have had no freedom for eight years. Let them let off steam.”

The late Binaisa faced a second challenge of handling different military groups under the Uganda National Liberation Front. These different groups were trying to clandestinely recruit people in their forces. He informed me later that he had sought to remove Brigadier Oyite Ojok, the Chief of Staff because Oyite Ojok had failed to control these military factions and he was himself heavily recruiting people into his military faction. 

He had assigned Oyite Ojok to go to Algeria as Ambassador. Many of his colleagues, including the First Deputy Premier, advised Binaisa against his proposed action, but he refused to take the advice and the Army removed him from the presidency in May 1980.
If Tanzania had supported Binaisa’s decision, it would have averted the military coup d’état.

The late Binaisa faced yet a third challenge of handling these various military factions in a state which was controlled by a foreign military force of the Tanzania Army, popularly known as the “Wakombozi”. This is the force that had helped Uganda in removing Idi Amin. After the coup that removed Binaisa from power, the Tanzanian Army held him incommunicado in a bid to protect him from being harmed.

The fourth challenge the late Binaisa faced was to unite the different political groups which had been disbanded in 1969. After overthrowing Idi Amin in 1979, all the former political parties and new ones were trying to reorganise and take advantage of the volatile situation. This is when the late Binaisa resurrected his ideology of the “Umbrella” as a unifying political denominator.

Binaisa faced yet a fifth challenge of being accepted especially in Buganda. Some Ugandans wrongfully viewed Binaisa as a political instrument that was being used to bring back Milton Obote. Binaisa, therefore, had the task of showing that he had come back to make good what had gone wrong.

Binaisa’s sixth challenge was that he presided over a devastated economy characterised by shortage of essential commodities such as sugar and salt.

Despite all these problems, Binaisa was a good listener and was accessible to many people. He managed to work with the National Executive Committee of the Uganda National Liberation Front and the National Consultative Council. He was a consensus builder.

The late Binaisa was a very hardworking person. When he fled into exile in 1973, he practiced law in Britain and America. This is a very important attribute that political leaders should emulate. It solves the problem of redundancy and dependency for survival. Binaisa retained his dignity.

When the political dust settled, President Museveni encouraged Binaisa to return home. He was given the facilities of a former Head of State. The facilitation is covered under the Presidential Emoluments Act No.21, 1998. It covers the following:

i) 	A monthly allowance of Ugshs 2.4 million;
ii) 	Medical allowance of Shs 300,000 per month;
iii) 	Utilities i.e. water and electricity of Shs 500,000 per month and 
iv) 	A contribution of two domestic servants of Ugshs 130,690 each
v) 	A chauffeur driven vehicle with Ugshs 1.8 million for fuel per month
vi) 	Four security guards and an escort vehicle for guards
vii) 	Shs 3.5 million per month for accommodation, a furniture allowance of Shs 20 million every five years, and 
viii) A secretary to assist him carryout personal correspondences and a computer.

The Presidential Emoluments Act No.21, 1998 will be superseded by the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and the Prime Minister Bill when it is assented to by His Excellency the President.

The NRM Government has established a good culture whereby former heads of state are encouraged to return and are given protection and other facilities. (Applause) 

In Uganda, the late Binaisa kept his legal aura. When he returned from exile, he associated himself with M/S Impala Legal Advocates and Consultants, which benefited from his wealth of experience and wisdom in legal matters.

Binaisa volunteered in teaching a primary school at Mutundwe and the pupils and teachers -(Applause)- were animated by his articulation, his accessibility and his humour. So, you can see how he solved the problem of functional redundancy.

Binaisa had a close relationship with his God. He was a regular attendant for Sunday service at Namirembe Cathedral, even when he was frail, and his presence was well recognised at Namirembe Cathedral.

All his life, the late Binaisa was a man of the people. He was eager to attend to people’s concerns, including visiting the sick and attending burials. He was humble, non-sectarian, humorous and patriotic and attempted to unite the whole of Uganda. He is survived by three boys and four girls. May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved. Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.

3.14
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof.Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and hon. Members. I rise to second the motion moved by the Leader of Government Business that this Parliament pays tribute to the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa QC, former President of Uganda.

Before I make my substantive contribution, and while recognising that this is a collective motion, allow me to, as an individual, convey my deep condolences to the family of the late Godfrey Binaisa.

I would like, Mr Speaker, to thank in particular, Ms Nakalema Binaisa who for a very long time stood by our father, assisted him and made sure that he lived well up to his death. (Applause) We thank you for your devotion to your father. Your father has passed on. I believe that now would be the time to turn to yourself and your future. 

In the culture of the Acholi, where I come from, a person of late Godfrey Binaisa’s age, 90 years, when he passes on, we do not mourn. We instead bring out the drums and celebrate and ask God to give us a replacement. 

Therefore, my contribution will mainly be a celebration of the life of Godfrey Binaisa; a thank you to God for the blessings that he bestowed upon him and recognition of the contributions that he made as a Ugandan who served his country diligently. And in doing this, I would like to start from an observation which for me - mine is about figures; it seems to say something about Godfrey Binaisa. That probably he was in complete harmony with his fate. He was born on 30 May 1920. He became President of Uganda on the 20 June 1979. He lived to be 90 and 60 days. And he died in 2010. All the figures are round. I think he was living in complete harmony with his fate. 

Mr Speaker, I may be short and also slightly bold like the late Godfrey Binaisa, but I shared very little with him in my life. I would like, therefore, to recognise a wonderful contribution made by Mr Guwedeko who published a series of articles about Godfrey Binaisa, and I will draw some of my comments from the contributions in those articles, but also one of my own personal experiences. 

In the first instance, Mr Speaker, if you read about Godfrey Binaisa and you will recognise one thing; you recognise a man of extreme intelligence whose brilliance sometimes is not well understood. Once you are given that kind of intelligence, you live generally a restless life. You look for challenges; you never fear challenge; and you will never hesitate to plunge yourself into anything. And when you look at the record of Godfrey Binaisa, you see that very life. 

He started as an ordinary student; I was told he became even a distinguished etymologist. I am an etymologist. He even published. He could have pursued that field but he left it. At a tender age of less than 30, he became a miner, the first African miner and became very wealthy. He even organised the first big wedding done by an African with wine and champagne served. You cannot do that if you do not have the mind and character of Godfrey Binaisa. 

Mr Speaker, there are many things that Godfrey Binaisa did in the politics of Uganda, but as always, the good things that you do are left with you and the bad things that you do remain. So, you will find that many commentaries would be about those bad things; even bad without a context. 

I believe that as Attorney-General of Uganda and in his time and his circumstance, he served Uganda not with malice. He applied his best and recognised that what he was doing was in the best interest of Uganda. Of course, it is sometimes seen as negative, but I think we pay tribute to him for being a Ugandan who when called to serve, served his country diligently and with utmost recognition of his responsibility.

Mr Speaker, I have only one close familiarity with the politics that the late Godfrey Binaisa participated in. And this is the time when the late Yusuf Lule was removed from the presidency. I happened to have gotten involved somehow with people like Dr Ambrose Okullu who is now in exile, Adimola, the late Col. Oboma, the late Lt. Oloka Pere; and we used to meet, and at that time, all the exiles that came from outside lived mainly in the then Apolo Hotel.

I remember that day I came to visit with these people and they told me that there is a very important meeting taking place in Entebbe and the outcome could be a change in the leadership of this country. I was then a special assistant in the faculty of agriculture in Makerere; and that really intrigued me. So, I hanged around. We stayed late into the night and then the first announcement that we got was that Yusuf Lule had been removed from the presidency, but who would replace him was still a matter under discussion. Infact, that day I did not go back to Makerere until late in the morning when we were told that Godfrey Binaisa became President. 

Of course I was here partly and many of us were here when Godfrey Binaisa was President of Uganda. He never changed on account of being President. He remained a very controversial person. He spoke his mind and he dared to dare. But all in all, each one of us is fated to play a role at some time in the life of a country and I believe that in the times that Godfrey Binaisa played his role in this country; he played it well and to the best of his ability. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by repeating what I said when I was interviewed by WBS television. I was asked about Godfrey Binaisa and I said that even in death, he will still cause controversy. I would like to suggest that even in death, Godfrey Binaisa, has caused controversy. There has been lots of debate on where he should be buried. I am glad that quite a number of Members have come; there would be queries as to why the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus did not bring a wreath; those are controversies. (Interjections) 

But Mr Speaker, most of all, like he did so many times in his life, the late Godfrey Binaisa, having worked with those who became former presidents, again outsmarted all his colleagues. He is now the last of the former presidents to die, but he has also earned himself a public holiday on the day of his burial. That is Godfrey Binaisa. We shall always remember him for being a very controversial politician. Yes, he was a great mind; yes, he lived a great life; farewell, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. 

3.25
MS OLIVER WONEKHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): The Rt hon. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I rise to support the motion paying tribute to His Excellency the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa. 

The late Godfrey Lukongwa Binasia made significant contribution to constitutionalism in Uganda, for example, in the drafting of the 1966 Constitution. 

He further participated as Attorney-General in declaring Uganda a Republic. During this time, it was quite difficult to play national politics while taking care of Buganda’s interests. The late is said to have played the balancing act very well. 

The late Binaisa was the fifth President of Uganda from 20 June 1979 to 12 May 1980. People will remember him differently. Whereas many may remember him for what he did during his brief reign as President, there is a lot to say about him as a person. For example, the alumni of Makerere University remember him as a compassionate man who saved the institution at a time when the country was hit by scarcity of essential goods. As chancellor of the university, he is remembered for his hard work to ensure that the students got basic requirements such as food and appropriate allowances. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, as referred to earlier, the late Binaisa given the attributes that he had, surpassed all boundaries of the norms of life; at home, at school, in his professional discipline, a rise to presidency against all odds, including a licence to stage a Western style wedding at his time. 

His Excellency, the late Godfrey Binaisa will be remembered for his intense patriotism, hard work, service, sacrifice, wit and humour and of course his famous saying, “Entebbe ewoma”- “Power is sweet.” May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.28
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I also stand up to support the motion. 

Mr Speaker, in front of us lies a man born for adversity. One whose life in leadership was spent navigating sheltered waters and troubled seas in 1966 and 1979 by all means, two of the most difficult years and very critical turning points in Uganda’s history. 

As Uganda’s Attorney-General in 1966, and President in 1979, Binaisa was charged with steering the ship through turmoil and tempest and he overcame. Uganda then was very volatile and capricious; it was packed with a lot of interest and divergent views. That he was able to execute his tasks faithfully and leave office without fingers pointing in accusation of crime or irregularity, is evidence of a rare and exceptional character.  

We are talking about a man possessed of rare integrity and a very keen ability to work with various groups of people and still achieve harmony with all of them. 

Whenever this country needed him most, he was always available to answer the call. He was one of those who were anti establishment during the colonial times. And as a member of the Uganda Freedom Union (UFU), one of the several groups that rose to oppose Idi Amin, he emerged from his political career as a patriot; whom Uganda held as a very big patriot then; and up to this day, at this hour, we hold him as such.

Here lies a man, Mr Speaker, who was born for the big time. Excellency followed him almost naturally. And inevitably when he was at home and abroad, he was at his best. I remember when we were in Makerere, when I was a student then, and they said, “The President is coming; please keep time; he is coming at 3.30.” But he was there at 2.29. He was a stickler for time. And he will always be remembered as such. (Applause) I don’t know why you are clapping?

As a young man, he became wealthy, trading and competing with Asians at that very difficult time. And he made handsome profits. He took leaps and bounds at a time when others took mere steps. He was able to acquire a mining licence when it was unheard of for an African to get one in colonial times. 

When he became a lawyer, he was no ordinary advocate. He became Attorney-General, the foremost advocate. 

When he turned to fulltime politics, he became President without asking for it because his colleagues knew him to be special, worthy and deserving of this highest office. 

As a lawyer in Britain, he excelled as Queen’s Counsel (QC) a rank that many dream about but very few achieve. 

So, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, here now is a man who was friendly to all and who was classless. One who transcended the bounds of political, religious and tribal divide; he reached out to all around him excelling at building bridges, when most people preferred to build walls. 

We did not know - I did not know which political party he subscribed to by the time he retired, because he got along very well with all of them. We do not know his enemies because we cannot see them. Neither do we know his friends because he was friendly to all. 

There was never a dull moment with him. His sense of humour even in the most difficult time, and his penchant for being candid where few would dare shall remain firmly in our minds.

From admitting - my colleague alluded to it - as President that he said, “entebbe ewoma,”  proclaiming at a public rally that he had fired former President Idi Amin from power and yet it was obvious that Amin would never return anyway, this was a man for whom  there was a light side to every moment. 

He has proved that it is now possible for a former President to live in Uganda as an ordinary person, but enjoying the status of a former fist citizen at the expense and under the care of the State.

He was a good example in the bad times. He was a strong, focussed and determined leader when Uganda was at her weakest, and a great ambassador away from Uganda. Such a brilliant mind, a large heart, and a simple personality! This is a man we shall not forget, a man we shall surely miss. As the Bible says in 2 Timothy 4:7, he fought the good fight, he has run the race, he has kept the faith; and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.35
MR SAMUEL NJUBA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this rare opportunity to talk about a brother professionally and physically. Before I do so, please accept my condolences to the family of the late, and especially the daughter who has been looking after him so well. May I also add that it was a delight to know that Prof. Wavamunno has been very instrumental in this function? I thank him.

I received the news of Godfrey’s passing on when we were in South Africa on duty and subsequently, I have been reading the various writings about Godfrey. I feel sad that we have concentrated on his presidency and the later years. The man who lies in that coffin was very instrumental in fighting for the liberation of this country. He was involved in civil debates with the likes of one J. Kiwanuka, Musaazi, Paul Muwanga, Mawajji, Kavuma and a host of others.

This man was deported; what we call internal deportation. He was posted with others to the most remote parts of Karamoja because of his persistence in obtaining independence. That is why I said I feel we cannot re-write history. Let us keep facts as facts.

I would like to see that people like Binaisa are truly recognised and a monument erected for them. For example, we can now bury Godfrey Binaisa, but what about Mawajji? How many people know about Mawajji? He was a lawyer who was murdered in Amin’s time, but he was a big fighter for the independence of this country. So, I hope that at the right time, we should move and build a monument like the one I saw in South Africa and put up all these names for posterity’s sake.

I was about to sit down but I would be failing in my duty if I didn’t recognise the contribution of Godfrey Binaisa to the Law Society at a very difficult time; that is 1971-1972 when he became President of the Law Society, and I had the fortune or misfortune of being his secretary at the Law Society. It was at that time that we lost the Chief Justice of this country. I saw and recall how firm Godfrey was to put us together to serve the Law Society and even approach the dictator Idi Amin to try to seek help and look for the missing Chief Justice.

We had to meet in different places in order to hide from spies. It was Godfrey Binaisa who arranged for the Bureau of Leaders of Lawyers in Africa to come and talk to Idi Amin and see whether they could talk sense into the man. I remember we told him jokingly, Godfrey, very soon you are going to be named judge. He never minced words and readily replied, “I will go to the bench and recite Shakespeare and they will think I am mad and they will release me.” That was Godfrey Binaisa. I am saying all this despite the fact that at one stage he behaved like any other African leader.

The people who surrounded him, like those everywhere, tend to mislead the leader. So, whatever mistake he might have fallen into, I think should not be wholly put on him, including my detention during his period. He told me he was misled that I had commandos and that is why he threw me in jail.

Lastly, Godfrey is misunderstood for the pigeon hole constitution and I think I should put this right. He told me that he wrote the pigeon hole constitution of 1966 with some people in order to save this country. If you look at the contents of the 1966 Constitution and that of 1967, they are different. I am urging Members of Parliament, particularly those who come from Buganda, to familiarise themselves with the contents. You will notice that the 1966 Constitution is fairly different from that of 1967. I will not go through the details.

He didn’t write the one of 1967 and that is the difference, but other people are just looking at it as if he did everything and destroyed Buganda. He run away in 1967 before that Constitution was enacted.

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity you have given me and let him rest in peace. Thank you.

3.42
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I stand to convey my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and friends of the late former president, His Excellency, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa QC. 

The tribute I am going to pay to the former president is out of my experience while he was a president. That time I was in the university and I still have a few people - I wish hon. Alex Byarugaba was here because he would be able to bear me witness on many of the things that we experienced that time.

The late former president was a believer in the rule of law and was very democratic. On that note, I am very happy that the mover of this motion also acknowledges that he was the type who gave opportunity to people to express their innermost feelings, however, ghastly it was to the office that he represented.

That was the time when we were in the university and on many of the walls in Kampala, there was a common writing that said, “Oba tuffa tuffe, ffe twagala Lule. No Lule, no work”. This was the common saying.

At that time, gunshots were very rampant at the sight of ten or more people demonstrating and indeed as the Prime Minister said, the late Godfrey Binaisa was able to say, “Let people express their innermost feelings, don’t disturb them.” Indeed, people never went beyond demonstrations to show their displeasure. There was no tear gas, there were no Kiboko Squads and people were able to demonstrate.

I respect the former President for being what he was. The Bible says that a prophet is never welcomed home; the gentleman lying before us is a Muganda and it is his own people who stood up and said that, “Twaggala Lule; oba tuffa tuffe.” Him and Lule were Baganda, but there was a situation where people could not embrace him. He was one of them; they could not join him, but he continued to work from hatred to love because as soon he became President, there was no dancing to welcome him. He was able to popularise himself in central Uganda and the rest of the country.

I would like to correct one thing as put by the Prime Minister. The late President did not lose his presidency because of the late Brigadier Oyite Ojok alone. There were two officers that had been transferred; the late brigadier was supposed to go to Algeria as an ambassador, and President Museveni was transferred from the Ministry of Defence to that of Regional Cooperation. This cost Godfrey Binaisa his job; that history must be put right. 

We would like to look at the late President as a person who strengthened the existing local government system. I remember that time it was known as “Mayumba-Kumi”. Immediately the exiles and the liberators came in, this system was needed to distribute the scarce items that the government was giving to the people. This system is closer to the current LC system that we have. I really want to thank him for having left behind such a legacy. 

The late Godfrey Binaisa was a man who believed in institutions. I remember when an attempt was made on his life in 1980 at a public rally in Iganga. When he came back to Kampala, he invited Makerere University students. He invited us to the current Sheraton Hotel and trailers of beer were brought to us. He surprised us because this was a scarce commodity then. He said that even if he had been killed, Makerere University was still alive and it would churn out more graduates and lawyers. He did not think that he was the only one with a vision.

Ever since the former President passed on, there were discussions between Government and the family members as far as burial grounds are concerned. I want to ask Government to make sure that the burial ground is accessible to family members. For those of us who are Christians, we may wish to go and offer special prayers to the deceased. It is a common Catholic practice that family members come to pray for the deceased, say once in a year.

With those few remarks, it is the good Lord that gives, and it is the Lord that takes; may his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.52
MS BETI KAMYA (Rubaga North, Kampala): I wish to address myself to the family and friends of the late Binaisa and to all mourning Ugandans. I rise to support this motion on behalf of Rubaga North, where the late Binaisa spent a lot of his time. I join you to pay respects to the life of His Excellency the late Godfrey Binaisa, and mourn his death. 

He occupied a special place in this world in my opinion. How many people can live such an eventful and colourful life only to end it by dying peacefully in their bed? There are not many people in this world who get such opportunity in this world. One of the eventful scenarios is when he was woken up to be told that he was President of Uganda. He joked and smiled with his nurse and then passed on. It was a wonderful way to go. I am tempted to believe that somewhere along his ancestral line somebody must have done something good for which God decided to pay through the life and the death of Binaisa. 

Having said that, lessons must be drawn from his life and death; from his life we learn that the actions of one person for whatever reasons can have very far reaching repercussions on society. His decision to participate in the 1967 Constitution in the manner that he did, is that part of Uganda’s history that we can never forget, but hopefully one where we have learnt hard lessons in popular constitutionalism and democracy. 

The late Binaisa as everybody remembers had very interesting and quotable remarks for which we cannot forget him. He is popularly remembered for the “entebbe ewooma” meaning, “that chair is sweet.” Other people prefer to pretend that it is only an unavoidable york. (Laughter) 

When he went into exile after his tenure in office as President, he lived in a flat next to my sister in South London and so I had the great pleasure to know a little about him and to interact with him. I got to know him as a person of great humour and thoroughly liberated from convention; that made him great company and a wonderful counsel. 

I shall always remember the late Binaisa at 90 years old, standing straight, shoulders straight, head up, just like they used to teach in - you know some of us who were taught by the British were told to walk with our heads high. I think literally, he has walked with his head high.

In his death, we learn how good it is for one to live his or her last days as an ordinary person among friends and family in one’s own country; to be buried by one’s own people; and to be honoured in your last days in your country. We should certainly celebrate this as the first president to die in Uganda, and we hope that all our leaders will go in such a manner. 

However, Mr Speaker, that will only happen as a matter of course and not chance, if we all worked together to understand what it is – what that sweet thing is in that chair that makes people hang on to it with their lives. Until we understand what that sweet thing in that chair is, we may have a long way to go before we see another Binaisa in this Parliament.

It is very regrettable that Uganda offers hopelessness to its youth who aspire only to go and live outside this country. Let the life and death of Godfrey Binaisa bring us together as a nation, to understand that it takes more than merely having a black man in State House to be truly independent. We need to understand that independence will mean dismantling the colonial administrative system that centralised authority, so that they could gain control over all our resources. 

May the death of Godfrey Binaisa help us to re-examine the problem of Uganda and work together as a nation, to find a solution.  May his soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: The learned Attorney-General.

3.38
THE MINSITER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): On behalf of my senior colleague who is not here with us because he is away on official duties out of the country, and on behalf of the Attorney-General’s Chambers, allow me to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family, friends and relatives on the passing on of one of the most distinguished lawyers and Attorney-Generals Uganda has ever had, who later went on to become the President of the Republic of Uganda at the most difficult period after the ousting of the dictator, Idi Amin. 

I had the opportunity of interacting with the former President. He was a man of great wit. He was a man of great intellect. He was a man of great memory. I could not believe that even in his old age, whenever I would interact with him, he would remember events by the hour, by the day, by the month and by the year.

We recently had a conference in Entebbe which was officially opened by the President of Uganda. All the political parties represented in this House were present in that conference and the theme was: “How to stem off or to avoid any violence in the 2011 elections.” At one point – and this was organised by the Uganda Human Rights Commission - at break time, I interacted with the Secretary of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Chairperson of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, hon. Medi Kaggwa, whom I asked, “Why do you not on such for a, invite our former President, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa. He has vast experience and knowledge, and he could help us to shape our destiny for the better?”  We all agreed that we look for him. A few days later, I heard this misfortune. 

His intellect was insurmountable. We all know it and we have read about it. He jammed queues in schools. There are classes he never attended. He accelerated from one class to another because of his intellect and no wonder he was always chosen to do very difficult assignments at difficult times in our history.

We all know that he became the Attorney-General in 1962 when we were transiting from the colonial regime to the regime that we now have. That meant that the country was looking for an Attorney-General who would reshape the legal framework to suit our circumstances, and the choice of course was the former President.   

That Constitution we talk about of 1967 – he crafted it more single-handedly, but it endured time until 1995. Ecclesiastes 3:11 says that, “God makes everything beautiful in its time.” That Constitution too was good in its time. From it, we learnt what we now have. From it, certain purposes were fulfilled and we have grown from it and, therefore, it formed the basis of what we have now. 

After the dictator Idi Amin in 1979, of course the same history repeated itself; as they were searching who would be the best at that critical time, the eyes went to the former President. 

We at the Attorney-General’s Chambers, mourn the passing on or celebrate the passing on of a great leader. The former President was a principled lawyer and if the principles that he cherished - he did not find it difficult to resign from the Government of the then President Milton Obote when they had disagreements concerning constitutional matters, particularly the presidential powers of extension. These two bring out the character of the person whose life we are celebrating. I think he is an example of a life that we should all emulate, and by standing bold and being conscious of our destiny, we can shape this country towards a better future. May the Almighty God rest the former President in eternal peace. 

4.16
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join all those who have spoken about this great man. I was lucky to be his Minister of Lands in 1979 – 1980. And in that capacity, I want to share with you episodes that we shared. This is the presumption that you can share episodes with a great man like this. 

The first one is when he was chosen to become President. We were 18 people in State House in Entebbe, during which meeting we decided on changing the President. President Lule was there and he spoke in favour of his position. A time came and we voted; 14 people voted against him and four – that is three others voted for him. He walked out and we went ahead to choose another President. I want to say this very firmly and confidently that President Binaisa did not campaign or solicit for support to be considered President. 

At that time, President Lule was chosen because of certain circumstances, including him not having had any negative political record, and because he was a Muganda; and the removal of Amin was centred in the central region; we needed a favourable political environment. Therefore, President Lule qualified. And for those of us who were in Moshi – I can see Ben Wacha and Daniel Omara Atubo, they should recall the considerations of why Lule was not chosen to become the President. 

Similarly, to get Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa to be President was in that context as well; not because he had campaigned, not because he was the only one in the world who could be President. But circumstances, as it is always said, determine who becomes a leader. When he was brought in by none other than Yoweri Kaguta Museveni – he is the one who drove him in the following morning after we decided he should be the next President; he welcomed the idea as if it was natural. (Laughter) And this is what is amazing about great people; it seems as if the conditions were all predisposed to his being the President. So, that is my first episode with him.

My second episode was when he came to give the first press conference at the then Nile Hotel. Unlike his predecessor, President Lule, who addressed the nation in Luganda, in his first address, President Binaisa spoke his Oxford English and we all felt that we had hit a jackpot. (Applause) He spoke about foreign affairs, regional affairs; he defeated the history of this country. We were happy with him; very happy indeed. 

It has been said that the conditions were very rough; anybody who talked about people being left to demonstrate had to take a second thought because the conditions were difficult. And it needed somebody with the humour and wit like that of Lukongwa Binaisa. He would say, “You Munyankore, come and eat with your President at table”. When we were having lunch, he would say, “Come and eat with your President; don’t you know you have to eat with your President?” That made the environment liveable even though it was difficult. 

The third episode is when he called me, “You my Minister of Lands and Natural Resources, do you know I am a minor now? I abandoned my Exclusive Prospective Licence (EPL) – I abandoned my licence and now somebody has it and this man is called Marinos; he is a Greek. I want my licence back”.

I said, “Mr President, let me check when the licence will expire because we are coming here to establish legality. If the licence is about to expire, we shall not renew it; but we cannot just shorten it”. And then, in his characteristic manner, he said, “Do you know, as President I can make Marinos disappear”? 

I answered, “Mr President, are you becoming another Amin?” He said, “You do not understand, I am President, so go and do your job.” (Laughter)

So, you can see that the power was there, but equally, it was tamed with humanity. I do not remember at all that I ever changed that licence; perhaps also because his stay in office was not too long for him to have got it.

Lastly, we went to Kabale and on our way back, he said, “Kabwegyere, come with me in the same car”. And Emmanuel Mutebile was the Principal Private Secretary and he told me, “The President wants you to travel with him because I am stopping at Nyamitanga. So, could we go together?” 

From Kabale to Nyamitanga, there was hardly any place you could stop at then, but somewhere on the way, we stopped. And I do not want to describe why we stopped, but we stopped. And unknown to us, people were squeezing juice out of Matooke. He said to me, “This thing is sweet”. So, whenever I pass that spot, I remember walking with this President almost unprotected just to see people squeezing juice -(Interjections)- yes. 

The last one was a rally in Masaka and there again, he is mining iron and so on - whatever he was mining. He addresses this rally and you know at that time – things have changed in Uganda today. You know you see a whole crowd of people anxious to meet a President, but literally naked - literally dressed in tatters.

What I remember about that incident is that when he was addressing them, he said, “You know, we are back. The country is back,” and pretty told this minister here – you know this minister is a minister of natural resources. “Iron ore is here” and then he said, “You know before very long, we shall be assembling planes here” –(Laughter)- and I said, “Oh!” I wish we were able to record some of these speeches so that they are reproduced. Here is a man who was great and greatness did not interfere with his normal existence. A human being but who, at the same time, represents that alloy of greatness and normality. He was lucky to have an appointment with greatness and may he go to heaven and be great there. Back to you. (Applause)

4.14
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, let me also join my colleagues in the House and the country at large to express my deep condolences upon the death of our former President, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa. I would like to express my condolences to the family and to some of his close friends especially, Gordon Wavamunno, who has been very close to him and assisted with the burial arrangements. Also, I would like to thank his doctor, George Mayanja, who is also here with us. He has worked tirelessly looking after our late President.

The House is continuing with this good culture of recognising past leaders. I think Uganda is moving towards the stability where democratically - and also in a manner that befits past leaders - we recognise them. Some of you will be part of that great history in future.

I would like to pay tribute to the late President in a number or respects. First of all, it has been mentioned that he struggled for the independence of this country. I think his life had about three phases. The first phase is the public one of 1958 to 1962 when he contributed a lot to the attainment of our independence and even paid by being imprisoned in Karamoja. Then came the period of the turmoil soon after Independence in 1966/67 when, as Attorney-General, he found himself caught up in constitutional development and how Uganda could move forward. There is the period of 1979/80, which has made us remember him when he found himself dashed and placed into this difficult office of the President.

The House wishes to recognise that President Binaisa ruled Uganda at a very difficult time. His 11-month presidency may not have had that impact, which normally one would need in political leadership. In other words, when judging President Lukongwa Binaisa’s contribution as President, we should bear these two points in mind. He was brought in at an exceptionally difficult time in the history of this country and also, his period of about 11 months as President was too short for him to make any great impact.

Together with my colleagues like Prof. Kabwegyere, Ben Wacha, Eriya Kategeya and others, I happened to have been part of the team, which was in the National Consultative Council. [MR ODONGA OTTO: “How many years?”] Odonga-Otto is shaking his head because at that time -(Interjections)- he was not yet born and, therefore, he was not able to experience history physically. I am sure if you continue to live peacefully, hon. Odonga-Otto, you will be able to reach our age and relate history. That means less of night things and less of driving and so on. (Interjections) You will be able -(Laughter)– to reach the stage we have reached.

At the time when President Binaisa found himself chosen as the President by a small group of 18 or so members of the National Consultative Council, to which I was a member, plunged him into a very difficult situation politically and militarily. The country had just come out of war; the country had been devastated by the regime of Idi Amin, but at the same time, the country had been deprived of any trace of human rights respect, democracy and so on. 

Therefore, Binaisa also found himself caught up with people who had militarily struggled against Idi Amin, and Binaisa himself had not been associated with the grassroots military struggle. One of his challenges was how to relate with the military institutions, the military commanders. I am using plural because even if you had a National Liberation Army at that time, you had various fighting groups. Then you also had the Tanzanian Army. You had somebody in the position of a President and Commander-in-Chief trying to bring together all these commanders, yet he himself was not militaristic. He was very civil. Possibly, he had never bothered to even look at how to command some of these people. No wonder in the military equation and political jigsaw, he found himself unable to control some of these commanders. When he tried to see how best to reshuffle, which is of course the prerogative of the Commander-in-Chief, a problem came in to see whether his orders were to be obeyed.

But also, in terms of politics, possibly he could have tried to play another level of how to get the political civil side versus the military side. Definitely, I admire him for that because he moved round the country and I witnessed a number of his rallies. The ones I remember best were those that I had to move with Godfrey Binaisa from Gulu to Kitgum to receive the Banyas who had liberated Kitgum on their own and these were the people we met at that time. The Arrow Boys did not start with these; those were the Arrow Boys who chased the team of Idi Amin even before the Liberation Army reached Kitgum and some areas of Uganda. So, Lukongwa Binaisa was there inspecting these Banyas and groups as Arrow Boys liberators in Kitgum and other parts. I moved with him to Lira and Apac, and all throughout, Binaisa looked and appeared very popular as accepted. Why were the people doing this? One, because they thought that with the departure of Idi Amin, there was now a civilian government. A person who was able to control the country; a person who was ready to move freely and definitely, Lukongwa Binaisa was a very free president. He was able to eat the local food; I remember the rich dishes which were served to us in Kitgum and he was able to stand in the line with us and eat that food; and I think really, that was what he was. 

Of course, President Lukongwa Binaisa also faced the economic problem. The country was short of everything – from the essential commodities to drugs in hospitals and beers and other drinks were hardly there, and people were drinking whatever they came across. I am sure you heard the story of people drinking methanol or ethanol alcohol, getting blind, dying and all sorts of things. All the hotels in Kampala were looted, vehicles were hardly there, shops had nothing, and fortunately, Odonga-Otto was not yet born at that time. So, he did not experience it -(Laughter)- he would have died. 

Colleagues, I think of more importance is the fact that I would like to remember President Binaisa, for he started the term “open presidency”. I do not know whether some of my colleagues remember this. He believed that a president should be approachable to the people; the State House door should be open and when he went upcountry, he had everybody next to him and the situation was such that Lukongwa Binaisa mixed freely. But he had this problem of the two years which we had agreed at Moshi that the interim period for the UNLF would be two years. Lukongwa Binaisa thought – and this is part of my substantive submission – that the two years we had agreed upon as an interim period for UNLF, and then we would go into multiparty elections, were somewhat too short for Uganda to heal and to be ready to move into the next stage of competitive politics. He, therefore, came up with the umbrella. This umbrella was intended for people to say, “look, we can be in our parties, we can have our various political ideologies; can we be inclusive?” something which the Movement possibly later brought after they came to power. That was Binaisa’s idea. However, as one of my colleagues pointed out, there was that interest in power, especially with our two historical parties, and I am not saying this because I want to condemn them, but our two historical parties – DP and UPC - thought that each of them was ready to go for elections, win power and rule this country on their own. 

In the debate in the Conference Centre - and I do hope that that record is still there, the issue was whether we should continue with the umbrella or go multiparty. I supported the umbrella. Unfortunately, we were defeated and we went multiparty immediately. You know what followed. One may ask a question: Was Binaisa looking at Uganda in years to come and if the umbrella concept were accepted, could we have avoided what happened in terms of war, in terms of disunity, in terms of the alleged contentious rigging of elections and so on? Could we have put our heads together and continued for a few years under Binaisa’s concept of the umbrella?

I would also like to say that the late President was friendly, witty, humorous and he was a simple person. I know that he is remembered for one of the statements that the chair of the president is sweet, but there was an anecdote to it when somebody said “Yes, the chair might be sweet, but it is hot.” And I really think that is what took him off. He could have looked at the chair as sweet, but he did not know, as somebody said, that it was hot.

Binaisa and some of us were called briefcase liberators. There were people who said that those who literally fought had possibly been in the military struggle to remove Idi Amin for a number of years and that the people who never took up the gun found themselves in key positions in Government and yet they had not yet fired any bullets. I do not know whether you remember those words. I remember Binaisa very humorously saying “Well, you may have used the gun to fight Idi Amin, but we used our heads to fight.” That did not go very well with some people. (Laughter) 

The last time I saw Lukongwa Binaisa is when he came to my office last year as a practising lawyer, defending some people who were claiming that they had a land title for Mulago Hospital and, therefore, Government must return the whole of Mulago to them because in the 1920s and 30s, they had a Mailo title to it. Lukongwa Binaisa at the age of about 89 walked to my office with these people on appointment, very sharp as the Attorney-General has said, strongly climbing those two to three steps without help and I was about to ask him: “What is this trick of your strength, of your wit, of your intellect, of somebody being so knowledgeable even at the age of 89.” I, therefore, want to join all of us in Uganda in mourning the loss of this great person. But at the same time as the Leader of the Opposition has said, we celebrate the life of Lukongwa Binaisa in Acholi and in many parts of Uganda. A person who has lived up to 90 years and has done what Lukongwa Binaisa did, self-sacrifice in employment, studying law to the highest levels and becoming Attorney-General and becoming QC, becoming president of the country, becoming President of the Uganda Law Society; all this is the extremely rich history in the life of a person, and since all of us are going to die, the issue is not how long you live, but how best you live and I think Lukongwa Binaisa combined both. He lived a long life and he lived the best. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There are many Members who want to speak. Maybe, from the beginning I should have said five minutes and now I am constrained to say, “The speeches from any individual should be not more than five minutes.” And now I think I should start with Fort Portal so that we can get a message from Fort Portal. The Member of Fort Portal and then I will go to those who were in the things, Ben Wacha, then Cecilia Ogwal, then Akena and I will line up others.

4.36
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to talk about our fallen ex-President who was actually personally known to my family.

First of all, I would like to say that we are celebrating his life because in Uganda, according to research, our life expectancy - the average age at which Ugandans die - for women it is 52 years, and men it is 48. Women live a little longer. Godfrey Binaisa has been given an opportunity by God to live for 90 years and I think we need to celebrate his life and to thank God for it. Also, the Bible gives people 70 years to live, so he has lived 20 years bonus. That means that God loved him more than others who live for a shorter time. 

When Binaisa became President, I was in primary school and we had just been lined up on the streets to sing, “Lule” but I did not know what Lule exactly meant. But we were lined up on the streets and we sang Lule. Sooner than later, we were told there was another President. Our teacher one day asked me to explain - actually asked the class - when they told us the name of the new President they added QC The teacher asked the whole class to explain what QC meant and no one knew it. I think even the teacher. When I raised my hand - you see from Kanyandahi it is very difficult to know words like QC I stood up and said, “It is Queen’s Counsel.”  The teacher said, “Come in front and explain to us what Queen’s Counsel means.” I said, “I do not know anything beyond that, but I heard my father say, ‘It means Queen’s Counsel.’” So, I insisted that it was only Queen’s Counsel and that is what it meant. 

But I remember that time in 1979, there was scarcity of essential commodities like many MPs have said, but there was light at the end of the tunnel during Binaisa’s time. We saw sugar for the first time in our house. There was mayumba kumi where we would go to line up to get this sugar, soap and other essential commodities like paraffin and salt. But he did not live long to make things right. There came the messy Obote II. 

In 1980, my mother travelled to Kampala to visit Godfrey Binaisa. There were no mobile phones, but she came back home and told us she had stayed a night at State House and she had spoken to the President; they dined and she came back. Thirty eight years later in 2007, Godfrey Binaisa came to bury my father. Kanyandahi is not a very easy village to reach. The Leader of the Opposition was there and he was seated with Binaisa at the burial of my father; hon. Mary Okurut was also there - you saw the distance. It is 290 kilometres from here and another 20 to Kanyandahi village. We were so honoured. We had just sent him a text message, but he called back to ask for directions. It was very easy for everybody to go to All Saints and stop there, but this old man, in his frail state, travelled all those miles and we were touched. 

The last time I saw him, I met him here at the steps of Parliament this year. He said, “Mwana wange nga munkyaye.” I said, “We still love you, but we are also messed up in politics and things. We still love you.” And I was so touched when he said so. 

He looked healthy and he was always full of spirit; high spirits. I told myself, “This Godfrey Binaisa has been an inspiration to all of us.” When he became President he took it easy. When he left the presidency he took it easy and this is a lesson to all of us politicians. We need to take things easy. It is not a do or die. (Applause) He made life so easy. He lived a very humble lifestyle and I thank God for his life and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I knew Godfrey way back in the 60s when we came on a student excursion from Ntare School. We were sitting right there in the gallery when Members were debating a very controversial issue about legitimacy of the 1967 Constitution. Of course, as usual, there was heated debate and some Members threatened civil disobedience. I was sitting there as a student and Godfrey was sitting, I think where hon. Kategaya is sitting, and he came on the Floor of the House. You know how his height and his arms were, and he said, “I want to caution Members that the long arm of the law will get them and at the end of that arm, there is Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa.” (Laughter) Everybody kept quiet and of course, in his characteristic way he started beaming. You know he would be beaming like that and he felt absolutely satisfied that he had silenced every Member on the Floor of the House. (Laughter)

We were thrilled as students, seeing this short man stretching his arm and his arm was not particularly very long -(Laughter)- really meaning serious, but demonstrating a serious point in law with his short arm. It was fantastic.

Then, I later had an opportunity to serve him as his Minister of Commerce -(Interjections)- it is true. I have so many things; only time does not allow.  But one time he sent me to India because as you have mentioned, there was extreme scarcity of essential commodities - sugar, salt, textiles, which was quite tough at the time. When I was still in India he went to Jinja, about May 10, 1980, because he said, “Well, ladies and gentlemen, the days of scarcity are numbered. I have sent my Minister of Commerce to India. When he returns, the country will be flooded with commodities.” (Laughter) And I was in India. Before I could come back, the President was overthrown and it was terrible for me because India had received me as a representative of the President with all the motorcades and courtesies, and immediately my President was overthrown, they withdrew everything and I found myself literally -(Laughter)- it was very difficult; these were difficult times. They withdrew them and I had a lot of difficulty to return. It was very difficult; I had to fly back to Nairobi and try to adjust to where I had been before, but it was his words which were demonstrable and in fact, Ugandans thought I had gone with a bag of money to buy commodities to come and flood the country. Of course, I did not go with a bag of money; I had just simply gone to negotiate a line of supplier credits, but the point is, for Godfrey the word impossible was not part of his vocabulary. Everything for him was possible; he could flood the market, he could construct aeroplanes and he would usher this country into freedom. Terrific man, whose mind you could clearly see. (Interjections) Well, this is personal, when shall I ever have this chance?

The second one, which I honestly can share with you is, his ideology of umbrellas. I was part of his lieutenant in advocating for the umbrella. Then colleagues like the late Obua Otoa would come and say “Look, listen, guys” - Obua Otoa was a tall man, “I am six feet, seven inches, how can I sit in an umbrella carried by this guy who is five feet, nothing”. (Laughter)

So, the umbrella was torn and I really share Omara Atubo’s point. Sometimes I really reflect. The umbrella concept was like, really, if you think about it, it was a unifying - well the Prime Minister called it unifying, as we use the bus for the Movement. And sometimes, this is counter-fiction; it did not happen but sometimes you asked yourself, if Ugandans had respected Binaisa’s ideology of an umbrella and we all came under this umbrella. This is personal. 

All I can say, Godfrey would come and say, “Look, I am kateramabale”. Kateramabale is a geologist because he studied geology; he studied medicine and ended up as a lawyer. And he would joke, “I was a grave digger in London, and I was a kateramabale - a geologist, in Mwerashandu, and here I am QC - Queen’s Counsel”.

Very few would have that combination - very few; and his sense of humour was really mistaken. His sense of humour was mistaken as him being a joker, but for those of us who really knew him very well, we immensely benefitted from being colleagues and ministers, because you felt you were working with a sense of easiness, which made things to be done without tension and anxiety. (Applause) The guy was a great guy.

Well, the light of a great guy is gone out; a great lawyer. We will miss him immensely, particularly at this time when we need the counsel and wisdom of the experience Godfrey had. God bless his soul. 

4.48
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank all my colleagues who have spoken before me. Let me also try to re-live my times when his Excellency Binaisa was leading us, in this country. But let me preface it this way.

1979/1980 was a very difficult political time in Uganda. I cannot recollect any one time in my life when I had to have so many political meetings in one day. You would run from a meeting of the NCC, go to a small political meeting; run to another meeting of the Opposition - the people opposed to your group because you are now the go-between; run back; it was a very difficult time.

So, for a person like Binaisa to have led Uganda even for a short time during that very difficult time, is admirable. (Applause) I think it is only a person who took politics the way Binaisa took politics that could have managed. The late Yusuf Lule tried but he lasted 68 days because his approach to the politics of the day was completely lacking.

I met Binaisa first in Moshi during the Moshi Conference. I attended that meeting. He did not attend, he was locked out. On the first night of accreditation, I met him at our hotel. A few of us were staying in Moshi Hotel, so I saw him and recognised him.

Somehow, he had a walking stick, but I knew he was not too old. So, I went and sat next to him. I introduced myself to him and said I knew him. I was sure that he was one of the participants because there was a group of people called special guests. My colleagues who were there - hon. Kategaya, hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Kabwegyere, hon. Kamuntu - would recollect. They were special guests and Lule came under that category, and I said, “Sir, I hope the conference goes on well tomorrow”. He said, “My brother, I am not a delegate, I have been locked out”, courtesy of the man who later was his Lands Minister, Kabwegyere. (Laughter)

So, we talked other things and so on, but since there is no time; the next time we spoke at length was after we elected Lule. This time I was in the company of Peter Otai and Steven Ariko.

I came, sat down, heaved a sigh and said, “Sir that is it”. Then he told, “My young brothers, your stars shine bright, do not give up”.

The next time I met him was outside here when he came to open the expanded NCC. He saw me and he was amused and said, “What do you do here?” I said, “Sir, I am a member of the Council.” He said, “That is perfect, I told you; and who do you represent?” I said, “Apac”. He said, “Do not forget I am going there, you must accompany me”.

I was later elected to two very sensitive committees which made me keep on meeting him. One of them was the committee on personal armies. (Laughter) The Prime Minister alluded to it. We were 11 in number, but we had to keep on meeting the President because it was a very sensitive committee. He gave us directions, but most of all, he was a listener. He would listen and advise, but once he made up his mind in his jocular manner, he would stick by it. You would not move him and he insisted that we finish the work quickly. Unfortunately, we did not finish the work quickly; it was unfinishable. The powers behind these personal armies were - you had people like Oyite Ojok, Yoweri Museveni, Ejalu,Omaria -(Interjections)- no, this guy from Acholi -(Interjections)- Pajoko, all these were powerful people in the government and we were supposed to be investigating them.

Binaisa encouraged us and he was sure that that matter would be sorted out. Unfortunately, it was the same matter which got him out.

I want to say this. There are times in politics where good should happen, but never happens. People have talked about the umbrella concept because it was the extension of the Moshi politics and Moshi politics was tainted with hatred; hating one group, the Uganda People’s Congress; and I was not for it. Unfortunately, it was also part and parcel of the UNLF politics. 

If we are to move ahead in our politics, let us please, for goodness’ sake, play it right. Let us not speak while pointing figures at individuals and at groups. 

Binaisa is dead. The whole group of them; the former leaders are all now gone. And in a way, it is a blessing. It is a blessing to us Members of Parliament and some leaders in Government because I always dreaded the death of a president - a former president, because it takes us back to arguing as to what we are going to do with him; the body. 

When Obote died, President Museveni told us, “The death of Obote almost divided my Cabinet.” Why should it? Amin was declared persona non grata even in his death. At least now we are here saying proper goodbye to Binaisa without having to jostle ourselves. Let us play things right. We can do it. 

Now the former presidents are gone; we are now left with former vice-presidents. (Laughter) We have Adrisi, we have Kazibwe; let us not jostle as to what to do with them. Let us bury them right and we can do it. 

Last but not least, it is very unfortunate that these people who fought so hard for our independence are going one by one without leaving us something which we can hold on to; some history that they have written. The history of Uganda according to Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa; the history of Uganda according to A.M. Obote; the history of Uganda according to Kamya – (Interjection)- Idi Amin never played anything. (Laughter) Now we have a few of them like Mayanja Nkangi. Please, before you go, give us some history. (Laughter) Help us to help Uganda. Help us to help our children.

Even us here now should try to rewrite history because it should be convenient to us; not convenient to Uganda, but convenient to us. If I were to be president tomorrow, God forbid, I might also want to change history to say Kategaya was never there. (Laughter) It is not right.

Godfrey, you played your part. Rest in peace. (Applause) 

4.59
MS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a contribution and to remind myself of the history of Uganda.

I did not know Godfrey Binaisa at a personal level, but I knew him and I admired him for the part he played in the history of Uganda, and I was amazed that he actually knew me more than I thought. 

Every time I met him at Standard Chartered Bank with his daughter, Nakalema, he insisted that I was an economist. I would introduce myself and he would say, “I know you. You are the economist.” Even if I reminded him that I was not an economist, he insisted that I was an economist. I then accepted that every time he met me I would tell him I am the economist. (Laughter) 

I knew that as a British trained person, they are people who really value jokes and I think that is part of the culture he lived. I remember when Linda Chalker used to come here, I did not know that the British would joke at that level. When I told her I do not drink at all, she said, “Mrs Ogwal, it is good to drink.” I said, “No, I do not drink. I am a mulokole and we are not supposed to drink.” She said, “Actually, you are right. In your situation if you put in alcohol, it will all go in flames.” (Laughter) I think Godfrey got it right and most of us who thought he was a joker were wrong. 

When I learnt that he had died, I remembered two things about Uganda and about him; firstly, the fact that his parents were deeply rooted in Christianity, I thought this was a man given to Uganda for a purpose. And you realise that when you trace Godfrey Binaisa’s contribution, he came in at a time when Uganda needed him; at a time when Uganda was at crossroads. At the time we were writing our first Constitution, Godfrey Binaisa had a hand in it. At the time when Ugandans were forming democratic institutions, Godfrey Binaisa had a hand in it. And in fact, today, I want to remind Uganda People’s Congress – some people think Obote was the founder member of Uganda People’s Congress. No, Obote was called from Kenya to come and join other nationalists in the national congress, but the Godfrey Binaisas were the founder members of Uganda National Congress. These are the founding people. In fact, if we could get history right, he was the first chairman of the UPC Buganda region. So, that showed that he believed in democracy, but democracy that is founded on the right institutions and strong institutions.

The second thing that I want to say about Binaisa is that he was a man who had been misunderstood. When we talk about referendum, Godfrey Binaisa has been judged to be politically wrong, but he was always legally right. We can read about this in our history and you will find that whoever had judged him politically wrong, you will find that he was on the right side of the law. The referendum was a Constitutional matter; it was provided there and Godfrey had to play his role. Godfrey put Uganda first and Buganda second. But knowing very well his own tribe, he knew how to tackle them very diplomatically. And I really admire the way he handled Buganda’s interests and the referendum; and while being the Attorney-General, he must have been a very skilful man and for which I admire him.

At the time when Idi Amin had to be overthrown, I remember one thing that I had been told; that Godfrey Binaisa was actually called by the current President, Yoweri Museveni and Edward Rurangaranga. They rang him; he was in New Stanley Hotel and he did not know why he was being called. When he arrived, it was Museveni who drove the car and Rurangaranga was the bodyguard and Mpampara was the third person. They drove him to State House and handed him over to Rugumayo. 

So, I am very impressed that actually Binaisa and Museveni had something in common. They were hatching this umbrella ideology, but they did not know how to actualise it. The problem with Binaisa is that he believed that for democracy to be reached, you had to remove militarism. So, at the time when he had a problem, that was the time when he had been informed that Oyite Ojok and Museveni were secretly recruiting.

Museveni was secretly recruiting and, therefore, to normalise the country you had to remove these two people. And that is it. So, while removing the two people, he removed himself. So, I just want to remind my dear friend, the Prime Minister that actually it was not only Oyite Ojok; it was both of them. And President Museveni was at that time the Minister of Defence. So, he had to go if the country was to normalise without the element of militarism. 

Finally, I would like to say that Godfrey Binaisa was a selfless person. And I am surprised by what his daughter told me that he actually used to watch the debates that we were having in Parliament and he admired that some of the contributions that the Opposition have been making, particularly on the economy, are correct.   

He is a man who thought that making wealth is not the issue; it is making wealth for the country. (Applause) And I think that we need to remind ourselves that we should really begin to put our country first. The way you see the depth and width of corruption in this country, Godfrey Binaisa would never have condoned that. And I think that to remember him, let us remind ourselves that each of us is responsible for getting rid of corruption because it is us the leaders promoting corruption in this country. If we were committed and had the goodwill, there wouldn’t be corruption. 

I want to be brief; I want to thank God for the life of Godfrey Binaisa. I want to comfort the family, for I regard them as my family; Binaisa was a nationalist and, therefore, we can give him a name from Lango. We can call him either Okello or Otim or we can take on the name of Godfrey Binaisa, but born in Lango. We would really receive him. May God bless him. 

5.07
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First I would like to pass the condolences from myself, my family and the fraternity of the Uganda People’s Congress to the family of the late Godfrey Binaisa. 

The first issue I would like to raise concerns how we as Ugandans keep our records. We have had a lot of hearsay of what happened, but we do not seem as a nation to have national archives where we can actually be listening and seeing the contributions which were made. Personally, because I am a product of history, I have been forced to create my own archives. (Laughter)

Even in this debate, the question of 1966 arose. And I thank the contribution of hon. Sam Njuba for bringing it out clearly that the 1966 Constitution was not a “cause but an effect.” 

Hon. Ogwal raised an important point that problems beginning from 1964, which the Attorney-General at the time had to implement a constitutional provision – which was legally correct, but politically wrong at that time. But for expedience, we have turned events into issues to try and galvanise, condemn or justify many events that have happened subsequently. 

Personally, I would like to pay my tribute to Binaisa for standing firm at a critical point in our history. At that stage, it was a young nation. We were just beginning to get our feet on the ground and a huge challenge was posed on the nation. Up to today, we still have difficulties around the same question. But where we have reached there is at least some semblance of a nation, Uganda. 

If you go back to 1966-64, it was a formation of a nation. And I am thankful that we had leaders who could, at that time, have the foresight to try and secure a nation which all of us can be proud of. That, I think, is a very important contribution though misunderstood, and often manipulated for expedience. But it should be on recorded that that was a very important contribution to keep the nation together. 

I am also equally confused about the policies of dealing with former Heads of State. For me it was not too long ago when we were in these serious negotiations on where and how, and under what circumstances was my late father to be buried. It is strange that we are having the same debate. Is it Kololo? Is it Nateete? 

In our case it was very clear because my father made it very clear because he stated that he wanted to be buried next to his grandfather. But that was not accepted. I find it strange that the government wanted my father to be buried in Kololo. But now a former President does not - something which I cannot understand. In one case we have a public holiday and in another we do not. 

So, let us considerably deal with certain issues. We are dealing with the Office of the Presidency; the leader of this country. We must be able to live beyond our political opinions and biases. (Applause) Let us respect a former leader as a former leader. Let us respect the institutions which run this country.

I was privileged to meet the late Godfrey Binaisa first in 1979 in Zambia where he had gone to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting as the Head of State. At that point my father also went to Zambia to request and to inform him that he wanted to come home because the issue of locking out people in Moshi continued. (Laughter) We still have people who hold the title of “political exiles” for various reasons. But that was a point where I first met him and I was taken in by the humour and his jovial nature. 

I did not see him again until after the elections of 1980 when as the Uganda Peoples Congress at State House, Entebbe the late Binaisa was present. His contributions in such critical points in our history - I need to go back to this point – we need to have clear archives. (Applause)

My sister, the hon. Minister for Information and National Guidance, I am surprised we cannot even have a portrait. We could not even have in Parliament pictures of the late Binaisa as President, as Attorney-General and in all his other contributions. We should have at least something like a public gallery of the life of our great leaders. (Applause) Or there would have been a radio. The picture should have been on our televisions. But now we rely on hearsay and things which are deliberately distorted.

One thing I want to bring out on the distortion of history in the presentation of the Rt hon. Prime Minister where he raised as, I think, his fourth point, the disbanding of political organisations in 1969. In 1969 there was a statutory instrument issued by the then Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr Bataringaya –(Interjections)- you have a different history. And it was issued on the night that the President was shot in Lugogo. After being shot, a grenade was thrown, which did not explode. At the time Statutory Instrument No.233 was being issued, the President was in Mulago undergoing treatment, and that was taken as premeditation to ban political parties. If we are going to look at such instruments, you need to bring in Decree No.14 of 1971, which was clear; you need to look at the Political Parties Bill of 1993, whose intention was clear; you need to look at Proclamation No.1 of 1986, which was also clear, but we jump on to 1969. 
 
There is no state which runs normally when the president has been shot, is admitted and it is not clear whether he is going to live or die, and that is an instrument that people hold on to. The term of that instrument was six months and it could be reviewed by Parliament. The archives actually exist in our library. I would really appreciate it if some people who try to talk about political history spent time to read it.
 
There is a point, which was raised by hon. Njuba about the 1966 Constitution and the 1967 Constitution. I wonder how many Members of this House have taken the time to read them; but you will get commentators talking about such events. The difference between the two constitutions becomes very clear, but these are issues, which are trying to be brought to define our history.
 
Being somebody who was born after the events of 1966, I would like to see this nation move forward and be able to reconcile with our past. Those of us who were not even born cannot be held by an event or a distortion of an event. We have to find a way of forging a common future. That is what we owe this nation and that is what we owe all Ugandans. We have to respect the contribution of all who have contributed to bringing us up to this point. Do not run anybody down; let us chart a way forward.
 
On this note, I thank God for the contributions of the late Godfrey Binaisa. I thank the family for maintaining him in the way he was able to live. I thank the Parliament for giving us this opportunity. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)
 
5.18
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to give my views on the late President Binaisa.
 
First of all, President Binaisa is the last of the generation of Independence strugglers. He is one of the group who were really nationalistic in terms of politics as far as I am concerned. Ignatius Musaazi, Kamya - I think we still have some who are living - Obwangor who is still around, I think Alimadi died. This is the group, which in a sense founded Ugandan politics and who were fired up by building Uganda as one. He is one of those who played a very important part as everybody has said. They moved from UNC to UPC, but they were definitely talking about Uganda at that time. They wanted a united Uganda and they also had the courage to stand up for what they believed in.
 
President Binaisa unfortunately has not written his memoirs, but in 1966 when he was drafting the new Constitution, he must have been having a lot of debate in his mind. He was a Muganda, with the Kabakaship very strong, but writing a constitution actually at the end of the day abolishing the kingdoms. There must have been a lot of debate in his mind.
 
At that time, I think he thought that by having these kingdoms abolished, he was uniting Uganda. Of course people can condemn him for that, but I am sure that at that time that is what he thought was correct and he had the courage to do so. I think that is still needed - political courage to stand for what we believe is correct.
 
I met President Binaisa physically in 1979. Of course, I had read about him as a lawyer and the rest, but I saw him in 1979. In normal circumstances, he was made a president. It is true that after the removal of Lule, we were looking for somebody else who could keep Uganda together and who could make sure that the Baganda support the new administration. Binaisa was in Nairobi. We looked for him and he said, “What do you want from me?” We said, “We want you to be president.” He could not believe it, but he was made a president. That was my first time to be in Cabinet, so I owe him that.
 
Some of my colleagues have said we need to look at our history objectively. We should recognise those who contributed whether we believe in what they were doing or not. It is very unfortunate that up to now we do not have an official historian of Uganda politics, and that is why everybody has his own version of what happened. Of course, people without history have a danger of actually repeating the same mistakes. 

I think we should look for an official historian to write our history and say this is what happened. Those who have the time and interest can read it; those who might not want, that is a different matter, but I think we should have the official history of this country written. We can then look for positive elements of what people did and of course also take the mistakes into account when we are planning for the future.
 
As I said, I worked closely with President Binaisa and he was always full of quotations as everybody has said. I remember two of them. When I was a minister, he was very open. I went to see him because by then there was a lot of talk that State House had been turned into the LCs, LPs and all that. So, I went and saw him and said, “Mr President, are these rumours going around that your State House has been turned into a kind of LPs and LCs and the rest true?” He looked at me and said, “What do you think?” I said, “For me State House will not be used for that type of work.” He said, quoting Shakespeare, “Like Caesar’s wife.” Now, in literature they said Caesar’s wife should be above suspicion. He said, the President should be like Caesar’s wife and I said, “Yes, a president should be above suspicion and not be associated with any corrupt practices.”
 
Of course as people said, we tried to help him not to tamper with the establishment at that time. Some people have said the removal of Oyite Ojok did precipitate Binaisa’s removal from the presidency and that Museveni was also a problem because he was removed from the Ministry of State for Defence to Ministry for Regional Co-operation. Both of them are true. I went and saw him and told him that he was entering a field he does not understand. He said that he was commander-in-chief and I told him that it was true, but in reality it was not.

I think the difference is that Museveni then took up his job as Minister of State for Regional Co-operation. Those of you who were there understand that we debated this at length in NCC - whether we should remove Museveni or not – and the majority said that he should leave the Ministry of Defence. 

The former President tried to go to Republic House in military fatigues. He continued to insist on the changes because he thought he was doing the right thing. When he came out of his confinement and journalists asked him what they should tell the people, he said, “Tell them that the creature is alive”. This time the creature is sleeping permanently. Some people thought that he was not serious but 1979 was a very difficult time, as everybody has said. There were no state structures and there were different forces with different political agendas. For Binaisa to survive for all those months was an achievement in itself. 

His views about uniting the country are still on the agenda. We are still struggling to have one country. I agree that His Excellency Binaisa did his job and he should be respected. This debate about whether former presidents should be buried should be stopped. We now have a proper legal framework on how to look after them. I think if someone makes a will and he says that he does not want to be buried in Kololo, it should be respected.

5.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I would like to register my condolences to the Binaisa family and all Ugandans over the demise of a great son of this country. Many young people who did have the opportunity of working so closely with former President Binaisa were being interviewed the other day and they really did not know what some of us know. What this really brings out is that we need to document many of the things that we do and give them fair publicity. 

I want to thank the media for a job well done ever since the death of His Excellency Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa. The media brought out a lot of literature about the life and times of his Excellency Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa. The radio stations have discussed at length the contribution of the late Binaisa to the country. I had the opportunity to interact with His Excellency Binaisa. He was always very humorous. I got to know more about Binaisa through eminent Ugandans like hon. Henry Kyemba, Dr Aliker and Tumusiime because they had worked closely with him. They helped me to understand why he took some of the decisions that appear controversial.

The issue of documenting what leaders do is still a challenge to many, including those who are in Parliament. We are lucky that some leaders like our President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, tried to solve this problem. He tries to document everything. When an article appears in the papers, he takes off time to give a true account of how he understands the situation. Not many leaders before him and those of us gathered here have been doing such a thing. 

The national credentials of the late Binaisa have been widely discussed here. He distinguished himself as a nationalist in this House and in various fora where he represented Uganda. In my view, he distinguished himself when it came to resolving the impasse between the central government and the regional governments such as Mengo. He chose to mainstream the interests of this country and decided to get a solution that would keep Uganda together despite the fact that the consequences of doing such were clear to everybody given his Buganda background. He chose the Uganda constituency. This is a solution that remains popular even today. 

I have always wondered how such a popular decision has been discussed with a lot of apprehension in many quarters. I think there could have been a problem with the manner and the method in which Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa went out to deliver his very good ideas to the various audiences he was dealing with. 

In my view, if the late Lukongwa Binaisa had had the advantage of practicing his politics under the NRM system where discussion, dialogue and consensus building are the clear approaches for the day through, for instance - 

THE SPEAKER: I am making the rules clear; strangers are not permitted to traverse to this area. You must all be at the back of the Speaker.

MR MIGEREKO: The caucuses which have now come up, which each of us in our political parties have, in my view, if they had been around, the kind of apprehension and pessimism from some quarters in regard to the viability of the arrangements that were agreed on 1966/67 would not have been there. If we had this kind of arrangement we are having today, I am sure up to this day, everybody would be addressing what Binaisa did in acclaim, and which we should all be doing.

Mr Speaker, his other nationalistic approach was exhibited when he came up with the idea of the umbrella, which is fairly akin to the Movement system of the NRM. It is my view that if His Excellency Lukongwa Binaisa was to come back a second time and the idea of the umbrella and the Movement system were to be tried out again, they would be given an extra lease of life. This is mainly because of the galvanisation of political opinion that all Ugandans were able to enjoy during the time of the UNLF umbrella and during the time of the NRM Movement system. 

I would like to add, however, that the debate which has been coming up regarding how to deal with former leaders when they are alive and in death is a problem which this Parliament has by and large solved. In my view, all that needs to be done is that as soon the law has been assented to, it should be given as wide publicity as possible so that all of us, including those who are now aspiring, can be assured that this nation, Uganda, can take care of its former heads of state and those former heads of state can stay in this country in peace without being troubled by anyone.

Lastly, His Excellency Binaisa had a huge capacity to forgive and forget. In my view, this is an attribute which was rare. Even when many people thought he should stay in exile, he chose to come back and, therefore, give the badly needed credibility to the NRM accommodation and reconciliation policy needed at that time.

On behalf of NRM, I want to once again pay commendation to our fallen leader for his illustrious life, for his contribution to the lives of Ugandans and humanity in general. I thank you and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.40
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I stand to pay condolences to the family and the friends of the late President Binaisa and the country.

When the former President passed away, a young friend of mine commented and said, “How come we heard so little about him when he was alive and now there is so much being said about him?” I say this just to underline the issue that has been raised - that we need to document the lives of these great people otherwise the young generation may never know. You can see that they are surprised over President Binaisa. 

The first political rally I ever attended in my life was that one of President Binaisa in 1980 when I was a very young teacher at Tororo Girls’ School. I was very impressed by this President because I had listened to his first address to the nation which he did in the Queen’s English as opposed to his predecessor who had addressed the nation in Luganda forgetting that he was addressing Ugandans. (Laughter)

This great Ugandan who lies here was truly a selfless person. We have been told that at one point in his late life he was teaching primary school children at Mutundwe. As he told us in one of the NRM sittings in Kyankwanzi, he said he was teaching the children to speak the Queen’s English because he cannot stand people who murder that language. I really do agree with him because I think if we must speak a language, we should speak it the way it is meant to be spoken. We have problems; we have graduates in this country –

THE SPEAKER: I believe that when he was teaching there was no salary attached.

MS LAGADA: Yes, he was volunteering. The selflessness was exhibited in the voluntarism in him. We have a problem because now we have people who are graduates who can tell you, “Well be back.” Really, that is too annoying! (Laughter) You cannot say, “Well be back.” (Laughter) Sometimes I think we ought to have somebody come up in this country to write the “dos” and the “do nots” in the language. The Speaker is warning me over my time.

I want to remind hon. Akena who is sitting there that the late President actually travelled to Akokoro to bury the late President Obote. I remember travelling back with him, crossing the ferry together at 8 O’clock at night when he was very tired, and the road to the North was terrible at that time. I think we need to commend him for that selflessness. (Applause)

Lastly, I am so happy that today in this House, I have heard honourable members from both sides commending the business of the umbrella that President Binaisa fought so hard for. I am convinced that in the 1995 Constitution, we provided for a reversal from one political system to another. I am convinced that one day this country will leave where we are today and go back to the Movement system - the umbrella system - because I can hear people feeling very nostalgic about it. I thank you and once more, I express my condolences to you. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga and the flag bearer, hon. Kyanjo. Three minutes for each of you and we end there.

5.45
MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to support the motion and convey my heartfelt condolences and those of my party, the Democratic Party, to the family, friends and the country at large. 

I met the late President in April, 1980. He visited Masaka and we were still young people. He said he wanted ten young men to visit him in State House. So, we went to visit him and it was my first time to visit the State House in 1980. When we arrived in State House, he welcomed us and you could see life in State House at that time (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as I said, 1979 to 1980 was very difficult. Some people have been saying here that he just took a unilateral decision to transfer President Yoweri Museveni from Ministry of Defence and to transfer Oyite Ojok to Algeria. Even before all that, Jesse James Namakajo, who was the press secretary in this country, had been arrested by the military and put in Makindye. As soon as he was arrested, Mrs Nkata, who was also a presidential aide, was arrested and put in prison. Now the President, as the commander-in-chief, told Oyite Ojok, “Why don’t you release these people?” Soon, Kakooza Mutale came up with his paper and printed bad news that Akena Adoko is back and he was also thrown into prison. 

There was pressure and the press was also after this, including the international community. So, he asked Oyite Ojok and the Minister of Defence, President Museveni, to release these people and they refused. Now, as head of state, what would he do? He consulted Musuguri, who was the commander of the Tanzanian forces here, and he told him that, “You are the commander-in-chief, how can they refuse?” 

What followed was that he transferred Oyite Ojok to Algeria and changed President Museveni from Ministry of Defence to Regional Co-operation. So, there were riots. He again consulted with Gen. Musuguri asking, “Can you quieten the riots and mutiny?” He answered, “Let me consult with Nyerere.” Nyerere told him that this is a young nation and we cannot interfere in the affairs of Uganda. Now, people say that he did not have the backing, but this was only intrigue that caused him to be removed from office –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, it is very important not to have our history distorted. I think we should put things right. 

When he went to Nairobi to exile in 1981-1982, we were there with him. He had visited Cuba and many Ugandans had gone to Cuba for training. When they came back, many of them were being arrested. Very many were in his house in Nairobi and he was able to look after them with his meagre resources. Some of them are now big men in the Army. Yes, they were trained in Cuba but the most important thing is that he sacrificed his savings to support the war. That was very important. 

Lastly, we thank the Government for having accorded him a state funeral, but this Parliament should learn from other countries. The late had wished to be buried in Kololo - that was his wish - but the Government said, “No”. If we have given him a state funeral, why should it end in Parliament and the church? We should also give him a state burial. A state burial means that the state should bury him in a stately manner. 

I was in Malawi last month and President Kamuzu Banda, despite the fact that he was a dictator who declared that there shall be only one life President and that is Kamuzu Banda, was given a state burial by the Government of Malawi. They have even built a mausoleum regardless of what he did in the past. So, even here it should not be the head of state to determine the burials of other heads of state; it should be this Parliament. The onus is on us as Parliament to decide that all former heads of state should be accorded this kind of burial, but not the President to determine the burial of this fellow presidents. Thank you. (Laughter)

5.51
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your kind attitude. I recognise that time is gone, but also know the importance of the person we are paying tribute to. I bring condolences to the family of President Binaisa from the people of Makindye West and from Justice Forum, which is my party. 

Mr Speaker, President Binaisa represents a fundamental element in the history of our country as the last member on the list of former presidents to die. It is, therefore, important for the current leaders and those of us who aspire to become leaders to behave better expecting this day to happen to us one time. 

President Binaisa represented one of the two major political elements in Uganda. One element is knowledgeable leaders without power and two, powerful leaders without knowledge. Binaisa belonged to the former group. The problems that befell him were due to the fact that he was a very intelligent person without power. Those with power wanted to use his ideas, but it was not possible to use the same ideas when he was still reigning as head of state. You can see, for example, when he brought the umbrella idea it was not accepted, but later it was said to be a darling of the nation. 

According to the speeches that have characterised this session, it is very easy to discover that if President Binaisa was President last September, the people who died probably would not have died. Binaisa was humble, modest and very forgiving. That is why some people thought he was not very clever. 

I want to conclude my remarks by saying that executing the duty that President Binaisa involved himself in, was such a difficult task, and it was not easy to execute it without stepping on the toes of some people. My honest appeal is that if you are among the people whose toes were stepped on, please forgive Binaisa. The religion I follow says that when someone dies, his files go to the Almighty and it is better to forgive that individual and leave all the matters to the Almighty God. 

We are very thankful to those individuals who are not politicians, more specifically Dr Mayanja, Dr Wavamunno and Hajji and Hajjati Bagalaliwo. Those people care about those who are thought to be very powerful and, therefore, expected to be cared for by powerful individuals in their group, but sometimes it does not happen. We are very proud of your contribution. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you very much. Your contributions have enriched the motion moved by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Wonekha. I thank you, very much. 

As we were here, I received a condolence message addressed to the family of the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, former President of Uganda:

“With deep sorrow, I convey my sincere condolences to the family and to all Ugandans on the death of the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa QC, the former President of the Republic of Uganda. I served as a Cabinet Minister of Education in his Government. 

I remember him as a hardworking leader who always encouraged those whom he was leading to listen to the people and take measures to address their needs. He constantly gave advice and support to his Cabinet to ensure that the country’s rehabilitation programmes after the 1979 war were efficiently and equitably implemented. I personally learnt a lot from his humour and wisdom. 

We thank God for his long life and service to the government and the people of Uganda. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.”

It is signed by hon. Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire, MP and Minister of Education

Hon. Members, at the beginning I mentioned some visitors who are in the gallery, but some were not mentioned. I have got the names now. These are: Rev. Canon Sam Ruteikara, the Anglican Chaplain to Parliament; Dr Geoffrey Mukwaya, nephew of the late Godfrey Binaisa; Muhammed Magid Bagalaaliwo and hon. Sarah Bagalaaliwo, members of the family. There is also Col (Rtd) Chris Mudoola, a prince from Busoga and an ambassador from Turkey, and I think hon. Ssewanyana. I thank you for coming to grace this occasion.

Hon. Members, it is now my duty to put the question to the motion moved by the Prime Minister. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I have received communication from the Office of the Second Deputy Prime Minister. It is about burial of His Excellency Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa QC, former President of the Republic of Uganda:

“I wish to officially inform you that the late Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa QC, former President of the Republic of Uganda, will be buried on Wednesday, 11 August 2010 at Nateete Mackay Church of Uganda at 1.00 p.m. 

There will be a funeral service at Namirembe Cathedral starting at 10.00 a.m. Invited are the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister, the deputy prime ministers, ministers, ministers of state and Members of Parliament.” 

So, you are invited to attend the funeral of the late President.

Hon. Members, this brings us to the end, but before we go, I invite you to remember that in June when the Budget was read, I raised the issue of expediting the budget process so that we finish it, I preferred in July, but we have not been able to do so. I prefer that we finish the process by mid this month, but it may not be possible because this week we have not been able to work. I am appealing to each of you to attend Parliament on Monday at 2.00 p.m. We shall sit Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday so that we can be able to finish these statutory programmes.

There are statutory programmes and non-statutory programmes. The statutory programmes will include passing all the laws backing up the Budget. If we do not do so, we shall not be supplying blood to the system for the system to work. I am appealing to the people in the villages - in your constituencies - to remind you on Monday that you are required in Kampala –(Laughter)- to attend Parliament. Please bear with us. Let us do what we can in August so that maybe in September, we relax. 

You know there is also an appeal to me that we debate certain reports including the CHOGM report. I have advised people that the CHOGM report is important, but let us first clear the statutory programmes, including the Budget. As soon as we finish the statutory programmes, we shall embark on debating the CHOGM report and other important reports presently in Parliament. 

I want to appeal to any minister who has a pending Bill before Parliament to attend Parliament on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday so that we can complete those budgets. I know there are pressures here and there, and there are campaigns, but let the campaigns come in September, October and November. Let us finish this work.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I am seeking clarification. Do not get worried. I am seeking clarification whether tomorrow is a public holiday in memory of His Excellency President Binaisa.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow is a public holiday. I think it is at par with what you passed recently about state funerals for presidents. That is what is happening. So, tomorrow is a public holiday so that you can go and attend the burial. 

I was hoping to adjourn to Thursday, but I have been advised that Thursday is youth day somewhere. You are leaders and I think you may be interested in going to mobilise the youth to be with them. That is why I have not adjourned to Thursday. So, you have tomorrow, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday. If you are to do any campaigning, do it then; but on Monday, I expect all of you to be here to do business for which you were elected.

With this, I think we come to the end.

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late, His Excellency Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, once again, I thank you for your time; I thank you for your contribution; I thank you for your understanding; I thank you for the good words you have said about our departed President Binaisa.

With this, we come to the end of the proceedings. As I’ve said, House is adjourned to Monday, 16th August at 2.00 p.m. All of you are expected to be here and as I’ve said, I have asked the people in the villages to remind you of this appointment. House adjourned. 

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and was adjourned until Monday, 16 August 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
