Wednesday, 17 August 2011 
  
Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala 
  
PRAYERS 
  
(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting and I am just hoping that we shall be able to conclude on the state of the nation responses today. I thank you.      

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I) REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UPTO UA 40.0 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND ANOTHER ID 7.0 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PHASE 3 OF THE COMMUNITY AGRICULTURE INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME (CAIIP) – PROJECT 3

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance.


MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, it looks like we do not form quorum as per our Rules of Procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, sit down. Minister of Finance proceed.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I move that the Government of Uganda borrows up to Unit of Account 40.0 million from the African Development Bank and another ID 7.0 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the implementation of Phase 3 of the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) – Project 3. I beg to move and lay on Table.

MR D’UJANGA: Seconded

THE SPEAKER: I now commit it to the Committee of the National Economy for perusal and report back.

II) REPORTS FROM THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the following reports from the Auditor-General:-

a)	National Youth Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2006
b)	National Women’s Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010
c)	Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDB) financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010
d)	Uganda National Roads Authority – Roads Sector Support Project I  financial statements for the year 30 June 2010
e)	Uganda National Roads Authority – Roads Sector Support Project II financial statements for the year 30 June 2010
f)	Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL) financial statements for the year 31 December 2010
g)	Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) financial statements for the year 30 June 2010

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. All those statements are committed to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

2.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiti): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the following Auditor-General’s reports for the financial year ended June 2010:-

•	Buikwe Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010.
•	Local Government Sector Investment Plan (LGSIP) – Ministry of Local Government Component financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010.
•	Local Government Sector Investment Plan (LGSIP) – Local Government Finance Commission Component financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010.
•	Wakiso Town Council Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010.

I beg to lay these accounts on Table.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you chairperson. Hon. Members, all those statements are committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for scrutiny and report back.

2.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Ezati Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I have the pleasure of laying on Table the following reports from the Auditor-Generals Chamber covering the  following respective institutions:

•	Reproductive Health Voucher Project in Western Uganda which covers the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 together with the report and opinion thereof of the Auditor-General.

•	I have the report on strengthening ICT training and research capacity in the four public universities in Uganda covering the financial statements for the year up to 31 December 2010, together with the report and opinion of the Auditor-General therein.


•	A report of the Auditor-General on Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology, covering the period on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010.

•	I also  beg to lay a report from the Auditor-General covering the docket of Ministry of Water and Environment and specifically Kampala Water Supply and Sanitation Programme I Component 3: Transmission Mains; accompanying support of sector reforms reference KFW No.2004/65/328.

•	Last but not least, under the same ministry, that is the Ministry of Water and Environment, I beg to lay a report of the Auditor-General covering the Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support implemented by Water and Sanitation Development Facility, South West Branch and funded by EU-Austria Development Cooperation and Government of Uganda and this covers the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010, together with the report and the opinions thereof of the Auditor-General. I beg to lay on Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. All those statements are committed to the Committee on Public Accounts for scrutiny and report back.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2011

(Debate continues.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon Members, before we go to the State of the Nation Address, I think hon. Aleper and hon. Anywar had a problem. I will allow them to say something before the ministers. Are you ready, Minister of Energy? 

MR D’UJANGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, when they finish, the Minister of Energy will come on and then agriculture.

2.46
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I rise on point of concern which I regard as a national issue. As we talk now, part of this country is cut off; that is Karamoja. The recent rains have affected Karamoja tremendously. The roads are washed away, the bridges connecting Sironko to Nakapiripirit are broken; Soroti is cut off; Amuria is cut off and Kotido from Kaabong is cut off. The business community spends days on the way; they cannot take their perishable goods to Moroto to sell. Karamoja depends on the food brought from Soroti and Mbale. As I talk now, even the prices we have been talking about have tripled in Karamoja because of the state of roads. 

My bigger concern is, whenever anything happens in Karamoja, it is taken as a Karamoja issue. I want to bring it to this Parliament that Karamoja is part of this country and I call upon this Parliament to support us.

Instead of pouring soil for over 25 years on the road, why can’t Government come out and work on these roads once and for all? In the State of the Nation Address, the road from Moroto to Nakapiripirit was spelt out clearly. When is it starting? I call upon this Parliament to give a hand of support. We cannot continue pretending to sit here when one part of Uganda is cut off from the country. 

As we talk now, the fresh food that Karamoja gets from the neighbouring districts is no longer there because of the roads. I bring this to this Parliament to implore Government - if it means borrowing, can Government borrow money and we put tarmac! The only region in this country without a tarmac road is Karamoja. Nobody has the answer as to why this is so. Maybe Government has the answer.

I bring this before this Parliament because I know this is the bigger voice of this country, and this Parliament has all the mandate to influence Government. Health services have broken down. We take days and nights travelling to Karamoja, which is a nightmare. Just some years back, we lost a journalist because of poor bridges and that was one of the resourceful persons in this country but there was no response.

So, in the short term, we would like to implore Government to put first class murram on the roads while we are waiting for the tarmacking. At least this should go on record that Karamoja also gets a tarmac road. Why should a region beg for a tarmac road for over 30 years? It is very unfortunate!

This is the voice of the people of Karamoja and this is the voice of Ugandans, and I call upon Members of Parliament to join me. Let us also remember that Karamoja is part of this country and we must be mindful of the people who reside there. It is not only Karimojong who reside there, we have Ugandans from all parts of this country-(Interruption)

MAJ GEN OKETTA:  I would like to thank hon. Member of Parliament from Moroto for those concern. I would like to humbly inform him and the House that the government took initiative and action, 24 hours ago.

Yesterday, the UPDF gave a helicopter to the First Lady and the Minister of Disaster. They flew through the eastern region to Karamoja up to Kotido. The Minister of Works and the technical teams are on the ground. The technical team from the Ministry of Disaster are on the ground making the assessment and they are going to come out with the immediate, short term, medium term and long term resolutions.

The honourable member should be informed that the Karamoja road tarmacking is on plan but natural hazards will never respect anybody. We must all work together in order to make sure that when all these natural hazards happen, we integrate our effort in order to make sure that we comply to the situation that should salvage the situation of the people on the ground. So, let him not have fear; the team is on the ground. At an appropriate time, tomorrow or the next day, a full report will be available and action will be taken. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, for the information on the immediate measures. But I do not know whether the Government can now committee itself on the long term measures. The Minister of Agriculture wants to make a response.

Lt Col RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that we had floods again in Karamoja. But it is not true that Government has neglected Karamoja as the Member was trying to insinuate. Karamoja has been given affirmative action in all respects. I want to inform the House, just as my colleague has already stated, that Minister of Works yesterday made a statement before Cabinet and he was directed to go there. Everything is being done to assess the situation and see how we can rectify the problem of the floods.

I want to inform my colleagues that Government is working very hard to restore the damaged bridges as a result of the floods. I would like to add that the tarmac road to Moroto is also in plan. Thank you.

MR ALEPER: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate what the minister has just said. But I am also disappointed because every financial year, Karamoja is in the plan while other areas are being acted upon. When will these plans be actualised? 

To put this in a clearer context, I have not made a statement in this House stating that Government has neglected Karamoja. I have categorically brought out the situation of Karamoja in terms of roads and I ask Government to take action to stop this problem of roads. 

I appreciate what my brother hon. Oketta has brought out; it is true nobody can stop nature. Even these emergency responses that Government has done are reactionary; there are certain things we can handle once and for all. But for things about nature, we shall continue addressing them even as our economy grows. And nobody should sit here and think that we do not appreciate what Government has done. But we also say that there are certain things that transform communities and one of them are roads. If we have to transport mangoes from Karamoja to Tororo and the roads are bad, what does that mean to Government? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is not a matter for debate. He wanted to raise the matter of floods which have cut off parts of his area. We have heard from the chief of disaster that something is being done. The minister has said that the Ministry of Works has been sent there; so he has got the answer. That is what he wanted to raise; it is not really for debate. 

2.56
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this golden opportunity to enable me raise a very important concern. As I stand before you, I am a very scared woman and I still want to thank you for enabling me table my case. 

Yesterday, when I left Parliament, I had pupils coming from Kitgum and I had time with them before I travelled home. As I reached home, I saw a vehicle trailing me and this vehicle had registration No. UAE 446C. It was followed by a police motorcycle. The number of the police motorcycle is UP 152. 

This fear is not unfounded, and the institution of Parliament has to know that I live in Akright Kakungulu Housing Estate. Two months ago, we had a person who joined us in the names of Arinaitwe. Arinaitwe is the gentleman who, during the Walk-to-Work demonstration, sprayed Dr Kiiza Besigye in the face. I say this because I am the Chairperson of the Akright Kakungulu Estates. Just a week ago, we had a community meeting and the issue was raised. Some of the residents were already threatened with the presence of Arinaitwe in the estates. We asked one of us to go and find out from the proprietor Mr Anatori what his status was; was he just a visitor, a tenant or a landlord? We also follow procedures within the estates and so we are still waiting to receive that report. 

Right now, Arinaitwe is residing in Akright Kakungulu. He lives next to a nursery school and he is guarded. There are policemen who pitched a tent at his place. Even when he goes out jogging early in the morning or in the evening, he is escorted by police. I raise this because even some residents have threatened to move away from Akright. The owner of the nursery school is scared. Should something happen to him as it happened in Makindye, what would be the fate of the pupils in that nursery.

On my own behalf, my life is in danger because as we left, he started trailing me. The vehicle was being driven by my son, and I told him to give him way, but he did not want to overtake us. I told my son to stop so that Arinaitwe’s vehicle can pass us. When we stopped, he proceeded, followed by the police motorcycle. We were going in the same direction in the estate. We wanted to buy something from a supermarket; he also branched there. When we finished buying, my son drove us home. At the supermarket, two of his bodyguards were putting on black suits. As soon as I parked, they positioned themselves. They stood at a distance and the other remained at the vehicle where Arinaitwe was seated. 

As I went home, the two gentlemen followed my car – you know, sometimes there are people who drink from that supermarket; they even hold meetings there. It is a small joint. They told me, “You have two visitors in black suits following you.” I had a visitor and I did not attend to him. They came and went back on a motorcycle belonging to the Police, passing in front of my house. Again, the people rang and said, “They have not used a car; he has now gone on a motorcycle.” Some people did some checks within the estate and they met them on the road in front of my gate. 

I tried to reach Afande Kayihura on phone so that I could express my fear but I just got his aide. I told him I urgently wanted to talk to the boss. He never got back to me. I tried the hon. Onek and his number was off. 

Since last night we have been panicking. I am in danger and the family is in danger. We had a mini-meeting and people asked, “What does Arinaitwe want from you now that you are being called a terrorist?” He has been there for at least two months. What is making him trail me now? Through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to be on record by stating this. I want to ask the government-(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Beatrice Anywar for yielding to receive this information. Before we concluded the Eighth Parliament, I vividly recall the day when we showed video footages of the day when Dr Kiiza Besigye was sprayed in the eyes with unknown chemicals by the same person. At that time, we even proved further that there was a hooded man who, using a hammer, smashed the window glasses of Dr Kiiza Besigye’s vehicle at Kubbiri where he was violently and inhumanly arrested. 

At that time, many Members stood up one after the other to condemn the inhuman manner in which the arrest was effected and called for the officers involved to be investigated. The information I want to give you, honourable colleague, is that if this same thing is happening and you have made frantic efforts to reach the bosses in Police and to reach the political leadership in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and still they have not given you a substantive - and you should seek the information as to matters pertaining to your security for which you rightly fear. I think and believe Government has not done anything as far as what Parliament agreed that the people who were implicated in that misconduct be investigated. Up to now, they have not been investigated. If they had been investigated, by now we should have already known what this gentleman called Arinaitwe was up to, this ASP.  How special is he that he has to move with motorcades to escort him? There are many senior officers in Police who are not escorted. What is so special about ASP Arinaitwe that he has to do all this and be treated with kid’s gloves? I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for sharing my grief. Through this institution, I want to be helped. Government should come up  and  one, explain to this Parliament and to the country at large whether Arinaitwe is a free man who needs to be escorted with government machinery or he is a wanted man. 

Two, if he is a wanted man, why isn’t he being arrested and interrogated? 

Three, to guarantee not only my personal security but that of my family, which has been traumatised over the years due to the way I am arrested in this country since the Mabira crusade. Since I am being referred to as a terrorist, my children are tormented. I need that assurance to be on record and even to assure the country that the residents of Akright Kakungulu, where the proprietor has chosen to harbour a criminal, are not put in danger should Ugandans want to find where Arinaitwe is.  I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs. I do not know who can – the outgoing minister? Will you? 

3.08
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen(Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am sorry to hear my sister today talking with grief. I must share her grief and I am very sorry that these things have happened to her but at the same time, I am happy she is the one talking. (Laughter) If she had been reported missing, the situation would have been bad. Since she is the one talking, that means she is still alive.
  
I want to appeal to her to remain firm. I think this Government is not so dangerous as other regimes before. According to history, she would have been dead by now. But as I said sincerely that she is the one narrating her own problems, it means we still have a chance. To add to her efforts, we will to try to reach the authorities in the security system. We are going to ask the Internal Affairs minister to investigate this matter very seriously. I want her not to get tired of getting to these people. Let her personally narrate her story - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is not a matter for debate. You have raised your issue, and the government has said they are going to investigate.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I need clarification.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I thank you and the minister for your sympathy. But this situation needs more than sympathy. I am a mother of this country and my children are in danger. I expect a pronouncement that immediately I am given security. If Arinaitwe can be given security, even when he is going to the gym, jogging and whatever, now that I am in danger, can’t you give me immediate measures to allay my fears rather than just sympathy? 

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I arrived late. Maybe she had asked for this before I came. I did not know that this was one of her prayers. But now that she has asked for security, definitely we shall insist that she is provided with security. This is her right. We shall insist! We are talking about the victim. I do not know what other people are talking about.   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Kashozi Boarding Primary School, represented by hon. Raphael Magyezi of Igara West. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have children from Apac Model Boarding Primary School, Maruzi County, represented by hon. Ebong. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.12
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of concern. This issue has been talked about here on the Floor but it looks like nothing much has been done. This concerns the run out of HIV drugs in health centres. 

I went to Bukulula Health Centre IV and I found that the ARVs had run out, and this centre has 100 children and 1,500 adults on ARVs. The in-charge was giving adult drugs to children. She was breaking the tablets into several pieces so as to keep these children on drugs. The remaining drugs could not be enough for the adult group.

I contacted the ministry and I got different messages. The Director General of Health Services, Dr Jane Ruth Aceng, gave a different version of the problem and the minister gave his own version. This is a very serious problem because some people in our society are not getting the drugs that they are supposed to get and they are on the verge of death. 

I, therefore, rise to request the minister to give us a concrete answer on what really is going on. There is an NGO that read about our plight in the papers and they came with some few drugs to rescue the situation but up to now, the situation is still bad. I think some other health centres, in greater Masaka and elsewhere, are going without these drugs. So, we need some clarification about this problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Shall we ask the Government to give an update?  When you are giving a report from the Committee on Social Services, can you give us report on the ARVs? Let’s now go to the State of the Nation Address.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the discussion on the address, my colleagues, hon. Members, raised a number of issues relating to activities in my ministry. I have taken note of all these issues and we have summarised our response and I would like to respond as follows.

The first item was to do with the activities in Oil and Gas. Some Members expressed the views that Government had kept the Production Sharing Agreements secret and had developed the National Oil and Gas Policy without adequate consultations. The National Oil and Gas Policy was approved by Cabinet in February 2008, after extensive consultations with key stakeholders. Each Member of the Eighth Parliament was availed this copy and we are making arrangements to avail all Members a copy of this Oil and Gas Policy. This Oil and Gas Policy is also on the website of the ministry and the website is www.energyandminerals.go.ug.  

Furthermore, in February 2010, my ministry appraised the Committee on Natural Resources on the status and current issues on the Oil and Gas sector.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for yielding the Floor. I am seeking clarification from him. Is it your advice therefore that instead of you tabling the Oil and Gas Policy to this House for discussion, we should just go to your website and look for it there. 

MR D’UJANGA: As far as I know, policy is a tool by the government and it is usually not discussed. But in the interest of moving together, as I said, we are making arrangements to provide each one of you with a copy of this policy. 

Madam Speaker, as I was saying, in February 2010, my ministry appraised the Committee on Natural Resources on the status and current issues on the Oil and Gas sector. In June last year, my ministry laid on this Table the Production Sharing Agreements, which Government had concluded. 

In April this year, my ministry reported to this House on the sale of Heritage Oil and Gas interest to Tullow and subsequent farm-down by Tullow to CNOOC and Total.

Last week, another set of PSAs was made available to the Committee on Natural Resources. It can therefore be seen that my ministry has been as transparent as possible -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are now going to engage in a debate.  Why don’t you let the minister answer? You can follow up other things in the committee or when they bring their report on the Budget.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you. I’m being intimidated that I will meet her in the committee. (Laughter) And I am glad because this Production Sharing Agreements were laid before her in the committee. 

Some Members expressed concern that Government continued to award oil contracts without appropriate legislation. The Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Chapter 150 of Uganda Laws of 1985, provides the legal framework under which my ministry has been operating, and all the current activities in the Oil and Gas sector have been based on that law. As we make discoveries, the activities in the oil sector are now much more than they used to be 20 years ago and so there is need for new laws. Therefore, there will be new laws and the Bill is with the First Parliamentary Counsel for drafting. These laws will cover resource and revenue management, and Members of this Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss this Bill extensively. 

The timetable for this Bill is that this month the draft from the First Parliamentary Counsel will be presented to the cabinet, and then in the month of September we hope this Bill will be presented to the House for scrutiny and passing.

Some Members also stated that the fuel prices in Uganda, compared to those in the region, were different. To this I have the following to say: As an importer of petroleum products, the pump price is determined by the international costs of petroleum products. As a matter of fact, 72 percent of the cost of fuel you pay is an offshore cost. The tax is 22 percent and the profit margin is six percent. And Uganda, being a landlocked country, suffers from the additional costs of transport as I have said.

Some Members also wanted to know the status of the Jinja storage tanks. The procurement to identify a private partner to manage the Jinja storage tanks is under a public/ private partnership and is underway. By the beginning of September, we should have this contract awarded. Otherwise, our facilities like Nakasongola, Mbale, Gulu and Arua are also going to be worked on. 

Members also wanted to know the efforts the government is making in developing other sources of energy. A whole range of alternative sources of energy is being developed. These include small hydro sources, solar photovoltaic and solar thermal; modern biogas, including co-generation with sugar mills, geothermal and wind energy. This year alone 24 megawatts of small hydropower has been commissioned, that is, 18 megawatts at Mpanga and six megawatts at Ishasha. We are now looking forward to commissioning, before the end of this calendar year, nine megawatts at Buseruka and 3.5 megawatts at Nyagak. Two companies, that is, Cozumel Energy Limited and GIDS Consult Limited, have been licensed to develop geothermal energy at Katwe and Buranga in the western rift valley.

On the issue of land matters in the oil exploration areas, my ministry is working with ministries and agencies of the Ministry of Land, Civil Aviation Authority, UNRA, NEMA and so forth, in handling the land matters in oil exploration areas. 

Some Members raised an issue that in the interest of capacity building, some of our own people should be involved in the construction of these dams. I am glad to say that a hydropower unit has now been formed in the ministry, and together with the Electricity Generation Company, we are developing local capacity. As a matter of fact, we have two sites: Nyagak III which is down stream of the current Nyagak, and Muzizi. These are going to be done by Uganda Electricity Generation Company, which is our local company.

Concern was also raised regarding the cost of dams in Uganda compared to those in other countries. With reference to Bujagali, Bujagali is a privately financed project; the first of its kind in Sub-Saharan Africa. Comparison of its costs with publicly financed projects could be misleading. The cost of Bujagali was arrived at through competitive international bidding. Members who have been in this august House for sometime will remember that when Bujagali came to this House - I think around 10 years ago - it was costing $580 million but this was in 2001. Now, later, with all the changes in the metal prices and so forth, this cost rose to £860 million. The Karuma project is an EPC. It will be competitively procured and the costs will be determined by the prevailing market conditions.

Some hon. Members also raised issues related to rural electrification in their areas. My ministry will continue to roll out rural electrification schemes targeting district headquarters, economic growth centres, health centres, educational and social services centres. The programme for 2011 and 2012 rural electrification is provided in the ministerial statement of my ministry. I would like to encourage colleagues to look at this programme in the policy statement and we will be ready to receive any advice on the coverage of this rural electrification programme in your respective areas. 

There was also a report on malpractices by some contractors on the rural electrification programme. With reference to rural electrification projects, we request hon. Members to be vigilant about activities in your constituencies because there are quite a number of them in the ministerial statement. If you have any complaints, we will be ready to receive them for further action.

Madam Speaker, permit me, while on this rural electrification project, to say - because I get a lot of queries from Members from the West Nile Region- that the new contractor is doing very well. And from the progress the mini-hydro will be completed by November this year. As for the rural electrification lines, we should have a contractor on site in October. So, all is on schedule. 

Now on the issue of petroleum products open tender, we have an open tender in Nairobi where the commissioner for the petroleum supplies department represents our country, Uganda, on the open tender system. Oil company licences to operate in Uganda are permitted to import products into the country on their own but on the open tender of Kenya we have now been allowed to participate.

Finally, Members also suggested - and these are Members from the Karamoja region- that a cement factory be constructed in Moroto and I think even this afternoon a hon. Member referred to this subject. But as I reported towards the end of the last Parliament, we have three to four electrification programmes for this sub region. You will realise that a cement factory is a big consumer of electricity and so the first thing we must do is to construct an electricity line to that area. And indeed we are constructing three lines now to the sub region, but the most important one is the line that is going through a place called Katikakile. When this line reaches there, an investor should be sought to have a cement factory established in that area. For now, it is not cost effective to transport limestone to Tororo over a long distance because it also damages the roads.

Madam Speaker, these were the issues and I am grateful to the hon. Members for having raised them. We will be prepared to answer more questions on one-to-one basis because our doors are open. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you. I can appreciate the minister trying to jump off before I even say what I am concerned about. Madam Speaker, I appreciate your guidance on how we are to proceed but two things make me rise up. The first one is what do I do when the minister has not answered my question? I stood up here, budgeted my three minutes well and I thought that was the most important thing I would ask. And the thing I asked the minister was whether the Government of Uganda has a plan to resettle the people who inhabit the areas where oil exploration has begun. I am still serious about that question today as I was that day, because I believe with oil exploration it is never going to be the same for the Banyoro, the Acholi and for whoever is going to be found in the Oil belt. So I need Government to give me that response. 

The second issue is that I have been here since oil exploration begun. What the minister has given this House is a standard response; the one they have been giving over years. They have measured it and no one goes below or above it. Let me tell you, Madam Speaker, for the record: many activities are going on under oil exploration and the more the minister keeps us waiting for the amendments in regard to legal framework governing this exercise, the more we run into danger with the environment, with matters of resettlement and compensation. So, how do we deal with those standard responses that are not meant to address our concerns at all? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister is here today and I expect him to come back to us when he wants money from this House. You now know what to do when he comes back for his budget. (Laughter) It is up to him to come and answer if he wants this House to approve the money he wants. 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Madam Speaker, I need some protection because I am getting confused by the House.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister, you should not be confused. Since yesterday, your ministry was on the Order Paper to give a response to the issues raised by the Members of Parliament on the State of the Nation Address. That is why I have called you.

MRS BIGOMBE: Madam Speaker, unfortunately, yesterday my ministry was meeting the committee and therefore we were not able to be here. We got to know much later that we were expected to make our presentation today. So, with your permission, I would like to defer the presentation to tomorrow or early next week.

THE SPEAKER: No. The responses to the State of the Nation Address must close tomorrow. Nothing will move to next week.

MRS BIGOMBE: Madam Speaker, in that case, I do not want to make a statement when I am not well informed. I think it is for the benefit of the House - (Interjections) – Could you please let me speak? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the minister explain herself.

MRS BIGOMBE: Madam Speaker, could you then allow me to call my technocrats to come and join me so that we can make the presentation now? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please. 

MRS BIGOMBE: Madam Speaker, I will make my presentation tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will come on at 2.00O’clock tomorrow.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, I would like to seek protection from hon. Katuntu and hon. Wadri; they are causing a lot of havoc.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity we have been given to respond to issues that were raised in regard to our ministry by Members. The first issue that was raised was to do with the National Land Policy. Nationwide consultations on a comprehensive policy have been taking place and a draft policy is now ready for presentation to Cabinet. Once it has been approved by Cabinet, we shall table it here in Parliament.

There was the issue of urban areas being in need of statutory bodies to take charge of urban land. According to Article 241 of our Constitution, district land boards are provided for both in rural and urban areas and these are supposed to take charge of the land issues in urban areas. The urban local governments are represented on the district land board to make sure that the concerns of urban areas are taken care of. 

Besides, the town clerks are supposed to be the recorders on the area land committees that recommend cases to the district land boards. It is true we have had concerns from a number of urban authorities in regard to the level of services they get from district land boards. My ministry and that of local government are interacting over this matter and if there is a need for amendments, we shall be in a position to deal with the relevant ministry and I know Parliament will have to come in on this matter. 

There was the issue of the Land Fund. The issue of inadequate funding of the Land Fund, which is expected to carry out a number of tasks, including facilitating occupants to acquire registerable interests, has been highlighted by Government a number of times. It is true that the level of funding needed in order to address particularly the historical injustices has not yet been provided, and this is due to budgetary pressures and the need to cater for critical and strategic issues within our economy.  

We are convinced that as the economy continues performing well and more resources are made available, we should be in a position to procure sufficient funding in order to be in a position to deal with practically all the issues that are laid out under the Land Fund. 

There was the issue of physical planning. Following the enactment of the Physical Planning Act by this Parliament, the whole country was declared a planning area; implying that all the developments in Uganda, both in urban and rural areas, will now be subjected to the physical planning law. I am due to issue regulations to operationalise this law. 

Furthermore, you may recall that Government adopted a National Land Use Policy in 2008, which provides a framework for utilisation of land in Uganda. However, in order to implement this policy, Shs 20 billion is required for the development of a National Physical Development Plan for Uganda. And as soon as funds have been accessed, this activity will be embarked on. 

It is also the view of our ministry that while physical planning has been carried out in regards to a number of urban and local areas, implementation and enforcement of what is on paper  is still a problem.  It is, therefore, my appeal to hon. Members that you assist us, particularly as we interact with local leadership, to ensure that the physical plans that have been approved are followed to the letter. This will enable us to cater for the population, which is growing at an exponential rate and yet our land is fixed. It will also ensure that, as a country, our developments are carried out on a very sound basis from the point of planning and that our land is optimally utilised in regards to the activities that are supposed to be pursued. I thank you.  

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY)(Lt Col Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the Members for their concern and observations and inquiry about some of the issues that attracted their attention. 

Most people were concerned about increased reproduction and productivity, and the steps that the ministry is taking to increase production and productivity. In the crop resources, we have encouraged, through NAADS and through sensitisation, people to open up more land for agricultural production because Uganda is now a food basket for this region.  We are, through NAADS, accordingly addressing the issue of food security. We have also availed Shs 30 billion for agro credit- loans for agriculture to address tractorisation and value addition at primary processing level.

We have also done research and put resistant varieties like cassava, coffee and improved tea plantlets to be available for interested farmers.  

We still have a challenge with availability of quality seeds because since we liberalised, it was assumed that the private sector would take this responsibility effectively. We have discovered that we need to have another line from Government, that is reliable to avail seed and planting material on the market. So, Cabinet has directed the Ministry of Agriculture to come up with a paper so that we can have an agricultural agency to put seeds on the market for farmers to access good quality. 

We encourage and demonstrate use of fertilisers.

In the livestock sector, we have rehabilitated the liquid nitrogen plant to make sure that we can avail safe semen to farmers all over the country. We have imported bulls, goats and pigs and we are doing experiments in poultry. I know hon. Katuntu doesn’t want to hear but – So, the National Genetic Animal Resources and Data Centre is equipped with all stocking materials of livestock. We are doing conservation alongside improvement.

In the fisheries resources, we have improved our fish fingerings in Kajjansi and every region has got a pond where they can   outsource these for stocking in their fisheries resources. We have also identified fish farming as one of the enterprises, especially in the eastern region where we have large chunks of swamps with running water.

There were issues to do with post harvest handling. It has been observed that much of our produce is lost because of poor post harvest handling. We have made demonstrations and we encourage small farmers to manage their harvested grain so that they can preserve it for food security and market.  

We are also working together with Ministry of Trade and Industry, and we are trying to revive the silos so that we can have storage for some of this grain for both food security in case of need and also for marketing.

We are also working with Ministry of Trade and Industry to improve on the wire receipt system across the country. We are also strengthening farm organisations in all the sectors: in crop resources, in livestock and fisheries so that they can come together for both production and marketing.

There were issues to do with water for agriculture production and many Members raised concern over this matter. The function of water for production has two components: the bulk water resides with Ministry of Water and Environment; farm water is the responsibility of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Through the National Livestock Productivity Improvement project, we have constructed some water reservoirs in the east and in the cattle corridor. We have also got money to import units for the regions so that they can dig their water tanks for agriculture production. We carry demonstration for irrigation at farm level by use of polythene paper and underground tanks.

We are aware that the dry season normally lasts about 45 days; so it is possible, if people harvest water, to overcome that shortage in 45 days. We are also in the process of soliciting more funds to make sure that most of the areas that are water-constrained are covered.

Disease and pest control. Many people talked about banana bacteria and FMD but I will respond broadly. Banana Bacteria Wilt is not strange; it is a known bacteria disease that attacks bananas and the methods, through which it can be controlled, are known. We have made publications and circulated these publications in all the country, particularly those who are involved in banana growing. What is lacking is the district local governments to enforce regulation because while some people can control, other gardens become breeding centres.

In Bushenyi, we had a very interesting scenario where one farmer was the source of the problem. We had actually threatened to imprison him or cut down his banana plantation but eventually we agreed, with the local government and the farmer, and we left with the sick plants and it was controlled.

At one time, we supplied some of these materials here in Parliament; and I will endeavour to make sure that we produce more for the Ninth Parliament so that Members of Parliament can take these materials to the farmers. Actually, banana bacteria are like ticks; if farmers know what to do, they can control it.

Now concerning FMD and particularly on quarantine, FMD is a serious disease that does not only attack domestic animals but also attacks wild animals and has very serious economic consequences. A cow, which has suffered from FMD, remains a carrier for the next six months so you need three months after the last reported case to make sure that you are actually safe.

We do not have enough money to vaccinate all the animals, so what we have been doing is to use a safe mechanism. We vaccinate affected areas, high risk areas and transit routes because this is where FMD escapes. We did it effectively last time when we got a vaccine, I think it was 2008, and we spent two years and two months without any outbreak but unfortunately during this last concluded election, there was some laxity in regulation and we got another outbreak from Kagera Basin and it went as far as Northern Uganda.

We have provided vaccine and imposed quarantine. I urge Members not to politicise quarantine. Animals, which have suffered from FMD, should not be moved to the market because when they move to the market, they spread the disease and it also goes into wild animals. So, it is very difficult! The best way we do it is that when we observe the healing and after we have recorded three months of no case reported, we lift total quarantine and we allow them partial quarantine. This means they can eat meat and trade in animals but not on foot. If you are sending animals for slaughter, we give you a permit from point X to slaughter from point Y but if you allow them to move around, then they spread.

I want to inform the House that we have successfully managed to contain the disease. We have lifted some quarantine restriction in Teso sub region and we are moving on - hon. Okupa, I was there and I am coming there. I was in Bukedea and opened it because it is safe now. We are moving to your area next week. That is what I am saying.

I want to inform the House that on water, we have increased regulation. 25 percent of our surface area is water and swamps so we have a natural resource. There was a lot of over fishing and if you are observant these days, we are very vigilant on our lakes.  We want to make sure that the stock can grow and we go back to supporting the factories, which are almost closing down.

There was a problem of corruption in NAADS, which was reported by several Members. I want to inform the House that much of the corruption was in procurement. We have unfortunately decentralised procurement up to village level but we are still getting reports. The only medicine is that, Members should participate in monitoring these programmes because where political leadership is involved in NAADS programme, it is making successes and where the political leadership and supervision is absent, there is a problem.

We have submitted a written response to the Committee on Agriculture and I think much of the information will be contained there. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you talked about the agri-business loans and the money you have put somewhere. You know, the Members here represent farmers. I do not know whether you can actually circulate information about how Members can access that money for agro processing.

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, we shall circulate information to the House and also inform them of the participating banks and how to access them. This will be in one week’s time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister, for Agriculture. 

4.02
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity to respond to the issues raised by Members during the debate on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President. I want to thank the President for his address that has provoked such debate showing interest and importance. I have been whipped to be very brief – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. You have only 10 minutes. 

MR KAMUNTU: I want to begin first by noting that this is a new ministry created only last June – it has been a department within the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. It is only now that it is a fully fledged ministry, and I really appreciate the fact that the President and Members have recognised the potential contribution that tourism can make to the social transformation of this country. 

Let me begin by pointing out that in the national development plan, tourism is recognised as one of the primary growth sectors of the economy and it is at the moment contributing nearly 9.2 percent of GDP. It is also earning about US$662 million in a year and contributes to the working population by offering them jobs. Therefore, I am pleased and I want to recognise that Members on both sides of the House, in their contributions, made this point that tourism should be repositioned in the overall economic transformation of the country and I can mention names: 

I thank hon. Ekanya - I do not see him here, but he made a very useful contribution on this point and the deputy chairperson on the committee of tourism. I really want to recognise that I appreciated their positive contributions in wanting to reposition tourism as a major sector in the economy. 

On the questions raised, I want to begin with yours, Madam Speaker, because you will recall that when chairing a meeting in which Members that were appointed ministers were vetted, you asked what I will do about domestic tourism so that it is promoted, and you quoted a personal experience. I want to assure you that measures have now been taken. I have had discussions with lodge owners in national parks and we are discussing as well to introduce wildlife clubs in schools, and the lodgers and hotel owners have agreed to give a concessionary pricing during holiday seasons for Uganda, and we have also a lower entrance fee for national parks for Ugandans. I thought I should answer this question because you asked it and to show you that we are mindful of the comments that you make as we manage this economy. 

There are issues that you specifically raised on the Floor of the House. You raised the issue of governance at the Uganda Wildlife Authority. I want to inform this House that this matter is being handled. There has been a commission of inquiry into the Uganda Wildlife Authority chaired by hon. Prof. George Kanyeihamba and we have discussed and we have agreed. I have written to him; he had given me an interim report which I have read and on the basis of his report, I extended his commission for a period of one-and-half months and it should be ending at the end of this month. So, this issue of governance at UWA should really be concluded and I assured the Members it will be peacefully concluded. 

Members also raised the issue of encroachment on protected areas. This is a very tricky issue. I have visited the field - even in this short period that I have been minister, there is real challenge here. Animals do not vote and it is only Members of Parliament who are voted by sometimes encroachers and poachers, and when it comes to issues of encroachment, I have found it very difficult to defend the animals that have no representative in the House, against the representatives who are voted by encroachers and poachers. We will find a solution to this problem and I will share it with Members because this matter has become a real binding constraint in developing tourism. 

There is a Member who raised an issue of inadequate funding for tourism promotion. It is true that when you compare Uganda with our neighbours, the promotion of tourism has been inadequate and I will be coming back to you, Members during the debates on ministerial policy, regarding budgets on this matter. So, I wouldn’t want to take more of your time since we will have another moment to discuss ministerial policy statements on the budget of the ministry. 

The third net challenge that you have raised, which I really share with you, is inadequate support in infrastructure in the national parks and game reserves. The roads, the power supply and access to these gifted-by-nature attractions are areas that require considerable improvement. 

There is a problem of mindset of most of our people about tourism. Their mindset is absolutely negative. If you asked an ordinary Ugandan what tourism means to his life as compared to health and education, the answers would be significantly different, indicating that we have a big battle of mind change to see tourism. 

Incidentally, the most visited countries in the world are the most influential countries in the world. If a country is not visited, it is not significant in world affairs and the negative attitude about Uganda and associating it with the past turmoil history must change. I have no doubt in my mind that with the support I have seen on both sides of the House, we will move tourism as a potential sector to make a significant contribution to the transformation of this economy. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. We wish you good luck in marketing this country as a tourist destination. 

Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Bukwo Elite Primary School, represented by hon. Sabila and hon. Tete, Kongassis County and Bukwo District. You are welcome. (Applause). 

Let us have the Minister for Economic Monitoring. 

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT) (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of economic monitoring, my ministry is engaged in a series of activities to make sure the economy is monitored and performance, especially to rejuvenate the rural economy, is activated. 

You know that monitoring is a wide and big function and because the country is big and the duties involved are enormous, in our ministry we have already started on this road map to involve our RDCs – (Interjections) - in monitoring the countrywide activities. The RDCs are central government representatives and so it should not be taken that they only monitor security. Much as we are Members of Parliament, we are representatives of the people and for that matter – like, for example, I have involved the Members of Parliament and I have directed that contracts that are signed at the district level by the CAOs, contracts that are signed at the central government to do work in the districts, should be shared with the Members of Parliament so that when Members of Parliament are monitoring these activities, they know what they are exactly monitoring.

Previously, what has been happening is that there has been no transparency in these contracts at that level. And because Members of Parliament did not know what exactly is being done, like in NAADS where they did not know who had been engaged, what the contractor was supposed to supply or what terms of the contract were, it became hard for Members of Parliament to monitor these activities.

Once the Members of Parliament have these documents and contracts including the roads – for the roads, I have gone ahead to ask for the cooperation of the Minister of Local Government so that the PS can direct the CAOs to make sure that the district roads committees are functional. We made a law here that district road committee be formed and Members of Parliament are part of that committee. Once the district committee is formed, it is upon the Members of Parliament, the CAO and a few other members to choose a chairperson amongst them. 

Those committees were specifically to oversee the implementation of roads in the district. It is this committee that will determine which roads are to be made. The contractors will be known to them and it will be very easy for Members of Parliament to deliver to their constituents. So on this issue, the participation of Members of Parliament is very crucial. 

My ministry is further doing wide consultations with stakeholders. The last one we had, and we intend to have more on a monthly basis, was on the state of the economy. In this consultative meeting, we involved Members of Parliament where all the chairpersons of the key committees and ministries were invited. Through these consultations, we share experiences and we together forge a way forward.

On the issue my colleague talked about, and also raised by Members of Parliament, about the transparency in the oil and gas industry. This is an issue that through consultation and involving Members of Parliament - suspicion on Government and companies involved in the oil and gas industry. Once we have a round table to discuss these issues, then we will promote transparency, good governance and sharing of information which has been lacking. You know what these kind of round tables have achieved, for example, the Investors Round Table and the achievements made in that area. So in this case, for the next one which we are soon going to have, we shall forge a way forward and make sure we know what is going on in the next few years in this field so that the locals exactly know what is happening. 

For example, tomorrow I am going to be engaged with the bankers in the country so that by 2014 – 2015, when we begin the old production, they should be well prepared to handle the magnitude of the business at that time. So, these are the kinds of consultations that I intend to undertake so that we prepare our population and develop our private sector so that when that time comes, we do not say that there is nobody involved – to say that there are international companies when actually the local content could have been filled by Ugandans.

On the issue of doing business and involving everybody, my ministry has undertaken to do further investigation and some of the problems have been solved. Our engagement with traders like KACITA is yielding results and we have other engagements at a wider level, especially with traders who are doing international business and more so that we have an opportunity for the new sector that has been opened for Southern Sudan. This is a very big economy that will actually in effect - the backward linkage that our business will be having with Sudan will actually turn around the economy of our country. And all we need to do is to develop the private sector so that there is wide participation. Once this is done, and we are all involved, it will make a difference.

At an appropriate time, I will request that I interface with the relevant committees where we can share information and maybe come to the House and give the status of the economy. I thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, hon. Minister, for Economic Monitoring. Just for the record, about a month ago, while I was doing some work in London, I had a meeting with officials of Tullow Oil in which we discussed the need for them to come and update the Members on what has been going on so that Members understand what they are doing. I told them that probably after the budget process is finished, we would notify them and they come and interface with the Members so that they can know what is going on. (Applause). I may also invite you for that meeting as well. 

MR BANYENZAKI: I think there is a workshop organised for Members of Parliament on the 14th and 15th of September and, through hon. Ssekikubo, Members are going to be informed so that we share the information. Since the ministers of Energy and Finance are here, their ministries have also been invited to participate so that they come and give the Members of Parliament information regarding this important sector. I thank you. 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, since the statement by the Leader of the Opposition to this Parliament in answer to the State of the Nation Address, and since quite a number of you have contributed to the general debate, my ministry has made several responses particularly in this House. And colleagues will remember on the 8th of July this year, my senior minister made a response on this Floor of Parliament on a wide range of issues, including the depreciation of the shilling against the dollar and the measures Government is taking to address this issue, among others, both in the short, medium and long term. Therefore, I thought it appropriate that those issues that were addressed, we do not repeat them here. Today I am only responding to those issues, which have not been covered by my senior minister in her response.

There were a number of issues that were raised in the Leader of Opposition’s statement. Just to remind ourselves, I could mention a few of them which I think require a substantive answer in my reply today:

•	The disparity between population growth at the rate of 3.2 per annum and the growth of agricultural output at 0.9 per annum, that it is increasing the number of food insecure people. 

•	 That there is huge divide between the rich and the poor; with a small part of the population swimming in abundance as the majority are wallowing in poverty and misery. 

•	 That the majority of the citizens are excluded from the benefits of economic growth and inequality is on the increase. 

•	 That it is true that Uganda’s growth path has created opportunities deliberately skewed in favour of urban areas of central and western regions, leaving behind the rural areas and Northern and eastern Uganda where poverty levels are now simply unbearable. I am quoting.

The response

Food security. It is important to be very cautious when making conclusions on economic linkages and inter-relations. Many times we tend to think that population growth should be in tandem with agricultural growth, for food sufficiency and security. This is not necessarily true more so in countries that have food surpluses. In Uganda, it is a well known fact that we normally produce surplus that have been used to feed not only ourselves but also the region. 

Notwithstanding the delayed onset of rains last financial year and a relatively high population growth rate, Uganda’s food production is sufficient to feed ourselves. However, during periods of drought, the affected areas tend to run low on food supplies and therefore two problems arise: One, the problem of distribution across the country and also the affordability of the cost of the food by the people living in those drought-affected communities. 

I am glad to announce that Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, has a programme to make a payment of approximately Shs 22,000 per month per household on a plot basis in the districts of Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Kaberamaido, Nebbi, Apac, Katakwi, Kyenjonjo and Kiboga to address the issues such as food insecurity and this is supposed to cater for 49,691 households and there is a provision of Shs 3.2 billion. This is on a pilot basis and it is the beginning. Bigger things will come in future.

On the issue of declining contribution or relevant share of agriculture towards GDP growth, this is an indicator of social economic transformation. While the agricultural sector continues to support the livelihood of the majority of our Ugandans, in line with our policy to diversify the economy, other sectors have emerged to reduce the burden on this agricultural sector. There is a trend that often manifests itself as a country develops. It is therefore not surprising that the share of agriculture in the GDP is declining and will continue declining as other sectors do emerge.

Income inequality

While it is true that there is income inequality, recently results of the Urban National Panel Survey carried out by Uganda Bureau of Statistics revealed that recent growth has strongly been for pro-poor with relatively high levels of mobility across the country. This nationally representative survey fronts that the same individuals over multiple years - which is the only way that dynamic concepts such as chronic poverty or the benefits of growth can be understood. 

Of those classified as poor in 2005/06, 60 percent had escaped that bracket by 2009/10. It is important to note that since 2005, the gap between regions has decreased. Between 2005/06 and 2009/10, the number of the poor decreased most rapidly in the Northern and eastern part of our country. Roughly, half of the recent reduction in poverty has occurred in Northern Uganda. As you know very well colleagues, that part of our country was under insurgency for quite a while. 

Geographically, uneven growth is observed in every successful economy and is in fact, beneficial due to economies of scale and agglomeration that private sector can exploit. The trend in poverty reduction show that public services like UPE have successfully resulted into narrowing levels of inequality between our regions.

Public financial management

The Opposition raised the following issues on public financial management:-

1. 	That there is no consensus on the National Development Plan.
2. 	That the debt hurdle could lead to a debt trap.
3. 	The need to revise the debt strategy.
4. 	The increase in accumulated deficit on the Consolidated Fund from Shs3,784 billion in 2008/09 to Shs5,165 billion today which raises Government’s borrowing costs, diverts resources meant for social services like health thus affecting the standards of living.

5) 	The proposal that Government implements the pay and pension reforms and downsizes Government to reduce public administration expenditure.
6. 	The problem of taxation
7. 	Petroleum legislation.

National Development Plan

I wish that we note that there was wide consultation during the preparation of the National Development Plan, which was approved by this very Parliament-(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Five more minutes.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: The preparation of the financial year 2011/12 national budget was fully aligned to the National Development Plan priorities. This involves rationalising sector’s objectives to ensure the strategic interventions outlined in the National Development Plan are implemented and this was achieved through a participatory process involving all government’s spending agencies. 

To further the integration of the National Development Plan into the budgetary process, the financing of projects is based on agreed Government National Development Plan and sector priorities as provided in the medium term expenditure framework.

Public debt

Uganda was one of the first countries to benefit from debt relief. Since then we have embarked on an ambitious programme of infrastructural development as outlined in the National Development Plan. Some of these investments will have to be supported by debt. 

However, while it is true that debt is increasing, it is in line with our macro-economic variables such as domestic budget revenues, export of goods and services, the GDP upon which debt sustainability is measured. 

The debt sustainability analysis carried out in March 2011 concluded that Uganda’s debt was sustainable both in medium and the long term framework. In the meantime, Government has embarked on a review and revision of the current debt strategy to reflect the current challenges and realities, including the changes in our monitory framework.

The Consolidated Fund 

On the Consolidated Fund, the statements from the Central Bank on the Government’s position show that the Consolidated Fund was not in deficit in 2008/09 and the position continues to remain the same. 

The deficit quoted by the Leader of the Opposition is drawn from the Auditor- General’s report. This report proceeded from the partial balance sheet for Government. The partial balance sheet shows a deficit because it excludes the value of Government’s fixed assets and, therefore, should be interpreted with that fact in view. 

Petroleum Registration

The ministry is working on a new public financial management law that incorporates oil revenue management with specific attention to economic management. This will be tabled before this parliament in this financial year, according to our plan. 

Youth empowerment

To address the challenges of youth empowerment, the Government has setup the venture capital fund of Shs 25 billion to be disbursed through the DFCU, Stanbic Bank and Centenary Bank. We are finalising the modalities which include guidelines, access criterion and procedure of the operationalization of the fund and this will be made public and a copy will be brought to Parliament. Further consultations are on-going before its full implementation.

Pay As You Earn

It is true that for PAY AS You Earn, a threshold of Shs 13,000 was fixed in 1997. However, it is not true that it is the lowest in the region. For instance, Rwanda’s threshold is equivalent to Shs 13,500; it is only in Kenya and Tanzania where it is relatively higher than that of Uganda. But we should note that these are different economies with different economic structures, financing needs and bigger tax base. The threshold was fixed at this level in 1997 taking into account the long-term stability of the taxing system. 

As you are aware, adjusting the threshold on an annual basis would destabilise the tax system. In 2010/11, PAYE contributed Shs 753.2 billion. That is 16.15 percent of the total tax revenue. It also contributes now 50 percent of the direct domestic taxes in Uganda. Adjusting threshold would have major financial implications for the budget of this current financial year. 

It is important that we appreciate the role of tax and review tax policy options available to increase revenue. The NRM Government is not immune to the plight of salary earners and certainly is looking into this matter with the seriousness it deserves. 

I thank you for listening to me. This is what we have been able to put up in light of the questions and comments you made, but which were not covered by the minister when she presented her statement here last month. 
4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking Members for the concerns raised in regard to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Before I directly respond to the questions, I want to put it in context that the Ministry of Gender has four major functions:
a)	Community mobilisation and empowerment;
b)	Protection and promotion of the rights of venerable groups, i.e, women, youth, persons with disability, elderly, children etc.
c)	It also enhances employment and labour productivity; 
d)	And promotes culture for productivity.

A number of issues were raised by Members of Parliament and I want to respond as follows: 
There was an issue on how Government intends to absorb the 40,000 graduates produced annually by our tertiary institutions when we are not investing in sectors that have potential to create employment opportunities.  I want to respond that the Government of Uganda is putting in place enabling environment for business growth and employment opportunities, by developing a number of policies at both macro and micro levels. The National Employment Policy 2010 is in place. The purpose of this policy is to guide all stakeholders in the creation and enhancement of quality and availability of gainful employment opportunities. 

In addition, we have developed a position paper and the purpose of this paper is to propose workable interventions necessary for employment creation. It has a number of strategies but I want to mention a few in the interest of time: 

•	The establishment of a national employment fund and provision of start-up capital and tools to the young and other marginalised groups.
 
•	The establishment of a sound and reliable functional labour market information system to inform our training policies. 

•	Promoting and managing programmes aimed at standardisation of labour

•	Retooling and operationalising existing regional youth skills centres to impart modern job-targeted skills, among others. 

There was an issue raised on the type of labour on the external market. A Member said that there are a number of Askaris and witch doctors in South Africa. I want to say that Government does not export witch doctors. But over the four last decades, Ugandans have been moving to other countries in such of work and Uganda sends skilled, semi-skilled and none-skilled workers. For instance, we had 757,500 Ugandans living outside, mainly in USA, UK, Canada, German, Sweden, Demark, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and South Africa. And 36 percent of these had tertiary education: 332, which is 36.4, were physicians trained in the country and many others. 

There was also a question that how do we deal with the unemployment problem when we lack competitive skills and a curriculum, which is not tailored to our local needs as a country? This one, Government is in the process of finalising skilling Uganda. The Minister of Education mentioned this yesterday. In addition to this, the ministry has established labour market information systems that are aiming at tackling the mismatch in skills. 

One wondered how we could protect people who are already in employment, particularly in the private sector. This is to do with the minimum wage. This is a very controversial issue in a liberalised economy but the ministry has considered it and initiated a cabinet memo providing for setting up of a minimum wage advisory board with a wide spectrum of members to study the situation or wages in selected sectors, among others, agriculture, manufacturing, construction, mining and many others.

How Government is going to address the issues of gender inequality and equity in the financial year 2011/2012. I wish to respond as follows: 

One, mainstreaming gender in all sector plans, policies and local governments. Sectors so far covered include agriculture, education, health and roads sub-sector.

We are also training staff in line ministries and local governments to build capacity in gender mainstreaming, among other initiatives.

There was an issue of child labour in schools. The government has put in place the National Child Labour Policy 2007, and elimination of child labour has been mainstreamed in other sectors like education. Elimination of child labour has also been integrated in the national education curriculum. 

There was an issue of absence of labour colleges which used to be in the LDC. The ministry and Government at large is making arrangements to ensure that the labour function is strengthened with adequate resources to execute its mandate. 

A Member raised an issue on the youth groups that were mentioned in the address. Nineteen districts were mentioned. She wanted to know these districts. The districts include: Nebbi, Pader, Apac, Gulu, Katakwi, Kibaale, Lira, Mpigi, Rukungiri, Sironko, Wakiso, Tororo, Kiboga, Busia, Koboko, Kumi, Mukono, Soroti, Mbale and Bushenyi. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kakira Estate Primary School represented by hon. Migereko and hon. Agnes Nabirye. I think they are the ones here. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Minister, you talked about Ugandans in the Diaspora. I think you are not capturing all the Ugandans everywhere. Last week, I was in Malawi and I met several highly qualified Ugandans. A number of them are advisers to the Malawi Government. One of the problems they raised was that you do not capture their being there. So, take an interest in the other countries other than those which you mentioned.   

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it seems your troops are inadequate again. Can you please ensure that the Minister of Defence, the Minister for East African Community, the Minister for Water, the Minister for Karamoja and Minister for Internal Affairs are here tomorrow because we cannot go beyond tomorrow.

I also urge the committees to work expeditiously to conclude your business because on Tuesday, we should begin on the budget debate without fail. House adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 18 August 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)
