Wednesday, 18 August 2004

(Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you back. Two weeks ago we adjourned to enable you work in your committees. I want to take this opportunity to thank you for whatever you have been able to do during the two weeks, and I hope you have been able to complete the work that will enable us to proceed with this budgeting process. According to the Budget Act we should complete approving the estimates by the end of this month. I want to congratulate you for whatever you have been able to achieve during the period.

In this regard I want to read you a letter I received from His Excellency the President in which he made an appointment. This was dated 4 August 2004, addressed to hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister of Defence. The subject was “Attorney-General”.

“This is to inform you that I have decided, using the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution, to assign to you in addition to your duties as Minister of Defence, the duties and functions of Attorney-General of Uganda. You will hold this office with immediate effect, until otherwise advised.”

So, that is the position. There is an acting Attorney-General as per this instrument. 

Then last month I received a letter from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and it reads: 

“Annual leave pending relocation to new job:

This is to inform you that I am proceeding for my annual leave including arrears of 35 days with effect from Monday, 2 August 2004 pending relocation to my new job.  

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the cordial relationship we have had during my term of office as Minister and Member of Parliament respectively and wish you all the best in the days ahead.  

Please convey my heartfelt appreciation to fellow Members of Parliament for the assistance they gave me through their parliamentary contributions, particularly during my term of office as a minister.

Yours sincerely,
Dr Kisamba Mugerwa.”

I have also received information, which relates to a corporation that is under our control. This is a letter from the National Water and Sewerage Corporation and the subject is: 

“Golden Staff of Management Merit from Worldwide Marketing Organisation:

We are pleased to inform you that National Water and Sewerage Corporation received an international award for excellent management. The Golden Staff of Management Merit from Worldwide Marketing Organisation was presented to our board member, Dr Shirley, in the Netherlands.  

On 16 July 2004 His Excellency the President, Yoweri Museveni, officially presented it to the Management Director.  Please find attached….” 

So, this was for your information and I think we are proud of our corporation for getting this particular award. Thank you very much.

2.47
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not in the habit of using this item but I notice on the Order Paper we have “Notice of business to follow” and usually Thursdays were for questions for oral answer, and I do not see that. Have we decided this will not now be on our Order Papers, because I have questions pending since April 2003? I asked the Minister of Education about the use of asbestos as roofing material in schools -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

DR OKULO EPAK: Yes, since April 2003 and the same question was sent to the Minister by the Clerk and I got no answer. When can I get the answer?  

Then the second one, I asked a question on the Ssebutinde Report and the question was addressed to the Minister of Finance, to tell us the financial implications and so on. Really, I thought that Members’ questions were equally important, particularly the last one which has now ended up in a whole expensive exercise being quashed by court. We might as well now actually demand that the Minister of Finance makes a statement on the Ssebutinde Report to the House, which will attract useful debate. So, Sir, how can a question for oral answer take more than one year?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am now directing the Clerk to bring up all the questions we have so that we communicate to the people who are supposed to answer these questions. Perhaps next week we shall set a day or two so that questions are disposed of by the ministers concerned.  

2.50
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I noted with satisfaction the letter you read us about the appointment of the Attorney-General. But on our desk we received another communication regarding the appointment of judges and may I congratulate you for having vetted them successfully yesterday? 

My concern, however, is whereas you read us the letter of appointment of the Attorney-General dated 4th August; strange enough the date on which this one was written does not appear anywhere. It was a subject of conjecture.  

THE SPEAKER: Subject of what?

MR SEKIKUBO: Conjecture, because we could not see the date on which this letter was written and I hope –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which letter?

MR SEKIKUBO: The letter from the President about Justices Ogola and Musota among others. I hoped such communications from the highest office, Mr Speaker, should be well formalised, should be specific –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Did the President write to you? (Laughter).

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, but you authorised us to get copies. 

That aside, I would not mind how you received it but some time back –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you should mind because it has to be authentic. Well, how did you get it?

MR SEKIKUBO: We got copies on our desk.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but what was the substance of the letter?

MR SEKIKUBO: The substance was, “appointment of Judges”. It states: 

“The hon. Edward Ssekandi, 
Speaker’s Chambers, 
The Rt hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Appointment of Judges:  

In exercise of powers vested in the President by Article 142(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission tendered to me 27 July 2004, I propose to appoint persons listed below as Judges of the High Court and a Justice of the Court of Appeal:
 
Principal Judge, hon. Justice J.M. Ogola; High Court, Mr Stephen Musota, Mrs Margaret Oguli Ouma, Mr Ezekiel Muhanguzi; Court of Appeal, Mr Steven Kavuma. 

I hereby forward the names for approval of the Parliament.

Signed,
Yoweri K. Museveni
President.”

This exercise took place yesterday. But my worry was, how could such a letter have been originated by the President? 

That aside, some time last year in September we received another communication about the appointment of Judge Remmy Kasule. Up to now this House has never been told what happened, despite the normal procedure that was passed through. The vetting was duly done and up to now we are still in doubt, we do not know what happened thereafter. Mr Speaker, another time we have such appointments, it should be taken to remind the President and the Executive of those appointments they make and how we proceed in such matters. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

2.53
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have got two brief remarks to make. One, there has been a lot of controversy about my safety in recent days. (Laughter) I am happy to announce that upon your return I complied with the request on your advice and I reported at 9.00 O’clock, to the CID headquarters. I am happy that I am safe because I expected negative consequences. The main reason for my going to the CID was that my speech on federo became unceremoniously controversial and I defended myself. I am happy to be speaking freely now.  

Mr Speaker, in accordance with your briefing vis-à-vis the contents of Article 119 of the Constitution, I am seeking your advice. It is true that hon. Amama Mbabazi is already appointed as a Minister of Defence, but it is also on record that one of the busiest ministries in Government today is the Ministry of Defence. Much as we cannot rule out a temporary appointment of the same person to the position of Attorney-General, to our simple reasoning and understanding, is it not too much for the same man to shoulder an additional responsibility of Attorney-General? If so, as Parliament, can we not advise the President otherwise? I am seeking your advice.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, I have read to you the letter, which I received and this was an appointment by His Excellency the President, the appointing authority for the ministers. But as you may check with the Articles, especially Article 113(3) of the Constitution says: “A Cabinet Minister shall have responsibility for such functions of Government as the President may, from time to time, assign to him or her.” Apparently, this is the provision, which the President must have used - I suppose. He did not quote it but I think this is the provision. 

As to determine what assignment a minister has to take or not to take, that is really the prerogative of the President. We, as Parliament, do not supervise what load one has and so forth, whether too much or not, that is for the President to do. So, I do not think really that Parliament can say, “This one is overloaded; do this or the other”. We should respect that the mandate was given to the President, therefore, he decides. If he does not carry out the functions, then we shall see and point it out later. But I think we do not have a way of checking on this.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I do respect your advice but much as I do respect the advice, if you read the Constitution, in Article 119 the role of the Attorney-General is specifically stated. Unlike other appointments related to ministerial responsibilities, for one to be a minister and to work as Attorney-General, there are specific roles he plays in Parliament. How will that responsibility be combined in such a busy schedule?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, I do not know. It could be that he has made assignments to other ministers to help hon. Mbabazi in the Ministry of Defence, and he did not copy this to me so I cannot tell.

2.58
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I still need your guidance on two things. One, Article 119 clearly spells out what an Attorney-General should have in terms of qualifications; and to appoint him Parliament must scrutinise the credentials of such a person. If hon. Mbabazi is made Attorney-General by an instrument, which does not even quote the Article under which he has been given these functions, do you not think there is need for Parliament to look at his credentials in order for him to perform these duties?

THE SPEAKER: No, certainly, because as far as the Attorney-General is concerned, what you have to look at is whether he is a cabinet minister. 

Secondly, but most importantly, Article 119(2) says: “A person shall not be qualified to be appointed Attorney-General” (or even to act I think) “unless he or she is qualified to practice as an advocate of the High Court and has so practiced or gained the necessary experience for not less than ten years”. 

So, if you think that he has no qualifications under this one, then he does not qualify. What we have to consider, the fact you will take into account is, when did the hon. Mbabazi qualify? When was he enrolled as an advocate of the High court, where did he practice, and so forth? He must have those facts. So, if you have those facts then you can attack this appointment on that ground. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, do you not think, given your guidance, that we should as Parliament look at the credentials of the Attorney-General, hon. Amama Mbabazi, because being a minister does not qualify you to be an Attorney-General? But being an Attorney-General in this Constitution qualifies you to be a minister, so I really need your guidance on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: As any citizen of this country, if you think that somebody has been appointed in a position where he does not qualify, you can challenge it. And if an occasion arises that there is a need to approve an appointment of a cabinet minister to become Attorney-General, definitely that will be an opportune moment for us to scrutinise and see whether this adheres to Article 119(2). Unfortunately, we are handicapped in that maybe the Attorney-General is not here to guide us because he is the one to interpret –(Laughter)- I am not the Attorney-General.

MR SABIITI: Secondly, Mr Speaker, I need your guidance again on this important matter, which I have read about in today’s papers. We are told that His Excellency the President has been elected Chairman of NRM-O. Given the constitutional petition No.2 of 2002, which was scrutinised by the Constitutional Court, the Movement was declared a party thereby making the President the chairman of the NRM party. Now he has been elected as the chairman of NRM-O. I need your guidance; can a person be a chairperson of two parties? (Laughter). I am finding it strange! Could you guide me, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, you are again trying to assign me functions that do not belong to the Speaker. It is the Attorney-General to explain that. (Laughter). But what I must say on the other hand, actually the judgement did not say what you are saying but people are carrying it in the context that it said that. It did not. I am speaking not as the Speaker but as a lawyer.  

3.02
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard you persistently refer this matter to the Office of the Attorney-General for interpretation. I believe the Attorney-General, according to the Constitution, is a legal adviser to the august House. I believe that the appointing authority cannot designate a person to perform certain functions, especially pertaining to the deliberations in the proceedings of this august House, without informing you. Do I understand that indeed the person who is actually Minister of Defence has been given additional responsibilities to be the Attorney-General and since there is nobody to advise us he is actually the acting Attorney-General?

THE SPEAKER: Well, whether he carries out the responsibility in acting capacity or in substantive capacity, what we are interested in is the advice.

3.04
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of importance and urgency in respect to the internally displaced persons living in camps. I visited some five camps last week. The health situation in these camps demands immediate action by the Ministry of Health. There is urgent need to send a team of specialist doctors to go and visit and assess the situation of these persons living in the IDP camps. If we do not do that, these people will leave the camps if possible but they will not be able to live for more than five years because the food situation has not been improved. Many of them are eating once in two days because there is no food for them to eat and the medical teams are not serious, they are not visiting them regularly as we think they should be doing.  

So, when I discussed this with some of the leaders in the camps, we agreed that a team of doctors should be dispatched because these people are in the camps; it is easy to meet them and then assess their livelihood style. Otherwise, that is a very important matter and should be taken up seriously. Thank you. 

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Mr Speaker, I have totally taken note of the submissions made by my honourable colleague and the Ministry of Health has taken note of that. We will, as a matter of priority, take action in that regard. In the next two or three days we shall have a team on the ground in Lira and we shall report to this House on the actions that we shall have taken. I thank you.

3.07
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This issue of the Attorney-General is very crucial and I think we should have some time to clear the air. One, I am not a Member of the Appointments Committee but I would like to know from you, Mr Speaker, when the Appointments Committee was approving the hon. Amama Mbabazi, did it approve of him under Article 113 of the Constitution as Minister or approved him under Article 119 of the Constitution as Attorney-General?

Two, Mr Speaker, yesterday I know for sure you were approving judges. One of the judges being approved as a principal judge has been holding the office of judge, approved under Article 142. Why was it necessary, therefore, to have another approval of this judge as a principal judge if the argument that the President can assign further duties - because they were all approved under Article 142!

Three, as far as I am concerned, we do not have an Attorney-General and I will be very reluctant to accept the advice of the hon. Amama Mbabazi as Attorney-General not because he does not qualify, not because he is not a good lawyer, but he has not been duly appointed. We should be looking at the principle behind this. We should be looking at the reasons why the Constitution makers found it necessary to have the Attorney-General approved separately under a different Article 119. We are now robbing Parliament of our responsibility. We are absconding from the responsibility given to us under Article 119 to approve a minister as an Attorney-General.

Lastly, this issue about –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Well, can I handle these? They are so many I may forget –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I hope you will give me a chance to conclude. Mr Speaker, the issue of people running to court every other time is very unfortunate. But we make these mistakes deliberately. Why should we? It is a very simple matter to forward the name of any person the President wishes to appoint as Attorney-General and we approve him. I mean, we are not demanding too much. We are not challenging the President’s power but we are saying the Constitution demands it. And remember one time I have warned this House that let us not embarrass ourselves again. Every other time a busy body runs to court and eventually we mobilise boda bodas to say the judges are wrong. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, in the first place as I said, I cannot act as Attorney-General, but since you have directed a question to me I can try to explain. You have asked that yesterday you heard us approving hon. James Ogola as a principal judge yet he was acting as a principal judge, “why did you do it?” The answer is very clear; he was acting as a principal judge, but we approved him as a principal judge. So, he is –(Interjection)- hold on –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am making a clarification to the point I made.

THE SPEAKER: No, hold on because you wanted to ridicule the situation; that the acting Attorney-General is not approved, but we went on and approved a principal judge. Yes, hon. Ogola was a judge of the High Court assigned the duty of acting principal judge. Yesterday our approval meant that now he substantively becomes a principal judge. So, it is distinguishable. 

You asked me whether hon. Amama Mbabazi, when we approved him as a cabinet minister, we - my answer is, no, we approved him as a minister. We did but I am just imagining that under Article 132(2), the President has decided to assign the Minister of Defence, who has the qualifications, to act as Attorney-General. It would be the same case if the substantive Attorney-General is sick for six months, the President could assign any minister who has the qualifications under 119(2) to act as Attorney-General. He would not come to seek approval.  

The other issue was that you are not going to accept his advice. Yes, this is what I said. If you think that the minister who is acting as Attorney-General has no qualifications, you are free to challenge it as a citizen. I said so. As hon. Katuntu, you can challenge it. Yes, you can; you are free to.

3.12
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I am just troubled a bit because in recent times there have been court cases, which have serious implications on the way Parliament does its work. Therefore, our concern is that the matters brought to the Floor of this House should be clarified because of our continuing desire that indeed matters should be done in this House without having to go to the courts for judgment. 

It is true that we do not have an Attorney-General in the House, but we have qualified lawyers on the Government bench, who can help the House and the Government to clarify this position because it is very clear. If you look at the Constitution, Article 113 says; “Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament…” and we did it in the case of the Minister of Defence. 

When it comes to Article 119(1) it says; “There shall be an Attorney-General, who shall be a cabinet minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” But Article 119(2) says, ”A person shall not be qualified to be appointed Attorney-General unless he or she is qualified to practice as an advocate of the High Court and has so practiced or gained the necessary experience for not less than ten years.”  

Surely there are lawyers on the Front Bench who I can name. Even if they are not Attorney Generals, it does not remove the knowledge of law in their heads and they can advise this House so that in receiving the information you have given us, we can advise Government accordingly so that these matters of being judged in courts of law do not arise, especially when it has been brought to our attention.  

Mr Speaker, I beg that members who are lawyers - I can see the Minister of Education, I can see the Minister of Finance – surely, we do not have an Attorney-General as such but these people are qualified to be Attorney Generals, and can advise us on the correctness of this position. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank Prof. Kamuntu for raising this important issue. To appreciate the interpretation of this situation, one has to read it very carefully and calmly. I want to begin with Article 113 of the Constitution: 

“Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament.”  

The important words are, “Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament….” What we should be asking ourselves now is, was hon. Amama Mbabazi appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament? If the answer is yes, then he is a duly appointed Cabinet Minister. 

Then Article 119: “There shall be an Attorney-General, who shall be a cabinet minister, appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.” In other words, the principle in Article 113 is being repeated in Article 119, that the person to qualify must be a cabinet minister. Let us first stop there. As long as he is a cabinet minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a request that one of the ministers or some of the ministers who are lawyers should – he is giving his advice. But certainly, this House cannot reject. What it can do, if there is a person interested in this matter, is for them to follow it up and challenge it legally because your saying no will not decide the issue. So, if you think you have a very good case and you want to challenge this, you present Article 119 and you present the qualifications, you say this person has no – I think the courts will assist us to decide on that.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker, I want to agree that Article 119 is capable of two interpretations, and both of them will be correct. The first interpretation is that the Attorney-General shall be qualified to be a cabinet minister, but has to be approved by Parliament. That is one interpretation, which is correct. 

The other interpretation, which is also correct, is that the Attorney-General; as long as a person is a cabinet minister who was approved by Parliament, he qualifies to be an Attorney-General. 

THE SPEAKER: The point, honourable members, is that this dispute is not going to be decided by the majority vote here. Whoever is interested in this matter and feels has very sound legal positions should present the matter to court and challenge it so that the court can guide us. But I am not going to say, “let us cast the vote on this so that whoever wins then wins the day.”  

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy that this matter has been raised in Parliament. My own advice would be that we receive these submissions and Parliament should ask Government to come and make a statement. I propose - the Leader of Government Business may disagree but I propose that Tuesday next week is a good time for Government to come here and make a statement and thereafter people may be free to proceed. I thank you, Sir.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Thank you very much. I would like to thank the Minister of Education; I think he has the right approach. I was just thinking about this thing in practice. Hon. Amama Mbabazi as Minister of Defence will at one stage require the advice of the Attorney-General. So, hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister of Defence writes to hon. Amama Mbabazi Attorney-General, seeking the advice from hon. Amama Mbabazi. What is the sense? What are we trying to do? Now hon. Amama Mbabazi writes back to the hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister of Defence, writes back as Attorney-General to give advice. Is it possible for one to advise himself?

THE SPEAKER: Well there have been situations when the President himself has been a Minister of Finance. What happens in such a situation? Let us give this matter - the hon. Minister of Education has suggested that you give Government two days to come out with a comprehensive statement. Honourable members, as I said, we are not going to decide this issue by votes here because we are not competent to decide that. It is the court, which can decide whether the appointment is valid or not. But as far as I am concerned, the letter I read to you says he was assigned the responsibility of Attorney-General on top of his other responsibilities. Whether the appointments for acting require another appointment that will be another issue that has to be dealt with by the courts.

3.23
MR WACHA BEN (Oyam County North, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I agree that the Executive should be given time so that it gives us a considered opinion. But in bringing their advice to us I would want the Executive to also consider whether under the Constitution it is possible to have an acting Attorney-General. I think this is important because then it will clarify the scenario and then bring the matter to rest. I thank you, Sir.

3.24
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance and more so the high-handed action of the RDC of Bugiri District as was reported in the New Vision paper of Monday this week.  

It is a well-known fact that Government has been urging political parties in the formation to regularize their position by being in conformity with the Political Parties and Organizations Act. One of the requirements is that if a party is to get registered it must obtain signatures of its supporters and members from the countryside. This, therefore, means that you cannot collect signatures through an armchair arrangement by sitting here in Kampala. You must go out and interface with your members. 

Why do I now have to say that this is a matter of national importance? Over the weekend we had two friendly political parties in offing, which went to Bugiri to attempt to obtain signatures for registration. Out of the blue, the Resident District Commissioner, himself with an AK-47, which is the domain of UPDF - in the first place, the RDC is entitled to security. He is entitled to security but it does not mean that he holds the gun himself. It is that he has the Police at his disposal; he could also have the UPDF officers to guard him. But here is a situation where an RDC personally lifts an AK-47 and begins sporadically shooting into the air and physically assaulting officials of these two political parties in the offing. 

I say this because it is known and it is on record that I am one of those on the other side of this Parliament. Sooner than later we in the DP will also be going out to collect signatures. Is that going to be the same treatment accorded to us? I think what is happening right now, Mr Speaker, is that Government wants to have its cake and eat it too. If this country is going to be ruled through authoritarian hands, let it be made known so that we all know that this is a one party state and therefore it has no intentions of opening political space so that people do not go out unnecessarily to risk their lives and the lives of their members. I think this is a point on which we need advice from Government. What should one do if you want to register a political party? Should you just sit down? Shouldn’t you collect signatures? We need advice from Government on that issue? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Leader of Government Business or the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us a comprehensive statement on the issue raised? That would be helpful.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, the Minister for the Presidency is giving it.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am not the Leader of Government Business and I am not the Minister of Internal Affairs, but I also read about what hon. Kassiano is talking about and as usual I was interested in following it up. As far as I know, the Police is investigating this case. That is the fact. Police is investigating this case. I have that information and I thought I should share it with you so that you take –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, why don’t we ask the minister to come with a comprehensive statement on this issue. That would help us because when he makes the statement, we shall be able to debate it. That would be the best way to handle this matter.

3.28
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few points to raise and I will be very quick. At one time I talked here about the constituency fund, which the President had promised. Fortunately the following day this is what I read. I would like to share it with the House. 

“Mwesigye studies Kenya Members of Parliament Scheme: 
Uganda’s Parliamentary Affairs Minister, Hope Mwesigye, held discussions with the Kenyan Constituency Development Fund Committee officials in Nairobi to study how a similar fund can be set up in Uganda –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I don’t want to interrupt but this is not a very urgent matter that has to be raised now. What we have been discussing are urgent matters. It is valid but do not raise it now.
3.29
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised a concern about the cargo, which goes through Dar-es-Salaam. It has happened that it might affect our revenue collection –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, again this is not an urgent matter. You put in a formal question and it shall be answered.

MR KAKOOZA: It is urgent because it is going to affect our Budget, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, put a formal question.

3.30
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that the Minister of Works is here and I am going to raise an urgent issue, which I think if the Movement Government wants to survive in Busoga region, it should try to address. This regards the road that is being expanded from Jinja to Bugiri. There are two major worries, although people are very happy that the road is being expanded.  

The first worry is about how soon the people will be compensated, those whose property has been destroyed, including houses and land, which has been taken away. 

The second one is the allegation that people who are being employed by the contractors, including tractor drivers, are being hired from Kenya. So, the local people who were expecting to get some money by working on this road are losing hope. That is why I am saying that it is urgent, particularly for the Government, which wants to get votes from this region.

THE SPEAKER: But is this about the votes? The votes will come in 2006. But honourable minister, can you answer?

3.32
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): I thank hon. Nabwiso for raising those issues but I do not think the survival of the Movement Government is going to depend on those two because the Movement Government has done a lot in Busoga.  

Now with respect to - (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague in charge of works and communications that when he alleges that the Movement Government has done a lot in Busoga, may I bring it to your attention the damage you did to the road from Bugiri to Busia whereby you deceived the people of Busoga that you were going to give them a road at a cost of Shs 26 billion, instead you are repeating it?

Furthermore, I put this question to you, three weeks ago to-date you have not come up with an answer, and you have cost this government and the people of Busoga an additional Shs 2 billion -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aggrey Awori, is the space between Bugiri and Busia part of Busoga –(Interjections)- is the border of Bugiri and Busia Busoga?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I know that the people of Bugiri and the people of Busia come from the same womb and they share the same area. Busia to Bugiri is almost the same road and we spend the same amount of money. When for us in Busia we see our neighbours in Busoga being deceived, we get concerned. That is why I am saying the honourable minister can deceive the people of Busoga, but not the people of Busia.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I know hon. Aggrey Awori has got a home in Bugiri not in Busia, and he lives along that road. But to say that we destroyed the road, I do not understand it because we reconstructed that road and it is there; and any Member of Parliament is free to go and see that the road is there. I remember before we reconstructed it there were quite bad sections just in front of his house, which are no longer there.

Turning back to the question, I want to assure hon. Nabwiso that everybody who has been affected on that road will be compensated and there are channels - some have already been compensated, others are about to be. I do not have all the details now because he raised the question without warning.  

I know hon. Awori raised two questions, one on that road and one on the airport, but you know the procedure for questions for oral answer. You circulated that question here, I am waiting for a communication from the Clerk to come and eventually for that question for oral answer to be on the Order Paper and then I will answer you. So, the procedure is there, hon. Awori.

Finally, on the issue of employment, again I do not have the details but when you hire a contractor, any people he employs here who are not Ugandans are supposed to get work permits. I am sure we will check and see those who have been employed here. But let me add that from experience, if I am a contractor and I cannot get experienced machine operators of my machines from the local population or from the country, I am entitled - I will give you an example.  

We recently bought new graders one of which was for Mayuge. We invited Mayuge District to send somebody who could come as a grader operator to practice on the grader so that they can take their grader. And the whole of Mayuge District, which is not very far from the Bugiri-Jinja road, did not have a grader operator. We had to get a pick-up driver to train on that grader.  

So, you might hear that the contractor is also lacking some experience. If that happens, and it has happened in the past, there are experienced people from neighbouring countries who are ready to be employed. We shall find out more details but definitely there is no way we expect Uganda Government or the Parliament to give work permits to surveyors or in any area where Ugandans have the experience. That will not happen.

THE SPEAKER: We have spent a lot of time on this general observation –(Interruption)

3.37
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. Honourable members, what I wanted to add to what the honourable minister has said is that really it is not very nice when we in East Africa are moving deliberately to forming one country to be concerned about whether a Kenyan or a Tanzanian is employed in Uganda or not. On the contrary, we should allow them to be employed and we encourage our brothers and sisters in Kenya and Tanzania to do the same. We have two brothers, one is a Vice-President in Kenya and another one is a Member of Parliament in Uganda. Thank you, Sir. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the fiscal year 2003/2004; and 

II) The Budgetary Proposals for the fiscal year 2004/2005 estimates of Revenue and Expenditure. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/2005

THE SPEAKER: We debated the motion. I put the question that we turn ourselves into a Committee of Supply. Let us vote on the motion by show of hands. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: I have got 95 in favour, no abstentions and none against the motion. So, the motion is carried. We now have a Committee of Supply. 

(The motion was adopted.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: I understand you have copies of the report from the Social Services Committee. Well, it appears that you do not have copies –(Interjection)

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Mr Chairman, I would like to draw the attention of my colleagues and Parliament to this provision of the Budget Act, Section 9:

“There shall be presented to Parliament by the Sessional Committees the reports on the budget estimates that fall within their respective jurisdiction by the 31st day of August in each financial year”. So, when I do my calculation we have these two days, this week and next week; and we have ten Sessional Committees. It is in that spirit, Mr chairman, that I did move last time when we were debating the general debate on the Budget that we keep it short so that we have more time to debate reports from Sessional Committees on policy statements, make specific recommendations and look at the recommendations which we made in the last financial year and to what extent they have been implemented. It was in that spirit, but it went as it went.

Given the time that we have, this provision and the ten Sessional Committees, I think it would be important that we agree on how we are going to move. We do not want to debate too much of one report at the expense of any other report - or even not listening to the report at all. I know, Mr Chairman, that Sessional Committees did a lot of work before the Budget was prepared.  

Actually when the Sessional Committees reported to the Budget Committee, we tried to condense their observations on policies and their recommendations in the report, which I presented at the beginning of this process. In light of that, I wanted us to agree on how we are going to move so that nobody is disappointed, neither the members who want to contribute nor the Chairpersons and the committee members who have done a lot of work during this process.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any view on this, honourable members?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, it seems to me that honourable members are not going to debate these reports because we are now going into committee to approve votes. We in the Budget Committee have a problem because the Minister of Finance has issued corrigenda to draft estimates. Any alteration or amendment of any vote at this stage has implications on the rest of the votes. As such, the issue of ceilings as were examined by the Budget Committee and also the various recommendations, which were made by the Budget Committee as provided I think in Section 7(iii) of the Budget Act, will now be totally out of place.  So, I have a problem.  We can do this as a ritual, pass the Budget, but at the end of the day - even the chairpersons of committees have been coming to us wondering what is going to happen in view of these changes in the votes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, where did the minister present this corrigenda? Is it here in the House? When you talk about presentation – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, every member I believe has corrigenda in his pigeonhole. If you have not got one, you will soon get one. Whether or not it will be tabled –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me. I think you used the term “presentation.” If it is presentation, it is not done in the pigeonholes as you have mentioned; it must be in the House. We cannot act on things that you find in your mailing boxes. I want to know whether there was an occasion when the Minister of Finance presented corrigenda to the House? I just wanted to know this particular detail.

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICE (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Mr Chairman, the issue of corrigenda is not new to us. Every time we come to the season of approval of ministerial policy statements and budgets, we always get some of these changes. It is upon the committees to reconcile those figures of the ministries, which are under their portfolio, the Ministry of Finance figures.  As far as I am concerned, when I received it I instructed the Clerk Assistant to the Social Services Committee to reconcile with the Budget Office. 

The reason why there are some delays in the circulation of the report was partly to ensure that the figures, which I am due to read soon, are reconciled between the sectors and the Ministry of Finance. The three departments under the Education Ministry have a desk officer and I suppose that even other ministries and other committees have the same.  

Mr Chairman, having said that, given the submission of my colleague, hon. Beatrice Kiraso, Chairperson of the Budget Committee, I am sure even last financial year we exactly faced this constraint and we had to devise a timetable in such a way that we had to sit –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, I intentionally asked that question for a purpose. For you to say it is not new - well if it is not new I am talking of that document, which he presented in your mailboxes. It is not corrigenda as far as Parliament is concerned. If a presentation of corrigenda is to be done, it has to be done in the House so that it becomes an official document, which we can use for our Parliamentary purposes. If that was done, I am just sounding a warning to whoever presented it that as far as Parliament is concerned, it has not recognised that particular document. That is a fact.

MRS HYUHA: Yes, Mr Chairman, I acknowledge your ruling but I wanted to contribute to what the Chairperson Budget Committee raised of how we are going to manage time. Even last year we experienced the same and we had to sit from Monday to Friday and each committee was allotted time so that you had to work within your time, which was allotted to you. Then each sessional committee at least had some time. 

Given that we have started today, we would agree from now that the report of Social Services be completed today so that we know that after presentation members are going to debate, ministers will respond and then we pronounce ourselves and then tomorrow we move to other committees. I am sure within the time that is left we can manage, if we sat morning and afternoon from Monday to Friday as we did last financial year; we shall be within the time limit. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

3.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): I wanted to report here, Mr Chairman, with disappointment as Chairman of the sessional committee on Agriculture. It looks as if the Ministry of Finance does not communicate very well the decisions that we take here to the sector ministries. Why have I said so? During the MTEF discussion, we took a decision and some changes were agreed upon, and we thought that the Ministry of Finance had shared this with sector ministries and ministers. With that understanding and commitment in writing from a whole minister in the presence of ministers of state appearing before the Budget Committee that changes had been affected; as we talk there is still some communication blackout between the accounting officers and some committees.  

Mr Chairman, we need to take this matter, which has been raised by the Vice-Chairman of the Budget Committee very seriously. We do not want to be bogged down, but the Ministry of Finance does not want to tell us the truth. It is true this information, the corrigenda, was given to some of us. We picked it from our pigeonholes this morning when our reports were getting ready for presentation and it has affected nearly all sectors. Now we do not know what we can do with these figures. In one instance a budget has been transferred from a different ministry to my sector to the tune of Shs 2.5 billion! That is a very serious thing.  

Number two, a ceiling has been affected and the budget has changed from Shs 1.9 billion to Shs 2.5 billion. Really this kind of situation is what is causing us this unrest. So, I think while we present our reports, the debate can prevail but I believe that we can stand over some figures where there are disputes so that we can be able to iron this out with the Ministry of Finance officials and the Budget Committee. Otherwise, the reports, most of them are ready. It is only this confusion of figures that is worrying us. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Under the circumstances what I can say is that we should regularize what has been done by way of corrigenda, which has been mentioned so that the corrigenda is normally tabled. We will accept it and then if it is affecting the work of the committees and their recommendations, then they take it formally, consider it and they adjust their reports. Otherwise, we cannot proceed if things are going to be done informally but they are affecting our minds.  

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman and honourable members, in view of these inconsistencies, I have no alternative but to apologise. It seems we have to harmonize our positions because given the fact that the corrigenda was never laid on the Table, which I know was because the plenary was not sitting, I think we need time to really harmonize this so that we proceed formally. I would, therefore, beg that we postpone debate to tomorrow when we regularize these matters because proceeding without formally rectifying the situation -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, what I suggest is that we should use this opportunity to regularize it and then maybe tomorrow we give it to the committees to take it into account when they adjust their reports. This means we shall not deal with this matter until next week. This will be fair to the members.

4.04
PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I noticed the procedural point. May I ask the minister - I see the minister is not paying attention. What I am going to say will not be registered. You can notice that -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we cannot proceed to receive reports, which have to be re-adjusted because of this one. So, I suggest that a motion is moved so that the House resumes and the minister presents them.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I had an observation that I thought the minister took note of that he did not lay on the Table the corrigenda, which he has just circulated through the pigeonhole. Would he now do it right so that it is regularised?

THE CHAIRMAN: He has explained that when they changed, the House was not sitting, that is why it was not regularised. But let him do it now and we proceed. Let the House resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has postponed debate on the motion. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The results are: four (4) for abstention and 97 are for the report. The report is adopted. There is a new report, but that is what happened. The report was that there was no business done. 

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to regularise?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, I have been personally away for some time. I want to do some consultation and harmonize with the relevant committees. I beg that I be allowed to regularize whatever is irregular.

THE SPEAKER:  No, you see tomorrow I will deal with the Budget. What we wanted is – maybe it is true that you do not have a copy. Can somebody who has a copy give it to him? 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: For that matter, Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do adjourn for 20 minutes so that I get a copy.

THE SPEAKER: You do not have a copy?

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance from you. The minister has told us that he does not have the document with him and the fact that the Committee on Social Services is ready with its report and that the budget for that sector is at the end, it is actually on the last sheet; is it possible to have the report presented by the Social Services Committee and we start debating meanwhile -(Interjections)- honourable members, give me a chance. Meanwhile, we should stand over pronouncing ourselves on the figure until it is reconciled.  This is in the interest of time.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is a good suggestion but I am saying if there is that corrigenda somewhere - somebody has it, you can give it to the minister. After we have regularized it, you can legally use it in making your conclusions because you have the copies. I understand you have the copies, but that cannot work.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance surely must have his staff who can provide that corrigenda for him and the job is done. What is so difficult? I cannot understand.

THE SPEAKER: Any Good Samaritan?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, once again I have to apologise. I came from a Cabinet meeting directly to the House. It took me by surprise and I am so bewildered to see that none of my staff is here. I do not have the documents –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us suspend proceedings for 20 minutes. 

(The proceedings were suspended at 4.11 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 4.40 p.m_)

THE SPEAKER: We had to adjust our Order Paper to include the item, “Laying of papers on the Table”, so that the minister can do what he wants. So, it is accordingly adjusted.  

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, after we had presented the draft estimates for the financial year 2004/2005, we discovered that there were inadvertent errors and/or omissions, which we feel we should rectify. Therefore, I beg to move that I lay on the Table corrigenda No. 1 to the draft estimates of financial year 2004/2005. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the corrigenda have been formally received. I understand you have copies –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the copies were given only to chairpersons of sessional committees. So, it is not true that everybody has it.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay, if the chairperson - you are going to consider this in the committee meetings. What we want really is to beat the deadline; time is against us. Now that the chairpersons have got copies maybe tomorrow morning you can sit and then make the necessary adjustments. Is that not possible, honourable members? Will it be possible, hon. Chairperson of Social Services, to adjust and then present the report tomorrow afternoon?  

4.46
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Meanwhile, Minister of Finance, this evening you can make enough copies for members.  

MR MWANDHA: I have looked at the corrigenda. In it the minister says there were certain things, which had been omitted. But the corrigenda in my observation shifts figures from votes to others and some of the shifts are in billions of shillings. Our recommendations to the President under the Budget Act are thrown in the dustbin; they do not count anymore if we were to go by their corrigenda. 

I would like to suggest that we hold a Budget Committee meeting and the minister brings his corrigenda. We shall look at our submission to Government and the minister can then explain to the Budget Committee the need for each of these corrigenda and how they put it into the entire formulae and the entire ceilings given to ministries so that then we can move together when we come back to the House.  

4.49
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I stand up to support the idea that has been moved by hon. James Mwandha. It is too soon for a serious ministry to have come up with corrigenda at this time. The Budget preparation process has now been made more participatory, therefore, for the last one year the Ministry of Finance, Parliament and other ministries have been considering issues of pertinent nature for which they requested money. I think those issues should have been ironed out.  

I smell a rat, Mr Speaker. If corrigenda are brought at this time and the issues that they are saying were omitted, if really they were serious issues, issues that should have been brought to the participatory budget preparation process, how come they could not have been identified at that time? If you know as a government that you have, for example, pledged 40 tractors for the internally displaced persons in the North, and this is an area that you have committed, could you within the last one year when we were looking at this Budget preparation process have forgotten that?

THE SPEAKER: No, the issue is, do we do what hon. James Mwandha has said? There is a meeting and these are things we are going to discuss when you meet the minister. Is it supported?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I said in my opening remark, I support the idea that the Ministry of Finance with its technical staff come and make us understand the reasons why they have come with corrigenda at such short notice when we are still on Vote-on-Account. What has happened so shortly? I think it is only fair that they come and explain it to us. Thank you.

4.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Mr Speaker, you had asked me a question whether if we conducted a meeting in the morning, of the Budget Committee, the Committee on Social Services would be ready in the afternoon to present a report. When I look at this corrigenda there are only two significant changes. One of them is that Makerere University has lost 25 percent, about Shs 2 billion. It is not surprising that just an hour before I came here the development budget of Makerere University has been reduced by Shs 5 billion to Shs 16 billion. 

We had to summon a meeting. The second big figure, which I see affected, is Vote 013 - Ministry of Education headquarters. About US $3.6 million was transferred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development under Programme 0200 – HIV. But that is a discussion, which has been ongoing. I noted that figure. I feel that probably if the meeting with technical officers is called in the morning and we harmonize, then I will be ready to present the report of the Social Services Committee in the afternoon. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without addressing the substantive issue on the floor, I am just raising a matter of concern on the procedure. This afternoon we heard the hon. Minister of Finance denying or stating that he was unaware of this document. Apparently those of us who received the document know that it came directly from the technocrats and as a matter of procedure this House does not deal directly with technocrats. Any document coming from any ministry can only be tabled or accessed through the Minister. 

So, through you, Mr Speaker, I am calling upon the ministers to make sure that the House decorum is attended to. And also as a matter of procedure, in the civil service permanent secretaries and other technocrats should not directly deal with Parliament except through their ministers. We are policy makers not administrators; they are policy makers not managers.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is an observation made. Do we need to have a debate? No. In that case, honourable minister, what do you have to say on what the Vice Chairperson of the Budget Committee –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I conceive it that there are substantial variations in the corrigenda, which have to be explained, and I am confident that given the whole morning tomorrow we shall be able to explain these seemingly contradictory shifts in the Budget so that we shall be in position to debate in the afternoon. So, I entirely agree with the proposal by the chairperson of the committee. 

THE CHAIRMAN: In that case, therefore, Members of the Budget Committee should meet the Minister at 10.00 a.m. so that you can –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, given the urgency - especially for Social Services, which is supposed to present tomorrow afternoon, I would take this opportunity to invite the technical people of my three ministries of Education, Health and Gender, so that we can harmonize if we are to be on board in the afternoon. But it appears that we need all the technical officers of all the sectors so that we harmonize the figures, given this nature of corrigenda. I beg to suggest.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is okay. Therefore, we adjourn to tomorrow afternoon to receive the Social Services Committee’s report. With this we come to the end of –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier on when we started this afternoon’s sitting we grappled with an issue whereby we did not have the advantage of accessing legal opinion. I receive with pleasure the person who was appointed Attorney-General in the House. I wonder whether he can throw more light on the matter. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think that pleasure is noted.

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure on the issue raised by hon. Awori. I think the Government side said that they would present a statement next week on Tuesday. So, I do not think it is procedurally correct to open up the matter until Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: No, nobody is opening it up again. I have just noted it; it was noted. (Laughter). With that we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.59 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 August 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

