Wednesday, 18 August 2010

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I also vividly remember those who are here. I am impressed with your diligence and I am telling the people in the countryside that you are very diligent people who attend to our work. Thank you very much.

Let us proceed as we did yesterday. I will be giving 10 minutes to anyone who wants to make a contribution on the motion on the Floor and then later, I will make other announcements as we proceed.

3.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, there have been some allegations made by one of our colleagues. I had expected Government to come up with a statement in regard to issues raised by hon. Kiyonga on the human rights abuses by the armed forces —

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I met hon. Kiyonga, I think yesterday. I was also with hon. Cecilia Ogwal. We discussed this matter and agreed on the best way to handle it. Hon. Kiyonga is aware of what he is supposed to do. We thought that was the best way we are going to handle that issue. I am aware of it.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, I thought the Minister of Defence would come and make a statement to this House because -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is there; hon. Kiyonga was in my office and we agreed on the best way.  I will be handling it.
Debate is open. Sorry, we have to adjust the Order Paper. There are certain documents which the Minister of Finance wants to lay on the Table.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you Mr Speaker and colleagues. Arising from the adjustment regarding districts, municipalities and town councils, there has arisen a need to submit to Parliament corrigenda No.1 to the budget estimates and with your permission, I would like to lay it on Table and sufficient copies have been given to Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, there is also a second corrigenda which is coming out due to the adjustment in the handling of NAADS, which we had originally expected to go under project support, and now which will go under budget support, and this requires us to submit to you. Mr Speaker, corrigendum No.2, which I would like to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, accepted. But now, which committees are relevant to what you have submitted here? Could you know? Which sessional committees are relevant apart from the Committee on Budget?

MR OMACH: The Committee on Finance.

THE SPEAKER: It is the Committee on Finance 

MR OMACH: Yes, sir.

THE SPEAKER: So, let the Committee on Finance study the detail and then make necessary corrections.

MRS NVUMETTA KAVUMA: Mr Speaker, the minister read a Bill for the first time in the House. Did the statement come? (Interruption) Okay.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2010/2011


 THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Epetait; 10 minutes please.

3.14
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, the general observation is that the budget for this financial year was full of wonderful wishes. In my opinion, I looked at this budget as something done the usual way. We are very good at putting ideas on paper, but fall short in implementation because the budget is so pregnant with many issues that actually leave everybody worried as to whether we shall be able to meet the targets. But let me go to the specifics.

Let me start with the issue of the fisheries department. The minister in the Budget Speech on page 5, did report that there was a reduction in fish and flower exports by 6 percent in April 2010, and that the figures had rebounded as of now. We were not informed how the fish exports have actually rebounded. What we see on the ground is to the contrary that there were generally reduced yields of fish in all the large water bodies in Uganda. Actually, the per capita consumption of fish in Uganda has come down. While we are talking about fish exports, we should also be mindful about what the Ugandans are consuming.

In large water bodies like Lake Kyoga, the size and number of fish being caught has greatly dwindled to the extent that many households are actually not finding alternatives of bridging protein gaps. 

I also took note of the issue of the roads sector. On page 26, the minister listed a number of roads whose design for upgrading to tarmac is being completed. They are going to complete the design to tarmac a number of roads including Soroti to Moroto via Katakwi, and Muyembe to Kotido via Nakapiripirit. The plan is to complete the design and upgrade them to tarmac, but on the ground, people are being told a different story that, “We are going to tarmac them this financial year”, and yet the actual status is that it is just designs being completed. I think we need to be fair to our electorate and tell them the vivid truth, rather than raise people’s hopes and then at the end of the day, as usual, no implementation is done.

The people of Karamoja have for long yearned for tarmac. From Soroti to Katakwi, the people there have for long yearned for tarmac. What they are being told is a different story from what is actually being planned in the budget, and I think that is not very fair. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the government’s realisation that the 69 people who perished in the train wagon in Mukura in 1989 ought to be given some ex gratia. I appreciate the Shs 200 million that Government has finally accepted to pay as ex gratia to the families of the 69 people who perished in a train wagon in Mukura. But my question has always been, how did we arrive at that figure? What exactly is going to happen? In fact the plight of those households who lost their dear ones is very grave. I would like to appeal to Government to reconsider giving extra support, especially in terms of education to those children whose parents perished. A number of them even fell out of school.

Mr Speaker, I am even short of saying that Government ought to apologise. Imagine from 1989, this is now 21 years down the road and that is when they come up with that effort. I think Government ought to apologise while this token is still being given. 
I would like to touch on the Ministry of Health. I know we will raise substantive issues during the debate, but on page 43 of the Budget Speech, the minister did talk about constitutional self-accounting bodies and these included the Uganda Aids Commission. My understanding about self-accounting bodies is that they would ordinarily have their separate vote, which they can manage and account for. But the case of Uganda Aids Commission still remains very weird and confusing to us because as we speak, the Uganda Aids Commission continues to draw its money through the Ministry of Health vote and yet Ministry of Health does not supervise Uganda Aids Commission; it falls under the docket of the Office of the President. It should have its own vote. Short of that let the Uganda Aids Commission get its appropriation through the President’s Office and get out of Ministry of Health, because our argument has always been that Uganda Aids Commission is choking the MTEF ceiling of Ministry of Health for nothing. It is just being used as a conduit. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to inform honourable members, since the Budget Speech on page 17 also talked about indoor residual spraying being rolled out to seven endemic districts, for want of time I will not mention the districts. While we are happy with the indoor residual spraying, the question that remains unanswered is that what has been the impact? Has malaria prevalence levels in those districts where they have undertaken indoor residual spraying come down? Have the figures improved? 

We are still very concerned even with the issue –(Interjection) - we will talk about it. My problem is that the time is very short. (Interjection) Mr Speaker, there is a popular demand that we get more information and you help to compensate. 

THE SPEAKER: They will give you two more minutes.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much my honourable colleague. The information I wanted to give, and to put the record clear as to why the Ministry of Health decided to go for indoor residual spraying - and I would like to affirm that after appropriating money, we have asked Government to provide Shs 7 billion because as of now, results show that the prevalence of malaria has come down in the seven districts where indoor residual spraying was done, for example, in Apac it came down; in Kanungu it came down from 18 to 5 percent; and we think that as we go for preventive measures and we case manage malaria and also apply mosquito treated nets, we think that the prevalence of malaria will come down. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the impact assessment of this programme requires a thorough study because the complaints that we get on the ground are contrary to the figures that we get from the Ministry of Health; that even after the concerted efforts to have indoor residual spraying done, people tend to have an upsurge of mosquito infestation. So, I think we need to have a thorough study to compare what is actually on the ground and the figures that are being used to justify certain exercises. He has touched on insecticide treated mosquito nets –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you hon. Dr Epetait for giving way. The information I would like to give is that last year, during the same debate, this matter was raised. Indoor spraying was done in my area, but at night, people cannot sit outside. The mosquitoes are so many outside that you cannot sit in the open air. And now that people have gone back home, they would like to sit around the fire before going to bed. This thing is being done as if mosquitoes can only bite people when inside houses. What are we going to do about the mosquitoes outside which have become very many?
 
MR ODIT: When the Ministry of Health introduced the idea of indoor residual spraying, the complaint was that in Western Uganda there was now an upsurge of malaria as a result of mosquito bites. So, the idea was that the pilot scheme should have been started in Western Uganda. Now, when they introduced DDT, they started piloting in Apac and Oyam. The same DDT has not yet moved anywhere beyond those two districts, but we have learnt that elsewhere in the country they are using ICON. So, it would be appropriate for the ministry, through the minister, to explain the comparative results or effects of using these two parallel chemicals or insecticides so that we can be able to see how the drugs are actually saving the lives of the people in the country. Otherwise, DDT was totally rejected in this House as a result of our complaints.   

DR EPETAIT: I am really constrained with time so I will beg my colleagues to bear with me. First of all, I thank my colleague for the information given. But hon. Minister, we should be realistic and accept that we need to undertake a thorough study on the impact of these efforts. 

You talked about insecticide treated mosquito nets. So far we have received a lot of money from the Global Fund towards purchase of insecticide treated mosquito nets. But we also demanded from the Minister of Health that they should come up with actual lists of what we have done so far and how many mosquito nets have gone to each district. We have never got that kind of update and now there is a complaint that some districts are being given more than others. We demanded for it and we are yet to get your response.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of education and support to private universities, in the Budget Speech on page 16, the minister did say that Shs 7.7 billion was released in support of private universities. But out of a total of eight private universities supported with Shs 7.7 billion, I would like to inform Members that Shs 4 billion went to one private university called Kampala International University ostensibly to buy medical equipment for their teaching hospital in Bushenyi. 

Surprisingly, no procurement has been done. The money was appropriated and we are now in another financial year, but we have not seen any equipment bought or any evidence of at least some progress on procurement that is being undertaken by KIU and yet we released money.

We must be very cautious whenever we are releasing money to any department or private entity. We must demand for accountability and on this note, we should try to put the KIU on notice. We want –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Colleague. I think the information you are giving that Parliament appropriated money - you have to know that this Parliament passed the Audit Act of 2008 that all monies, which are submitted to private and public-private partnership institutions must be audited. So, I don’t think it is correct to demand accountability when the Auditor General has not given it. The Auditor-General is free to go and audit and we get results from him.

MR EPETAIT: You have said it all. For us we are saying that since Parliament appropriated Shs 4 billion to the hospital, we went there to check what the Shs 4 billion had done and we saw no equipment and yet at that time, our argument was that we must exercise equity. Other universities were getting only a half of a billion shillings while this one got Shs 4 billion and there is no accountability.

On the issue of education still, I would like to urge Government to expedite the process of putting in place regulations and mechanisms for implementing a student sponsorship scheme for higher education because many parents to date cannot afford university education –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Join me in welcoming our pupils and teachers of St Margaret Girls’ Boarding Primary School, Aduku, Apac District. You are welcome.

3.32
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would very briefly like to touch on a phenomenon, which is actually with us, but we have failed to acknowledge that it is a dangerous cancer. This is the rift between the haves and have nots. The widening gap between these two communities of our country, a land which is well endowed with resources adequate for all, is being split into a small group of haves and a bigger group of have nots.

History is replete with lessons of how revolutions start, be it the French Revolution, the Russian revolution or the liberation theology, which is being preached in Latin America.

The root causes of all this is that the majority very poor want, by every means, to upset the status quo so that they can also see light. I am rather concerned because we have economic instruments available to Government to try to straighten these sharp divisions.

Of course if you are a Bill Gates of sorts, nobody will have cause to complain, but what is happening is that some people sleep the whole day and do no work at all and they are top on the list of having amassed a lot of wealth. I am saying this with a heavy heart because a sane government in future will ask individuals questions as to how they acquired what all Ugandans are able to see.

Mr Speaker, if you plotted the concentration of wealth on a Lorenz curve, you will be shocked to learn that about five percent of the population of this country account for up to 40 percent of the wealth of this nation and this is not a good way to proceed.

Very colourful growth figures are being sung to us by the day but you will ask, for whom is such growth if it is not trickling down? What are the measures that should be taken to make sure that a few individuals do not control production and the process of distribution? I wish Government could educate Ugandans as to how we will be faring as a nation in the foreseeable future if this trend is not stemmed.

Mr Speaker, the cornerstone of the Movement campaigns during the last elections was Prosperity-For-All. I cannot speak for Bukoto County in Masaka District, but in Madi-Okolo of Arua, my people are still very poor. There was great assurance that every household will be earning income of about Shs 20 million per annum per household. I am yet to see this; it was a good phrase to get votes. Four years down the road there is nothing to show. I am afraid that we are not on the right path as far as our economy is concerned because the rich are getting richer and the poor are having a raw deal. We were told of a better economy and I am not seeing it in my village. 

THE SPEAKER: I introduced the children but I understand that there were many more still outside. I would like to repeat the introduction of the students from St Margaret Girls Boarding Primary School Aduku in Apac District; they are with their teachers. You are welcome.

3.39
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): I wish to make my remarks on the ministerial statement. I am particularly concerned with the issues that were raised by the shadow minister, which were not taken seriously. He used the annual report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June 2008.
It is true that as a country we benefited from huge debt write offs that saw our external debt drop to  US$ 1.1 billion, but what surprises us is that this figure has trebled over the last four years and it is now US$ 4.1 billion. As somebody who is closely following the trends of this country’s economy, I want to say that this is not a good indicator of sound economic management.

The Auditor General’s report also cites what the shadow minister raised, which I think we should take seriously. As at 30 June 2009, the consolidated account had been overdrawn to a deficit of Ugshs 3.7 trillion while our reserves stood at a negative Ugshs 6.7 billion. This is not a sign of a well performing economy. It is an indication of recklessness in spending. If we were serious, this negative reserve of Ugshs 6.7 billion should be enough for the minister to resign, but it does not seem to be moving us at all.

What this means is that we are actually insolvent because the Treasury has been run down from a positive surplus of Ugshs 5.14 billion that was inherited in June 2006. This House continues to approve supplementary budgets without clear sources of finance. I am urging the Minister of Finance to take the shadow minister’s observations seriously.

The minister continues to use the estimates of 2005/06 which places 31 percent of the population to be living below the poverty line, instead of using the most current estimates which put 35 percent of our citizens under the poverty line. The Minister of Finance was trying to sugar-coat the situation, which does not portray the correct position to the country.

The minister should have used the latest estimates. What would have been the purpose of using outdated estimates? I think the minister has been caught trying to tell a lie and not giving a correct position of what Ugandans are going through.

As far as we are concerned, the population that is becoming poorer is growing day by day. Unless we present it correctly, we shall not be able to address this situation.

The state house budget is about twice the budget that is allocated to the 13 referral hospitals of this country. I do not think that a serious government would chose to place more funds into state house and then ignore the health concerns of the population. 

The agricultural sector is grossly underperforming; the growth in this sector output has actually declined from about 7.9 percent in 2000 to about 2.2 percent in 2008, and yet this sector remains a closed sector of our economy in terms of its potential to contribute to our GDP and employment.

The government has not taken this sector seriously and it has failed to raise the levels of spending in this sector even when we know that it is a signatory to the African Union’s Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) where we have committed ourselves and said that we would be able to achieve at least six percent of annual agricultural growth. 

So, what does this simply mean? It means that issues relating to food security and hunger are not going to be adequately addressed unless we seriously think as other African nations have already done, by proposing that six percent annual agricultural growth should be the minimal target that we should have if we have to enhance our food security.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much.

3.49
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti):  I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I think I will narrow myself to the agricultural sector and maybe health, but in the meantime, I wish to appreciate Government efforts in fighting corruption by putting in the Anti-Corruption Court and the IGG’s Office. But now, my biggest problem is how does the IGG’s Office investigate the Vice-President when he is still in office? My humble thinking is that maybe in a civilised society where people have a sense of shame, anybody who is implicated should first of all step down from office while investigations take place. Assuming there is a junior staff in that office who is supposed to give evidence on some issue, how is he going to stand on his two feet and say, “Yes, the Vice-President did A, B, C?” I think it is proper that people step down from offices if they are being investigated, otherwise we shall be wasting time. 

I have a problem with this issue of historicals because it seems they have over lived their value. If it is rewarding them, then I think we have over rewarded them. We have now gone to the extent of rewarding their children and we may go to the extent of rewarding their grandchildren. I think this issue should stop and we should think of recycling and putting in place other leaders other than having somebody – a minister since 1986, and today the same man is a minister. These people have become defiant and some of them do not even listen to the President. That is one major cause of failure to fight corruption and if we do not make a step towards this, we are wasting time.

On page 10 of the Budget Speech, we have been told about tractor hire services. I was imagining that there were tractor units based in districts or in sub-counties, but I have been reliably told that it is not the case. A service provider is hired by the sub-county and unfortunately, they even charge higher than the price of using a tractor in the common market. So, in a way, this is to exploit our voters, otherwise if it was during that time - I remember during Obote’s government, when I was still a small boy, there used to be tractor services at a subsidised rate and that is when a tractor service would have meaning. But today, you are telling us that there is a tractor hire service which is charging Shs 70,000 to Shs 80,000 per acre and yet in the common market it is Shs 50,000 to Shs 60,000. So, I do not think we are being fair to our voters. 

We appreciate that our farmers are really hardworking and produce a lot, but the marketing system is the biggest problem. Like somebody said yesterday that the price of maize has dropped to Shs 200 or even to less than Shs 200 a kilogramme, but in the neighbouring country, government has fixed the price and co-operatives buy this produce. 

In Kenya, you do no break a cob of maize to go and roast, but just have your maize dried and you take it to the society. I wish you could do the same so that we have a constant price for foodstuffs and the farmer would go to the garden and make his calculations knowing that at the end of the year, they are bound to collect these tonnes of maize and this amount of money. That way, you can be able to predict and plan, but unfortunately, prices are so haphazard; today it is Shs 600 a kilogramme and tomorrow it is Shs 150 and it discourages farmers so much. 

I think we should be able to revive these co-operative societies and I do not know why we kill them, but in some places it is working. In Mbarara, you can just go to a society and you are told the price of matooke. But in Soroti, I went to one village and found people with a vehicle buying oranges at Shs 3,000 per bag. If I had a stick, I would have beaten these people and sent them out of the village because that is exploiting our farmers.

So, I think these co-operative societies should be revived so that we help our farmers to get meaningful money out of their efforts and short of that, this “Bonna Baggawale” of ours will never be realised.

Still on the same page 10, we are told there is Shs 60 billion in the banks to be borrowed. I do not know if a rural farmer in Katakwi or even in some place in Ngora can be able to access this money. It is still the very well-to-do who are able to get this money. I have MPs chasing for this money in these banks, but the common man can never reach this place. So, we are not really out to help our farmers. We should get a way of getting money nearer to the people – some of these people cannot talk to bank managers. So, let us look for a way of helping these farmers of ours.

On the road sector, we quite appreciate the efforts of UNRA, but I think they have to educate their contractors because most of them are very defiant. Recently, when the Chinese were working on Soroti-Dokolo Road, one of my constituents got an accident and he was amputated, but nobody was ready to compensate him. They even slapped him! I had to pick up the matter and began chasing for him; it became my duty. Something that should have been done by somebody else became the duty of the MP to chase that boy’s money and finally, they accepted to pay him for five years and they gave him a deposit of Shs 3.5 million. But supposing I was not there? And in any case, is it the duty of an MP to chase such payment? So, contractors should be disciplined and they should be able to help our voters. 

And then on the other hand, some of them use village roads as by-passes and they refuse to work on them after doing their work like they refused to work on one of my roads and I think that I am mobilising my people to demonstrate so that they will know that they did a wrong thing.

On the health sector on page 17, we have been told the US$ 40 million was lobbied from Global Fund, but a short while ago – it is unfortunate that the minister has gone away. He told me Global Fund decided to supply faulty nets and they have been sent back and I am sure that when we got this information, everybody was smiling all the way knowing that we are going to get nets. No wonder up to now, like hon. Dr Epetait was saying, some districts have not got nets. I do not think we expect those nets. And in any case, for how long are we as Government going to depend on donations? What do we have in place as a government to fight malaria other than waiting for money from Global Fund? I think we should get a little bit more serious than we are. 

I have a story from a woman. As I was coming from the village one day, I found this woman moving with a child to hospital. I gave her a lift and she told me she was taking this kid to a government hospital. I assured her that she will not get treatment in time and the kid would have died. So, we took this small child to a clinic and I asked this woman where the father was. She said, “The father of this child has gone back to the village to sell a goat.” How many goats would one need to sell in a year to treat malaria? 

In our place, if you do not have a goat on your verandah – if you do not have a cow, you can never be called a rich person. If you do not save, you will never become rich. Now, if these citizens of ours are going to spend their goats and cows on treating malaria, when will they become rich? Yet they spend the same goats and cows on paying school fees! How will they get rich as expected if we keep on spending money on social services. I think we should be a little bit more serious and offer social services that are worthy to our people. 

By the way, malaria is so funny these days; you may treat it now, but after two weeks, you would be down with malaria again. Supposing you have five children, how many goats would you need to treat them in a year? Government should be serious and take charge of our people and stop giving them lip service. 

On page 20, I was surprised to see that even after 20 years there are certain parishes without primary schools. I notice that 180 parishes do not have primary schools. I thought we were to vote for services and I think Luwero is one of them. If you do not have a school, what is there to vote for? I think it is high time we woke up and knew what to do as decent Ugandans. 

Finally, we were told that a school opened in Kigumba for petroleum with 30 students admitted there already. I would have wished to know – I hope it is not like the flying schools where all the students are like twins coming from the same village – (Member timed out.)

4.00
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It is pleasing to note that our resource envelope has increased by 17.5 percent. Our resource envelope is at Shs 7.5 trillion which is 75 percent of our revenue collection and our government is able to mobilise Shs 5.5 trillion. I am glad our government is no longer depending so much on donor funding. We have reduced it from 50 percent now it is at 25 percent. That is very pleasant to note and I am now very glad that we are moving forward.

We need to thank Revenue Authority for the effort in mobilising resources. We are now collecting Shs 5.5 trillion. I think we need to thank the manager of those who are collecting our revenue and as a Member of Parliament, I would like to thank Uganda Revenue Authority for what they are doing. 

Mr Speaker, we are collecting a lot of money now, but where are we putting our money? I was hurt last week when I toured my constituency. I went to a number of health centres; right now, we are sending more money for prevention other than treatment. In my constituency, they supplied drugs worth Shs 2 million in the last two months. They supplied one tin of Chloroquine and 100 ampoules of Quinine. And yet most of those health centres are registering over 200 people daily suffering from malaria, especially children. 

Where are we investing our money? Are we targeting the interests of our people? I would like to appeal to Government that we adjust our budget and put more resources in buying drugs for our people. Seventy percent of our people are suffering from malaria – I went there and checked on their records. But the supply of drugs does not reflect the interest of the people because right now I am told they changed the procedure. They used to make requests for drugs from the districts, but right now they supply drugs from the centre, which is at Entebbe, and the supply does not reflect the needs of the people on the ground. Therefore, I appeal to the frontbench to get more serious on this matter; we have the money and we must spend it on our people.

Secondly, I want to talk on behalf of Amuka Boys and Arrow Boys. These are people that worked hard together with UPDF to attain permanent peace. They struggled and sacrificed and right now we have peace in the greater North. But it is disheartening that those who sacrificed and worked hard for our people have no place in our budget. They were promised to be supported with iron sheets, but in this budget, there is no provision for the Amuka and Arrow Boys. I want to appeal to my government; the government which I support, to put something for Amuka Boys and the Arrow Boys before we pass this budget. They worked hard and I know they deserve it.

Thirdly, we normally talk about Pay-As-You-Earn. In our country it is 30 percent. Imagine 30 percent of your income being taxed. We have talked for long. I did economics; once you remove 30 percent of somebody’s income, you will have reduced the disposable income of that person – the spending power has reduced and in that sense, even your revenue collection also reduces. Even productivity also reduces –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Member. I want to put the record right that not all income is taxed at 30 percent. The law is clear in section 15 of the Income Tax Act. It starts with 10 percent for those that earn about Shs 120,000; those who earn about 235,000, you are taxed at 20 percent; when you earn beyond Shs 400,000 then you are taxed at 30 percent. So, it is not true that everybody, even those whose income is less than Shs 300,000 are charged 30 percent.

MR OKOT: But generally, what I am talking about is 30 percent of Shs 400,000 – when you are paid Shs 1,000,000 Shs 300,000 would go to tax and you remain with Shs 700,000. 

There has been a debate in this Parliament to reduce on that tax. If we are talking about prosperity for everybody I think even the civil servants deserve it. Therefore, I want us to revise the way we tax our people. I propose that we abolish Pay-As-You-Earn. (Laughter) I can give you the economics of it. Once you abolish Pay-As-You-Earn, the 30 percent will be spent by that person and you would tax that person indirectly and because you tax them indirectly, they would spend more and we would generate more income to finance our activities; this is simple economics. Once you increase that tax, you are suffocating that person’s spending, that is why most of our civil servants are on what we call salary loan -[Mr Ocula: “Even Members of Parliament.”]- yes, even MPs, and in that way we are imprisoning our people.

Therefore, my next point is on salary loans; our banks are plying to give Members of Parliament and civil servants salary loans; but that is crippling our economy. The salary loan is about spending; banks must give loans on production. Banks’ portfolios are now on salary loans, but the portfolio of production is not there. Therefore, I want to appeal to Government to create credit reference bureaus for civil servants whereby Government gives civil servants loans. That loan should be projected; that loan should be soft to help our civil servants. That is my appeal; it can be done. That was done in America and I still feel that same thing can be done in Uganda. 

My next point is about support to universities. We have already started a university in Lango, which is a college from Gulu University, but I do not see any money that has been given for the development of that university. They have given little money yet that university is still new and Government should spend there. If we want to support human resource development in that region, Government must provide money, Government must support that university. It should not be next year; it should be this year.

I want to appeal to my government that this financial year - I hope the Minister is here with me; he is seeing – put that money there for that university. We shall be very grateful

My last point is about agriculture. We know that 70 percent of our people are employed in that sector yet that sector is receiving little support. I know we have increased our support to that sector, but not to the level I want. Therefore, I want to appeal to my government to focus on that. Once we focus on agriculture, we shall spur development in all sectors. Seventy percent of our people, once we support them, definitely, they will produce and create development in our country.

I want to thank Government for what it is doing. We are moving forward. We have reduced the dependency rate from 50 percent to 25 percent. The poor have also reduced, but in the North, it has not reduced. In the North, it is still 61 percent. Now that we have 61 percent of the people in the North living in abject poverty; I want to appeal to my government to focus on the North. 

I know the President has already made this statement. He has directed all the ministers to focus resources to the North. Minister of Finance, since you come from that area, make sure the budget for the North is increased; make sure we focus on those people. I thank you, very much.

4.11
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to contribute on the Budget Speech. When I sat in the conference centre listening to that speech; I was wondering whether that was a Budget Speech or a speech directed to 2011. 

When the economy of a country grows, the people feel happy. Everybody feels very happy when the economy has grown. When I heard the eight percent growth, I was so happy that I expected everybody in the countryside to be happy. When you look at the economic growth of any country, you look at a cross-section of the people and at the livelihoods of the people. Are they happy? Have their livelihoods improved? Has their income improved? 

When you go around this country, the 8 percent is not reflected among our people. You do not see it anywhere. I have heard of the “Bonna Bagaggawale”, but where I come from - and I think all Members in this House will agree with me that we still have a big problem. After the economy of the country has grown, you look at the social sector across the board; the health sector. 

If the economy of the country grows, you should address the plight of the people because these are the people who produce for the nation. They should be healthy. But when you go to our hospitals everywhere in the country, the health of our people is really bad. You go to the hospitals and there is no medicine at all. This Government talks very proudly about health centres built; health centre IV, health centre III, but these health centres are completely empty. There is no medicine at all.

What is the biggest problem? Don’t we have doctors? Mbarara University and Makerere University produce doctors every year. The parents are happy that, “our sons and daughters have graduated.” But these people are on the streets. I want to tell the Minister of Health who is seated in front of me here that even in Mulago Hospital, there are doctors who are working as volunteers. I thought in the budget, they should have focussed on the health sector so that people are healthy; but a doctor graduating from Mbarara and Makerere University is being paid Shs 700,000. Imagine a doctor earning Shs 700,000 and paying Shs 500,000 for a two-bedroomed house. This doctor has to look after a family; he has to dress up as a doctor. How much money is he left with? I keep wondering whether the Ministry of Finance can’t add one and one together when they are making a budget.

What has happened is that many of these people have left the country. People in the hospitals are suffering. That is why the doctors will never put in time to be in the wards. He will just spend less than an hour in a government hospital and go to a private hospital.

We are talking very proudly about education, which is good. This Parliament approved loans from the World Bank to go to the education sector. We proudly talk about UPE and now USE; but I want to tell Members that while UPE may have helped some other parts of this country, it has not helped Mbale where I come from. These children in class four and five cannot even spell the word “chair”. This question of moving them from one class to another class has not helped. These children cannot perform. Even after borrowing money to put up classrooms and buy desks, the children still sit on the floor. Some of these children are studying under trees. Have we addressed this issue of the leaders of tomorrow? 

I remember asking the Minister of Education in this House whether she was happy whenever she reads results, year-in and year-out. She told us she was very happy and I kept wondering whether she was sincere. If I were the Minister of Education, I would never have been happy because the results are never the same. The results of PLE in Kampala schools, in Greenhill Academy, in Kampala Parents, in Lohanna Academy, are not the same results as those for the children in Bukwa, Nakapiripirit, Sironko and Manafwa. They are never the same. These results are from the private schools. So, how can we talk proudly about UPE, ladies and gentlemen? 

We are not being sincere to our people and ourselves because the children who pass are the ones who go to schools here in the city. What about the schools up there? 

Let me talk about agriculture because Uganda is an agricultural country. However, this Government has not paid attention to agriculture at all. Where is the cotton in this country? And as I speak, Mr Speaker, I grow coffee and you come from a coffee-growing area. But the wilt has destroyed the coffee. Now, what are we looking at? Perhaps the oil! But that oil perhaps will run out at one time. 

When I was growing up, there was cotton everywhere. The Ministry of Agriculture used to spray coffee trees in Bugisu and other parts. Today, the coffee has dried out. Now, what are we looking at? And when you talk about infrastructure, look at the roads and how much money this Parliament has borrowed for the road sector. These roads – I am being very sincere because I see these things on the ground and you all know it. Look at these roads – the road to Masaka, Mr Speaker – how long does it last? The road to the east – these roads cannot last five years and we are spending a lot of money on the roads. Poor jobs! And why are they doing poor jobs? You know the reasons, you know the answers. 

But how can the economy of a country improve when the roads are in such a state? And we keep borrowing money? And we pay? And we are passing over these debts to the children and the people of this country. What has this country done?

As for the rule of law and order; the other time, people were arguing that we saw people coming out -	 Kiboko Squad – where are they coming from? We proved recently in Mbale that Kiboko Squad were the Policemen in uniform, beating people. And then we have got Uganda Human Rights Commission looking on. The other time we asked them and they said, “Well, the donors are doing the work for us; they are making reports.”

But surely, why should we subject our people – the people who give us votes to beating like animals. Even animals cannot be beaten like that. And this Government is looking on! Has the government failed to control these people? Why should Ugandans be subjected to such beatings when everybody is looking on? It is such a shame to this nation.

About the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness; today there is a lot of food in the countryside; there is a lot of maize, beans. But when we were growing up, our great grandparents had granaries. And I remember I asked the Swedes to come and build silos. There are silos in Masaka, Jinja, but as I speak, these silos are empty and yet there is plenty of food. This Government does not plan ahead.

4.12
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start my contribution by making an observation. Some time ago, when the budget was being read, there would be a lot of excitement in the country. But today, this excitement has died. I want to think loudly and wonder why people are no longer interested in the reading of the budget in this country. There has been some argument that indeed, today we do not regulate the prices of crops and other commodities that is why the interest has died. 

But I would like to differ, Mr Speaker. People have started regarding the Budget as mere promises which shall never be fulfilled by the government. For example, take the Kyetume-Katosi Road in Mukono. You will find that in each budget, it is indicated that it will be constructed. However, even in the next budget, you will find the same road. And today, you find phrases like, “This road has been considered to be given money for the completion of the design...” I wonder what that means. It is like giving without giving anything.

To go to the specifics, on page 45, the minister talked about our external debt, but nowhere in her speech does she mention something to do with the internal debts Government owes to people. Buganda government has been crying out about the money the government owes the kingdom. And when you look at the budget of the Mengo government, it is indicated that the Government of Uganda owes it a sum of Shs 21 billion in rent. You can kill a bull in very many ways. Some governments came here and abolished kingdoms; others are not paying their dues to the same kingdoms. And in one way or another, they are killing the kingdom.

I want to talk about NAADS in urban areas. When you look at our law books, you will find that farming is not allowed in urban areas. We have not changed the law. These laws were made in the 1960s. For example, you cannot do anything like farming in town without the permission of the Town Clerk, but we still allocate NAADS money to those areas. What do you expect the farmers in urban areas to do?

Whereas we have something called “urban farming”, we need to give those farmers enabling laws. Either we abolish the 1969 Urban Authority Rules and allow farming in towns or we think about a different fund for people living in towns. At times, it is not proper to think that maybe people in Kampala City will be rearing pigs, goats or doing other forms of farming in town. So, I wonder what we really use NAADS money for in urban areas, especially the capital city.

Concerning education, it is good to have universities and many of them. But I fear that the universities being established in this period are moving towards becoming tribal universities. People are expected to meet at university and be able to develop as Ugandans. Some people who lead us here studied in Dar-es-Salam while others studied in Kenyatta University. In Makerere University those days, Kibaki was here. I am getting concerned about this idea of each and every region getting its own university. I do not know how we shall regulate it to make sure that the students in Uganda have a chance to meet at school. That somebody can move from Buganda and study with somebody from Kigezi, Karamoja in the same university to be able to build a strong Uganda. 

I have seen the minister’s speech, where she talks about classrooms. For example, 1,800 classrooms built here, 23 teachers there and I want to ask: When does the government intend to build schools because we are talking about classrooms? 

That is to say, you build one classroom here, say, at Mukono Bishop School or a toilet, and go to another school and construct one classroom. We must build new Government schools instead of classrooms. We should open up new Government schools in areas where they do not exist. But we are concentrating on classrooms and when we talk about development in this area, we emphasise the building of classrooms more than the building of schools. 

About the Kigumba Petroleum Institute, what are the qualifications for one to join this institute? How does one apply? Sometime back, there was some information that Ugandans were being taken out of the country to study in that area and we did not know how they were being selected. Equally, with Kigumba Petroleum Institute, who are these lucky 30 students that are there? Where do they come from? How does a student from Mukono, for example, join this institute? 

Lastly on education, I would like to know what this Parliament thinks about the children who miss out on the UNEB examinations for various reasons, especially those whose examination fees are stolen by headmasters who later disappear. It seems we, as a country, are not thinking and have not moved out to help these children. They pay fees but one thieving headmaster escapes with the money and you leave a child to miss a full year or a very crucial examination in life, and at the end of the day, you find that most of them drop out of school at this level after missing an examination. I think UNEB should come out and get something like a supplementary examination to assist these children who might have faced different reasons and missed out on the UNEB examinations.

About the environment, in Mukono North, we are concerned about excessive cutting down of trees by people who claim that they are going to plant trees. In Kyampisi sub-county, people, through the National Forestry Authority, allocated themselves big chunks of forest land with a promise that they would be planting trees in these areas. A hectare of land went for Shs 2,400 in Mukono for a lease of five years from the National Forestry Authority. What these people have done is that after those five years, they renew their leases and eventually this land is converted to other use. People have built houses on this land. One of those people is the former Vice-President of Uganda. She was allocated a very big chunk of land in the forest but she has not planted any trees. Together with several others, they have cut down all the trees in the area and right now water is a problem in Kyampisi sub-county in Goma. 

We suggest that Government repossesses this land. These people should be sent out of those forests so that the land is given to other people who are interested in planting trees in these areas, especially those living in those localities. They would plant trees while at the same time use the same land for planting their food and even help us with pruning the trees. (Member timed out.)

4.33
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech that was delivered to this Parliament. I begin my submission by looking at the energy infrastructure. When I joined Parliament in 2006, I deliberately chose the Committee on Natural Resources so that I could get the power line from Katine to Kaberamaido restored. I remember the Budget Speech of 2006. I was seated next to the late Dr Okullo Epak and when it came to the issue of allocations, the mention of Kaberamaido power line was made and the late Dr Okullo Epak said, “But this has been in the budget for the last three years.” 

It is very sad to note that Kaberamaido has not got power up to today. There were loans that were passed by this Parliament in the Seventh Parliament and about two months ago, the President went to commission the Kona-Kilak-Patong-Adiang-Abim-Kilu and generally the Pader power line, which loan was passed at the same time with that of Kaberamaido and I am so sad to note on page 14 that the minister mentioned restoration of Soroti-Kalak-Ilwala power line. How do you restore power to an area and leave the district headquarters that need services, possibly more than any other sub-county in the district?

I get very perturbed when I look at Government priorities and that is why most of the colleagues commented that this Budget was an election pledge or a vote-catching speech and not a speech that was meant to deliver services to Ugandans. Where do we get the services now? You have to wait for 10 years; it was budgeted for, loans were passed on the same infrastructure and the locals have to wait for 10 years. It is very sad and so shaming, and I think we really need to move, not in circles and backwards, but forward. Do I need to be on the Committee on Natural Resources advocating for power lines to Kaberamaido for over five years? I think Government owes the people of Kaberamaido an apology. And it is not that Government is taking power to Kaberamaido for the first time; this House should be made to know that by the late 60s, Kaberamaido had power and it was because of this Government that we lost the power we had. So, I think you owe the people of Kaberamaido either an apology or you expedite the process of seeing to it that Kaberamaido Town and above all the district headquarters have power, just like any other part of the country. 

I will go over to agriculture. When we look at the agricultural sector these days, Government talks about value addition as if it is the lack of value addition that has killed Ugandan agriculture in this country. Government earlier on – I keep on referring to the good old days because that is the little I know of as far as my region is concerned - there were irrigation infrastructures in Lango and some other parts of the country, but Government has not taken up the issue to have these infrastructures functioning. We had famine in Teso sometime back last year; people would do without meals for days and we had to walk out of this House in protest in order to have the issues of our region addressed. We have Lake Kyoga, Lake Bisina and many other water points, but areas around the lakes are as dry as the Sahara and they cannot have any productive yields just because there is plenty of water in the lakes but Government has deliberately refused to have irrigation facilities so that this water is made to reach the gardens. When is Government thinking of functional irrigation services in this country?

When we talk about agriculture, we should be looking at coordination and linkages between the researches that are done by the institutes and what is on the ground. You talk of research and research centres, but how do the two link and coordinate? We are losing a lot of soil to soil erosion by wind, rain and all these other agents. If you ask the Ministry of Agriculture, “Can you quantify the amount of soil, moreover good soils that are lost every year?” they cannot quantify them. Unless we move towards having linkages between what is researched and what is given back to Ugandans at the end to have productive yields out of what they put in, we will not be talking anything progressive.

And Government has made NAADS mean agriculture. When Government is talking about agriculture, it has to be NAADS and value addition; full stop. We have had issues of fisheries. In fact, the Fisheries department is the most neglected department in the agricultural sector. 

Take the point of Lake Kyoga, the one I know best. Last week, I was in my constituency and all those other months, Mr Speaker, the people are being beaten in the lake. If we were to count how many people die due to accidents caused because of harassment on the lakes, you would be surprised to get the statistics. They are beaten and the nets confiscated and the names that are the common dominators are either the Marines or Kakooza Mutale’s men. This is what the fishermen will tell you. They are being harassed and their nets confiscated. From Kaberamaido side they are confiscated and sold in Kagwara in Serere district. Others are confiscated and sold in Bukungu, now in this new district of Budiope. Is this what it means by being constructive and thinking about the farmers? 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, my colleague and neighbour on Lake Kyoga. Maybe at this point it is better for us, as you proceed on that point, to seek official clarification from Government -  because there have been stories in the media in regard to the leasing of lakes. Some people are in court over the same matter. 

So, we seek an official clarification. Could it be that the lakes have been leased or sold and that is why you are beating up the fishermen and denying our people the opportunity to tap into this resource? I thought that clarification at this stage would be a very important one. Thank you.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much. At the end of the day, when ministers come to respond, we expect these answers to be given to us because we were born when people were fishing in these lakes. We were born when these people were living in these areas. It is because of this Government’s negligence that we have reached the point where we are. You have never taken any initiative to regulate the fishing nets right from the other time when you saw the fishermen misusing them. You never took the initiative of providing loans or alternatives to make the relevant nets available to the farmers. All you have come up with are beatings, beatings; marines, every time in the lakes. Is this how this Government is going to pay back the fishermen and the farmers of this country?

So, I feel the fishing industry in the agricultural sector should be looked into. We have a lot of water and we can still have a lot of fish, but beating up people in the lakes is not the solution. 

I urge Government to honestly take a keen interest in the fishing sector. It is not all about that law you are planning to bring in this House. It is not about the law.  It is about talking to the fish farmers, the fisherman and we find out where the problem is. 

And lastly, I will talk about the issue of transport infrastructure. Under transport infrastructure I want Government to take very keen interest in the weigh bridges. Recently, we had a very long queue in Busia because of lack of the weigh bridge and because our neighbouring countries use overloaded trucks on our roads; the roads have hills and valleys. Even the well refurbished areas - talk about the Jinja Road that was repaired of recent - because of the heavy trucks, the roads have hills and valleys. Now you wonder whether it was the construction that was the problem or the load and the weight on the roads.

So, we really wish that this is an area of keen interest, and the water and rail transport should be coordinated such that we offload the heavy load and the trucks on the roads and we lessen this burden. Otherwise, we will be making roads that will last for two weeks; in the other week they are already potholed and they will be useless. 

And possibly we will also expect an answer and a response on how far the Kyoga-Bukungu line - where the ferry issue has reached. We have waited for two years now in suspense. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.45
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to begin with agriculture. As my colleagues have already stated, indeed, given the fact that agriculture is the backbone of our economy, what we are doing leaves a lot to be desired - whether we are serious about this sector. 
When you look at the NAADS programme, the way the NAADS programme is being coordinated is as if we are in to encourage peasantry methods of work yet we are supposed to go into commercial agriculture. But the methods being used in as far as NAADS is concerned are like we are very far from moving away from the peasantry methods to commercial agriculture. 

I believe that as a country depending largely on agriculture, we should move extra steps to ensure that we effectively support our farmers down there in the villages. (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, my neighbour, for giving me the opportunity to provide you information on this sector. Until this country consciously develops a land and agricultural development bank to provide funding for the agricultural sector, there is no way we are going to move away from peasantry methods of farming to modern commercial methods. I know that there are so many enthusiastic commercial farmers mainly in Buganda, who have collapsed under the weight of loans because either the prices are falling or the climate is not being favourable to farmers.

So, I think the government should now think consciously of developing a method of loaning money to commercial farmers and the only way out is for us to have a land and agricultural development bank because this bank will loan money knowing very well that a farmer is not expected to pay every month, and knowing very well that in case the climate fails farmers, farmers can always be given another chance, in another season.

But in all these commercial banks, you have to pay the loan according to the prescribed conditionalities and farmers cannot definitely comply. I want to appeal to Government that if we are to modernise in accordance with the vision that we have set, that by year 2040, Uganda is going to be a modern country with a modern economy, it is important that we develop a land and agricultural development bank. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for that useful information. It is only when we fully modernise this sector that we are going to achieve our desired goals given the fact that 70 percent of our people depend on that sector. It is our responsibility as representatives to ensure that this sector is funded well.

When you look at the irrigation schemes in this country, it leaves a lot to be desired. We have many people who are living on the river banks, but because the government has not come out to support this initiative of having irrigation schemes, we cannot even afford to have plantations along the river banks. That is why even people living along the river banks will really start crying of hunger, simply because no irrigation scheme is available. We have to move an extra mile in as far as funding this sector is concerned.

When to it comes to the Ministry of Education, I think there is a need to redefine our policies in the Ministry of Education, especially sponsoring students in public universities. When you look at the list of those who have been admitted in public universities on government sponsorship, they are the students who come from first world schools, whose parents are in position of meeting tuition of maybe Shs 1 million or Shs 800,000 per term.

The criteria being used by the ministry that only those who are acquiring almost A in every subject or AAAA are the ones who are going to be admitted on government sponsorship, I think has outlived its usefulness.
If we continue to follow that arrangement, we are going to leave out so many Ugandans who come from poor families when the parents do not have enough money to meet their tuition at campus. I suggest, in order to increase on the number of students sponsored by the state, we have to redesign these policies, either by saying that the government is going to sponsor half so that instead of sponsoring 5,000 or 6,000 students, we sponsor times two -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, when you compare students sponsored by Government and the private students, which is the bigger number? Is it the students sponsored by Government or private?

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, definitely those sponsored privately are bigger in number, but if we are to share that national cake -

THE SPEAKER: Good

MR SEBAGGALA: Definitely, those who can afford to sponsor their sons and daughters can do so, but if there is that window that the government is going to sponsor some students at university and if we are to increase on numbers of those who are going to be really sponsored by the state, then we must redesign the new strategy.

THE SPEAKER: But don’t you see really that these private students who are more than Government sponsored students are children of peasants and the peasants are required to pay Shs 1 million over a semester. Don’t you think we should think in terms of helping these universities have their infrastructure and pay the lecturers so that the amount of money demanded is reasonable, so that a peasant can afford, and it does not matter whether all the students are required, as long as the amount of money is reasonable? Wouldn’t that be equitable?

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Colleague. Mr Speaker, I think the concern that has been articulated for a long time here is the fact that when you look at the present Government sponsorship to public universities, actually we tax the poor who cannot afford to pay for their children in order to sponsor the children of the rich who could afford university education without any help.

I will give you an example. The criteria used for you to qualify to get Government sponsorship requires you to have got AAA. For you to get a AAA, you do not need to study in a village school like Amodo S.S. where I studied, you must study in a school like Namagunga, like Budo, like St Mary’s Kitende where you pay huge sums of money. For you to go there for O’levels, you must have studied in a very good primary school. Now, that means you are already from an affluent family.

The rest of the children in this country who get EC are children from those rural backgrounds of Nakapiripirit, of Soroti, Kyanamukaka -(Laughter)- yes, and many related villages. So, our argument for a long time has been, can Ministry of Education and Government reconsider a criteria for accessing this money? If they cannot reconsider it, there is no point taxing the poor to sustain the rich. That is injustice to say the least.

THE SPEAKER: I think there should be a debate by all stakeholders as to how to handle this issue.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for accepting information. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that in the past, particularly when UPC was in Government -(Laughter)- the policy was that the parents should shoulder the primary and secondary education up to S.4 but from S.5 where the payment is heavier, the government should take over until university. It was a better policy than this one which is unconstitutional. The current policy in my view, is against our Constitution because it discriminates against the poor, the majority of the citizens in this country. So, we shall be ruled for ever by children of the rich, forever and ever, because they are the ones who are getting quality education. The rest of us are just being phased out of quality education.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, when you refer to the UPC times when university education was being taken over by Government – I think circumstances have changed. I remember that at Makerere University you would have just 300 students from the three countries, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. That was affordable. When I was attending high school, they would give me money for transport because the numbers then were very small. But can Government now afford that with the big numbers? (Interjections)

Hon. Members, when I say 300 I mean it because the intake at Makerere in those days was 300 from Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya. 
I think what we need to do is sit down with all stakeholders and decide on the policy that should be used to address this issue. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I hope that I still have some more minutes. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you surrendered.

MR SEBAGGALA: Yes, Mr Speaker, you have used five of my minutes. (Laughter) Thank you for your guidance that we need to sit down and find a new policy in as far as that scheme is concerned, otherwise it has outlived its usefulness. 

Still on education, I think we have not done enough to put in place vocational training. In an era where we are training for white collar jobs, we also need to boost the area of vocational training such that our students at various levels can access this kind of training. 

I sit on the committee of national economy; we visited some vocational training schools like Masaba Vocational Training School, but what we found there was that the school serves almost the whole eastern region, but it is underfunded. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in fairness, I give you three minutes.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was talking about vocational training institutions. If we could fund these vocational institutions in our various regions so that they can train our brothers and sisters at various levels, then they can assist us in as far as creating employment is concerned. Because when someone graduates from those vocational training institutes, definitely in a period of two or three months, he can get what to do because those skills are with them.

Finally, the domestic arrears. Many businesses have collapsed due to domestic arrears. Many businessmen and businesswomen are crying because the government has not been in position to clear. And many of these businessmen and businesswomen are depending on bank loans. The moment they get money from banks and Government takes long to pay, the bank is not going to listen and indeed the government is not going to come in to explain that they are the reason as to why so and so is not moving well in as far as his loan is concerned. So, I appeal to the government that before we think about any other item, in as far as our schedule of preferences is concerned, let us ensure that these people are paid on time so that they do not go into serious burdens when the banks get on their necks. 

On the road sector, in the last three budgets, in the State of the Nation Address, the President informed us that he is going to institute a commission of inquiry. Three years down the road, the President has not come out – because he was here telling us that there was a lot that had gone wrong in the ministry of works and he informed us that he was going to institute a commission of inquiry to find out where our trillions went. But up to now we do not know how far that commission of inquiry has gone and what their findings are. We are injecting a lot of money in the road sector and what we are getting -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We are winding up this debate today. I think I should allow hon. Ekanya and hon. Bako.

5.05
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are saying that we are winding up with debate but the minister of finance needs to answer. 

Last week, we received corrigenda 1; today I have seen corrigenda 2. It is going to distort committee work and yet we are supposed to engage on the reports now. I do not know how we are going to handle this because these corrigenda 1 & 2 distort the entire report.

THE SPEAKER: Where is your report?

MR EKANYA: Our report of the Committee of Finance is ready and the chairman will be here tomorrow, but with these corrigenda -

THE SPEAKER: Where is the report? You should have handed it in?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) I want to focus on a few issues. In order for us to revamp the education sector, we need to take a leaf from the East African Community. If you look at the East African Community, Uganda has two comparative advantages; one is in education and the other is in the agricultural sector. In order to finance education, some countries are reforming their financial sector and they are using long-term bonds to reduce the cost of putting up infrastructure in most of these universities, for example, in Tanzania and Kenya. 

Therefore, I want to call upon the minister of finance to tell this country when he will bring the necessary laws to reform the pension sector, the social security sector and the general financial sector so that development institutions can go for long-term bonds to put up infrastructure in some of these sectors. 

The other thing that we need to look at is the cost of public administration in this country. This economy is growing at 8 percent but the share of growth is not realised. I want to propose that we reduce the size of Parliament to 200 MPs or less. We can create more districts, Mr Speaker, but we need to make sure that a district does not come with a new MP, LC5 chairman; we need to reform the entire governance system of this country. Otherwise, every time you create a district, you have a new Woman MP automatically. Every time you create a county, you have a new MP. 
Mr Speaker, I wanted my district yesterday, but I am one of the MPs who are saying that a district should not come with a new MP. A Member of Parliament should represent over 500,000 people, otherwise the growth of the economy is consumed by the few people. (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Ekanya is that Ghana has more than 100 districts but these districts are not constituencies. They do not have MPs. They are administrative.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, that is the way to go; otherwise, the growth is being consumed by us here in Parliament and the Civil Service.

One other reform we need to reduce the cost of public administration is to remove vehicles from civil servants. If you go to all these offices, every civil servant has a vehicle. Let civil servants secure loans and own vehicles. The cost of maintaining all these vehicles is too high and yet they are abused.

Mr Speaker, you know we passed the PERD Act here, but five years down the road, the Minister for Privatisation has never laid a report here in this House on the operation and management of privatisation. How are these parastatals performing? We approve loans here to National Water and Sewerage Corporation and other sectors like railways but how are these sectors performing? Hon. Omach, when are you presenting a report here to this House?

Mr Speaker, you know that NPART is operating illegally. The Minister of Finance has failed to bring a resolution to this House to extend the life of NPART, but we are going to appropriate money. The Minister of Finance should be ashamed to seek this Parliament to appropriate money for an illegal institution. There are over 3000 properties under the Custodian Board. Who is in charge of these properties? Can we know who is collecting the rent? Who is managing these properties and how many properties were claimed?

I want to go to the issue of agriculture. I saw a letter from His Excellency the President lamenting and here we are also lamenting. I do not know whether this Government listens, if the President can lament and we are doing the same. There is also a book of Lamentations in the Bible; so we can lament.

The President was lamenting about zoning this country so that there can be high productivity in the agricultural sector. In that letter, he said, “I hope this time you ministers and technocrats, will listen to me”. Two years down the road, the programme of zoning has not been implemented; the programme of one village one product has never been implemented; and we are all waiting for another disaster. We have a very good Prime Minister and professor from one of the best universities; what is the problem with implementing some of these good ideas from the President?

We were taught in secondary school about the Cobweb Theory. A country that is committed to development should have a programme and silos to stabilise the price of agriculture. In this country, in the 21st Century, farmers still bring live animals from Mbarara. They are squeezed in trucks instead of building abattoirs in Mbarara, Bushenyi, Soroti, Teso or Karamoja. This was done during the UPC Government. We should do this so that we bring beef to the city in refrigerated trucks and we can all eat fresh and nutritious beef. Now we bring live animals and then the cost of a kilo of beef becomes so high because a truck cannot carry more than ten animals. What is the problem in this country? It is embarrassing when you see live animals being squeezed.

In Soroti, oranges are rotting and for the last five years the President has been promising a factory. What has happened? We pass money here. I am also told that Government reactivated Uganda Development Corporation and Cabinet put a directive that it should be operationalised, but now there is a squabble between ministers as to who should be in charge. People are fighting. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you clarify under which docket Uganda Development Corporation is, so that we can really know and tell our farmers to go and continue planting oranges.

In Mbarara, people are still bringing matooke. When are we going to have vacuum matooke or potatoes being sold in this city and in urban centres so that the farmers in Mbale, Mbarara can get value for their produce?

Because of time, let me move to one other very important issue. In Malaba there are some importers; when they reach the border, they want to pay their taxes but they are not allowed to. This is an embarrassment to this country. We are now talking of the East African Community, COMESA, EBAs, EPAs, AGOA, why don’t we adopt international trade rules and regimes? Isn’t it embarrassing that somebody who wants to take his goods to Northern Uganda or to Southern Sudan is forced to bring them to URA headquarters? Now, the issue is that the Minister of Works was given money to expand the yard, but up to now they have failed to do so and trailers have nowhere to park.

I want to talk about health. The money given to a health centre II in Kyanamukaka is Shs 1.5 million for drugs for three months. That is my salary for one month. Isn’t it a shame to this country that a population of an entire parish is given money for drugs worth the salary of a Member of Parliament for one month, and we complain that drugs are being stolen? We really need to get serious; who are we deceiving? The budget is there; it is open; so, we need to increase the budget for the health sector. Otherwise, we are deceiving ourselves by putting the President’s team to investigate drugs being stolen and some few innocent people are being arrested. These are all lies.

Finally, I want to talk about –(Member timed out.)

5.15
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to talk about rural electrification. In 1995 when the President came to Arua, he promised the people of West Nile hydro electricity from Nyagak. It is exactly about -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I am sorry yesterday you probably had other commitments and were not able to attend the proceedings of Parliament. The issue of electrification of West Nile came up and the hon. Minister for Energy gave us a very good report on it. I do not know whether we should go back on this, but it was given.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. However, on the same note, ever since that report came, we have been given five deadlines and the last one passed last week. We are now being supplied by darkness called power and that is why I bring this to your attention.

To speak about my sector pains me deeply. If I look at agricultural financing in this country, I am intimidated by two factors: One, insurance for agriculture. Most of these insurance companies do not actually want to insure agriculture production because the risks are almost 100 percent certain, so farmers are faced with this uphill task. Where can we insure our production?

Second, are interest rates. The commercial banks are charging unfriendly interest rates. Soon we shall be bringing to the attention of this Parliament a land and agricultural development bank. It is my prayer that we support this because it is only through these means that we will be able to rescue our farmers.

Water for production; it is sad that about a year ago when this country suffered a lot of starvation, we still had all these fresh water bodies. Lake Victoria is with us. There is no place in this country where there is no fresh water. Our country has been failed by the NRM regime because they cannot afford simple irrigation technology. 

We are talking about the safety of the poor peasants down there. They are just looking at us driving our expensive cars, but we are not making any fundamental change in their lives. You find a desperate woman in Busoga who has tilled a lot of land, selling a kilogramme of maize at just Ugshs 25 while a processed kilogramme is at Ugshs 1,000. You can imagine the excessive profit margin between the farmer who is producing at that subsistence level and the commercial consumer of the produce. If the NRM can listen, they would be putting investment in the agriculture sector.

Fisheries; this sub-sector grew by -2.8 percent last year. In the year 2006, I warned the NRM Government that if we do not responsibly exploit our aqua resources, there would be trouble. As I speak today, fish is one of the most expensive protein sources. Poor people cannot afford to eat fish, and that actually means that the poor are deficient in protein from fish. One kilogramme of Tilapia costs Ugshs 11,000 in Nakawa market. The NRM Government should come out with clear policies to rescue our waters. If that is not done, we will not eat fish in this country and we shall be producing dull Ugandans.

I want to draw your attention to the agricultural extension programme called NAADS in this government. This has become an instrument that the President and the NRM regime is using to actualise an election promise to this country five years ago. What is happening is that the selection of these farmers is skewed to the yellow regime. You need to be a card bearer in order to access extension services. As a professional, I get hurt that extension services which are meant to be a public good have become a private good.

MR AMURIAT: I rise to give information to my friend. According to the Movement functionaries in this country, an NRM card is used to access drugs in hospitals, jobs, contracts, university scholarships and almost every service in Uganda. I think that our friends on the other side of this House should really style up because recruitment in political parties should be on a voluntary basis and not by use of coercion. I think the government in power needs to check what their supporters are doing on the ground or else this country is being led astray. We should have equal opportunities to the resources of this country because we are citizens.

MS BAKO: Thank you for that information and I hope there are ears listening to this critical concern. Our country is being segmented on the basis of parties. It is wrong to assume that farmers know what they want; we are talking about people who are still scratching the earth to earn a living. We are assuming that these people know what they want thus extension services should be private sector led. This is not true, and I wish my minister can wake up to listen to this seriously.

It is unfortunate to assume that these peasants know what they want. There must be technocrats down there to tell them what they need. How can a peasant understand that if a Mubende goat mates an Arua goat, he or she would make Ugshs 20 million a year? This is not possible, and that is why we are having all these troubles. It is my appeal that we revisit the way extension services are being delivered in this country.

The maternal mortality rate of 335 is unacceptable. How do we expect 335 mothers to die out of every 100,000 in an economy growing at eight percent? We all know that women are the ones sustaining the economy. 

With increment in net distribution, this country has not seen reduction in malaria rates. There must be a systematic refocus on how we handle malaria in this country. I want the ministry of health to tell me how much reduction has taken place in malaria cases as result of net distribution.

There is injustice in allocation of drugs in regional referral hospitals. Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, for example, is receiving Ugshs 570 million, Lira will receive Ugshs 371 million, Arua will get Ugshs 290 million and Gulu is supposed to receive Ugshs 290 million. This means that when you add what Gulu and Arua will receive, you will get the total of what Mbarara is to get. (Member timed out.)

5.26
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I would like to thank the government for the presented budget. I come from an area that has been disturbed by war and where people are still grappling with resettlement. However, this corrigendum shows that they have removed some of the money meant for primary education in Gulu to be able to support newly created districts. 

I was in Gulu and they were asking me to pay some teachers’ salaries. This means that sometimes we have an unrealistic ceiling. Parents try to recruit some teachers, and these are parents who are so poor. When these parents hear about Constituency Development Fund (CDF), they think it is for paying teachers. This was in Bungatira sub-county in a place called Mon Roc. They also asked me to pay teachers while in Pukony parish in Awach sub-county. They even asked me to provide women with household utensils like saucepans, plates and cups. These are people who are very poor. Honestly speaking, Mr Minister, you really need to explain to us why we have to remove something from Gulu and yet Gulu is still a three-county district; a district with up to 16 sub-counties and divisions. Why should we sincerely remove? 

The Opposition suggested that teachers should get at least about Shs400,000. I am a teacher, but taking into consideration the prices of fuel right now – if you see the prices of petrol and diesel - definitely you will know that the prices of everything, especially those in the shops, have risen. Now you want to remove the little which goes to our teachers and yet those teachers are not enough. Even with the recruitment of teachers right now, I heard that for Gulu District just about 500 and something teachers were recruited, which is not going to be enough for our primary schools. So, I really feel that you, Mr Minister of Finance, need to explain this to us. Our people cannot pay teachers; they cannot recruit and pay. 

Let me now move to disaster. I think we are not serious about disaster preparedness. Taking into consideration what the country experienced this year, I think we would be more serious and give it visibility. If we were serious, right now we would have a better plan for disaster. Maybe then the minister will also explain what we really have to do for disaster preparedness in this country because it looks like the plan is not there. 

People talked a lot about fish in this country. In my district we do not have a lot of these water bodies where we can go fishing, so people try to get their fish from fish ponds. However, I do not know what the fishery department is doing. Women are not being helped. One woman from Awach got up and told me, “Look at me, see how thin I am; I am so thin because of your misguided fishpond digging. Why do you people ask us to dig and then you do not even guide us on how we can reap from the fish pond?” So, Mr Minister, especially the fisheries minister, it is important that you pull up your socks and try to guide our people better in terms of fish ponds.

Let me talk a bit on energy. When we talk about energy, then maybe we talk about oil. Of late, we have been thinking about oil and this oil is in the North, the Masindi area and also in Acholi sub-region. However, to our greatest surprise, it looks like we do not have our children who -[Ms Kabakumba: “We do not have oil in Masindi.”]- If you do not have oil there, I was told you have oil in Bunyoro –(Interjections)- yes, in Bunyoro; and because of this oil which we have. We need to try and really help our children and take them for further education to learn more on this. We had about 27 children taken, but from one region and not from the region where this oil comes from. So, we need an explanation. 

This brings me to education. Right now a lot of people have to go to the university and very many from my region, especially from my district, cannot afford university fees, so they come to me thinking that I would be able to pay. Of course I cannot pay. I do not know what plan we have. At least last year we discussed a lot about providing loans for higher education. It is not there and not seen. What are we going to do with our children who cannot afford university fees and yet they would like to go on with further studies or they want to reach up to that level? I think it is a disservice to our people. 

I must say that UPE is alright but when we try to compare schools where our children can do well and go to good secondary schools, we have divided this country into two. Right now children of the poor cannot rub shoulders with children of the rich. Even if you are poor and very bright and you remain in a UPE school and go to a USE school, sometimes you will fail to even achieve. Your potential can never be exploited the way those who are from well-to-do families are able to. So, now, what do we do? What plan do we have in the budget to make sure that we try to bridge this gap? It is a very big gap and we need to bridge it because if we leave it like that, definitely we are going to have a lot of problems in the future. 

I was so sad to hear that in the past when those of us who were able to study at higher levels from S.5 onwards, there was no fees. That was because the population was small -(Interjections)– Yes! Right now the population is big, which means that also this big population should be productive and we should have a bigger economy and big tax. Now, this tax should not only go to the rich. Why do the rest of Ugandans pay for the rich only? When we take this 11, those who get those scholarship positions even in the district are people from the rich. They are people who are from well-to-do schools; people from USE schools can never be able to get to that. Why should we then tax everybody else in Uganda to pay for just the rich people who can even pay for themselves? So, I think this is a disservice to our country.

Now, let me talk about Gulu Airfield. (­Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, hon. Members. We have had many contributions since yesterday and this was due to your commitment, but I think we have come to the end of this general debate. 

The Minister is expected to respond; that is to wind up the motion, and this should be tomorrow. I will request you to come at 10.00 a.m. and once it is done, I will give you some good information. A decision will be made tomorrow that will be fair to all of you in handling this budget. 

I have looked at the Budget Act. Under Section 7, the committees are supposed to have submitted their reports by 31st August. Apparently, as of now, I have not received a single report, but let us come tomorrow and then a decision will be made. I thank you for your time and for the ideas you have given. Hon. Minister, you will have about an hour or less than an hour to wind up and then we see how we proceed. 

With this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 5.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 August 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 


