Monday, 17 August 2009

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am happy to welcome you to this sitting. In the gallery, we have our children who have come to see what is going on here. I have not got the details about them, but when I do, I will formally welcome them. Meanwhile, I would like to thank you for turning up today, Monday, when normally we start our sittings on Tuesdays. 

Let me also thank you for the work you have been doing during the break. I hope you have been able to look at the Budget more seriously because this is supposed to help you make meaningful contributions to the motion moved by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, when she read the budget in June.

As you know, the budgeting process is now controlled by the Budget Act, which we enacted some years ago. The intention was to involve Parliament into that process rather than using it to rubberstamp.

The process of budgeting starts before the Budget Day; we get involved – I would have expected us to expedite the process. The Budget Act expects us to complete the process of passing the Budget by 31 August. We ought to get done with the Committee of Supply by 31 August. I hope we will be able to do it in this time.

I take this opportunity to thank you for the warm welcome that you gave to the Speakers of the Commonwealth parliaments in the Africa Region; a conference that has just ended. 

I must report that the participants, the Speakers and presiding officers were happy with what they saw in Uganda; a number of them wanted to acquire Bibanja –(Laughter) – so, Minister of Lands, people are coming to acquire Bibanja. I thank you so much, hon. Members.

Before I get off the microphone, I would like to introduce the pupils and teachers we have in the gallery. They are from St Cecilia Boarding Primary School, Muyambi, in Koki County, Rakai District. This county is represented by hon. Magulumaali. You are welcome to Kampala.

3.50
MR EZATI KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on two issues of national importance.

Two weeks ago, we did read in the New Vision, a proposed timetable for the 2011 Presidential, Parliamentary and other elections. In the newspaper that I am quoting, which was published on Friday, 31 July 2009, the Chairman of the Electoral Commission outlined the timetable for the next general elections. 

In the same newspaper, the chairman told the nation that presidential nominations and parliamentary nominations will take place in September and October next year, respectively, starting on 20th September to 30th October.

Mr Speaker, you will realise that the country has been yearning for electoral reforms. In April, the political parties in the opposition in their inter-party cooperation did present to you a wide range of legislative proposals. However, no sooner had they given you that, His Excellency, the President, came out to say there is no need for electoral reforms. 

We confirmed his statement when last week he presented to this Parliament proposals for candidates to fill the positions of leadership in the Electoral Commission. Our position, however, is that there are a lot of people out there who are interested in the electioneering process in this country. There are those who are warming up for the office of the presidency; there are those who are warming up to represent constituencies; and there are those who want to become LC III chairpersons.

I think it is only befitting, Mr Speaker, that we hear from Government as to whether this proposed timetable is the one they have agreed upon. If that is not the position, we will be interested in knowing, from Government, the following:

First, when the issues of proposed legislation amendments are coming to the House? Are they taking the words of the President as gospel truth; there is no need for electoral reforms? 

We need at least one year to the operationalisation of the electioneering process. There are many laws, which we would like to know when they will be brought to Parliament by Government, one of which is the Electoral Reforms (Amendment) Bill; they are intended to enable us prepare. This will also help the institutions and the country at large to familiarise with the changes that will have been approved.

The second issue, Mr Speaker, upon which I would like to seek clarification from Government, is about the letter purportedly written by H.E. the President, dated, 15 July 2009, and addressed to the Minister for the Presidency, hon. Beatrice Wabudeya. 

This letter has treated Bunyoro sub-region as a special region where certain political posts, right from LC III chairmanship up to Parliamentary level, are being ringed so that for you to vie for those political posts, you have to be a Munyoro.  Yet we know from historical perspectives that there are a number of tribes that have settled in Bunyoro. 

I can talk for the Alur, the Lugbara and the Acholi, who were invited, historically, to Bunyoro by the Kingdom during British rule in order to make Bunyoro realise its cotton quota. Now, these are people who have settled there and have no other place as their home other than where they are. For example, when you take Nyantonzi sub-county, it is an entirely Lugbara area. 

Now, if you are saying that these people who are bona fide Ugandans, and who know no other place of origin other than Bunyoro, must go, where else are they going? Are we not inciting people to rise up on tribal cleavages? For example, if we look at Buganda, it has many more people who have settled here. If we were to consider those sorts of sentiments, I am sure that the Deputy Attorney-General would not be the MP because they would say, “No, you are not a Muganda; you need to go where you belong.” I know very many leaders in Kayunga who are not Baganda and many who are ministers in this august House who are in Masaka, Lwemiyaga or Bukomansimbi, but are not Baganda by origin, but because they are Ugandans, they have been accommodated. 

So, I wish to seek clarification from Government as to whether what appeared in this letter purportedly written by His Excellency the President is the true position of Government and whether this will not incite Ugandans to begin fighting one another. 

For example, I do not know what hon. Daudi Migereko will do to me because many times I stay in Jinja - I do not know what hon. Onyango Kakoba - first of all, he is equally - he will be considered a foreigner like me when it comes to Kayunga or Mukono. So, what is the position of Government? Is that the official mouth piece so that we can all go from here and say, “Bunyoro is a no-go zone for a non-Munyoro; or Bugisu or whatever it is?” I want to restrict myself to His Excellency’s letter. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. Hon. Wadri has made a contribution to the issue. It was obvious that he captured the moment to make a contribution to the issue which we are still discussing internally. As soon as we are ready, we shall be able to inform the entire body politic.

With regard to his second question, hon. Ruhindi is requested to answer it.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister inform the House as to when they will be ready? Because this is a sensitive matter which is causing a lot of problems among ethnic groups in Bunyoro. When will the government be ready?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: We shall be ready when we have found a lasting solution to the problem.  We cannot rush that matter.
2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, in regard to the electoral law reform, I wish to inform this House that before my senior colleague left yesterday for official duties in Malaysia, I believe with the permission of the Speaker, we discussed a paper on the proposed relevant amendments to the electoral laws. The paper has already been submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat and I believe that if that paper is not discussed this Wednesday, it may be discussed immediately in the next Cabinet meeting.

I wish to assure this House that the proposals on electoral laws made by the Opposition were considered and they will be considered further by Cabinet. The Opposition is always welcome even when proposed amendments are made to the relevant laws, to make proposals on the Floor of the House or in the relevant committees of the House.

I believe that by February next year, we should have completed debating the proposed amendments to the electoral laws. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is very good when you say February. I think it is important that if we have to make reforms they should be made early enough for the same to be internalised. I think that it should be our aim to complete the exercise by February. I think that is ok. 


MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember that on the day the Minister of Finance made the budget speech, he moved a motion requesting that this House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the estimates. 

Some years ago, this motion was debated immediately it was made, but we considered that maybe it was better we gave some time to the members to study the budget and be able to make meaningful contribution to the motion. That is why there was a break, to enable you to go and look at the budget in detail to be able to get ideas and views that we would express on the motion. 

I would have expected you to have completed this exercise, and I hope the reports are ready. I would also have loved, if it were possible, for these reports to be laid before Parliament so that Members would utilise the reports to make their contribution.

I would like to find out whether this is the position in that the committees have finished their reports in respect of the estimates of their sectors. Can I have an idea from various committees the position on these reports? Perhaps I will start with agriculture and go on in alphabetical order. 

3.03
DR LASTUS SERUNJOGI: Thank you Mr Speaker. The report for the Committee on Agriculture will be ready by the end of this week. 

THE SPEAKER: Ok. That is the report. Let’s hear from another committee.

3.03
MR ANTHONY YIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report for the Committee on Public Service and Local Government will be ready tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Good.

3.04
MS MARY MUGYENYI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report on the Committee of Natural Resources is in draft form. We are discussing it and it will be ready next week, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

MR GAUDIOSO TINDAMANYIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The finance committee on Thursday will be winding up with the Minister of Finance since the Ministry of Finance had to meet almost all sectoral committees, and I hope we will be ready early next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, where are the other chairmen? 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you can see, some of the chairmen are not here and indeed some of the members. All I can say is that they must be working round the clock to make sure that these reports are ready. 

I did communicate your instruction to the various chairpersons that the House would resume today in the afternoon so that we could seat in the afternoon and mornings in order to ensure that this business is expeditiously handled. 

I will be getting in touch with them as soon as we finish here so that we can have all these reports ready and have them considered by the House. 

THE SPEAKER: But, I would personally advise that we help the members appreciate that importance – maybe the chairpersons should have the executive summary of their reports, a one or two page summary; you read that one so that members can be able to follow rather than coming here to read a 54 page report. 

Anyway, I think we shall get another report on the position tomorrow. Now let us start the debate and I think we should be able to cover as many people as possible; let us make our contributions within five minutes. With that we shall be able to cover as many members as possible rather than one person speaking for 30 minutes; that will not help us. 

3.07
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Albert Oduman): Thank you, Mr Speaker and members. I wish to present to you the Opposition Response to the Government Budget Statement for the financial year 2009/10 on behalf of the Opposition. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, allow me to present to you and the people of Uganda the Opposition response to the financial year 2009/10 National Budget presented to Parliament by the Minister for Finance Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bumba, on the 11 June 2009; and our considered proposals for moving this country forward; proposals that we believe would solve the country’s endemic problems if all of us, the actors in the policy process, become selfless and resolved to squarely deal with what confronts the population. 

Mr Speaker, the structuring of this response consists of:

a)	 Introduction
b)	Analysis of Budget Performance
c)	Highlights of unfulfilled Government assurances
d)	Our policy proposals and recommendations 
e)	Conclusion

Mr Speaker, Winston Churchill once referred to Uganda as a beautiful garden where staple food of the people grows almost without labour. Despite the good environment for the last ten years, there are a number of people who can barely afford to leave on a mere $1 per day as increased by one million people to over 9 million people, yet the economy has grown to greater heights. 

Among those below the poverty line are 7 million people - being 26 percent of the population, who are chronically poor. Policy initiatives such as UPE and NAADs have not benefited these people either. Over 93 percent of the population in Lokopo, Bokora County, for example, remain in chronic poverty with famine in proportions not known before. The Opposition believes that this must be addressed and corruption tackled if we are to liberate these people. 

Mr Speaker, the theme for this year Opposition Response to the National Budget Statement is, “Improving Household Incomes of the Poor through Increase Expenditure on Agriculture”. This theme represents the Opposition’s desire to revisit past government actions, commitments and assurances and to make proposals and recommendations that will make the much talked about economic growth to benefit the majority poor. 

Mr Speaker, for the last three years, under the NRM Government, poverty has increased and the quality of lives of the citizens deteriorated. 

Public health care is collapsing with no essential drugs in hospitals, and patients sleeping on the floors, yet a few ministers and Government officials are treated abroad at an exorbitant cost to the tax-payer. 

Education is collapsing with many pupils performing dismally, and with a high drop-out rate from UPE. 

Agriculture on which the economy is anchored, and 80 percent of the population dependent, is grossly underfunded and continues to deteriorate. 

Government is in a planning vacuum, operating on adhoc directives with no long-term plans for determining national priorities. 

Our country is witnessing heavily skewed economic growth that does not translate into improved welfare for its citizens. 

There is unprecedented increase in Government revenue, but poor infrastructure, with more potholes on our roads, are still the order of the day. 

The cost of access to finance is too high for the business community as well as the agricultural sector. 

There is debilitating corruption and patronage in resource allocation at the expense of our poor people. 

There is unprecedented increase in Government expenditure characterised by reckless spending and wastage of public resources, thereby fuelling inflation and lowering the standard of living of our people. 

Government has prioritised public administration to benefit its cronies at the expense of poverty alleviation programmes. 

The external debate which had been written down to manageable levels is increasingly becoming unsustainable at over $4 billion up from $1 billion only two years ago, and it is crippling the country. 

There is poor management of the economy and rampant unemployment. The environment is seriously threatened. 

In order to meaningfully address the inadequacies of this Government, the Opposition decided to audit first actions and policies of Government. Three year’s history is reasonable enough for meaningful assessment, but where need arises, this budget response extends the period up to eight years. 

Budget performance

Mr Speaker, the NRM Government continues to mislead the country by portraying budget releases from treasury as budget performance. For example, the minister reported that 99.8 percent of the budget was disbursed in the financial year 2008/09 and, therefore, the budget performed. This is erroneous because meaningful review of budget performance should place emphasis on the impact of the policies implemented on intended outcomes. 

Effective policies are those that give people greatest accessible and affordable services at the least cost. Our view is that correct policy choices should have delivered the much hyped ‘Prosperity for All’. 

For the last three years, the NRM Government has demonstrated a spectacular misunderstanding of the root causes of poverty, and continues to implement misguided policies. It is engaged in wasteful spending on programmes and policies that do not benefit the poor.  Government commitments and assurances to the people are always abandoned whenever funds are appropriated by Parliament, leading to increase in poverty levels with only 20 percent of the population benefiting from growth. This shows that Government has lost direction and is unable to trace its past actions and reconcile them with the present and future.  

Budget Speeches have become annual austerity justifications prepared by technocrats and read by the Minister of Finance on behalf of the President without representing the interests of the poor people. This budget, like the previous ones, is just recycled. It makes mention of increase in economic growth without demonstrating how that growth benefited Ugandans. 
It promises to improve household incomes through increased agricultural production and value addition, just like the previous ones did in FY 2006/07 (page 26), FY 2007/08 (page 11) and FY 2008/09 (page 16), but with no tangible benefits. 

It also promises to table the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, just as it did in the FY 2007/08 Budget Speech (page 8) and FY 2008/09 (page 10). It further promises to rehabilitate the Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road, Fort-Portal-Bundibugyo and Kampala-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi roads, just as was the case in FYs 2005/06, 2006/07 and 2008/09.  

Again, like the previous budgets, it promises to reconstruct Northern Uganda, reduce inflation and ensure macroeconomic stability. Government must stop this recycling game and get more serious on matters of importance to Ugandans.

Budget Focus

The NRM Government has a passion for politically catchy phrases which are at variance with the policies programmed, funding priorities, and the impacts intended. This year’s theme is: “Enhancing Strategic Interventions to Improve Business Climate and Revitalise Production to Achieve Prosperity for All”. The themes for the previous years were:
2008/09: Strategic Priorities to Accelerate Prosperity for All;
2007/08: Re-orienting Public Expenditure towards Prosperity for All;
2006/07: Enhancing Economic Growth and Household Incomes through Increased Production and Productivity;
2005/06: Promoting Economic Growth and Household Incomes through Increased Savings, Investment, Employment, and Productivity;
2004/05: Promoting Economic Growth and Reducing Poverty through Public Expenditure;
2003/04: Increased Production for Increased Exports and the Eradication of Absolute Poverty;
2002/03:	Increased Production for Increased Exports and the Eradication of Absolute Poverty
In serious budgeting, a new theme is expected to build on the previous one to demonstrate enhancement of policy initiatives. Instead, what we see is a fundamental loss of Budget focus, with the underlying policies failing to address constraints that stand in the way of production, marketing and access to financial services. Consequently, the policies implemented were not in tandem with these themes and the poor people continued to bear the brunt of disoriented Government policies.   

Economic Growth and Poverty

Economic growth is a statistic that shows the total output of an economy, but without showing how the benefits of that growth are shared among the population. In Uganda, economic growth has moved from pro-poor growth in the 1990s to growth without poverty reduction, and eventually growth with increase in poverty. This has been caused mainly by the investment shift away from agriculture, leading to low agricultural productivity and output. While economic growth is a precondition for improving standards of living of the people, it remains of little value if the contribution of the majority population to that growth is minimal.
Whereas the population employed in agriculture has remained above 70 percent, the share of Agriculture in GDP has systematically declined to 15.1 percent in 2008/09. This means that whereas over 70 percent of the population are engaged in agriculture, other sectors of the economy have edged out the majority poor engaged in subsistence farming, from active participation and significant enjoyment of benefits from growth. This is evidenced by the widening gap between the rich and the poor, as indicated by the gini coefficient, which has risen from 0.36 in 1992 to 0.43 in 2007. The situation is worse in the northern region where 64.79 percent of the population lives in abject poverty compared to 19.34 percent in the western and southern region.

The Minister reported that Uganda’s economy was rated B+, as being stable in terms of growth, by the Standards & Poverty Rating Agency. However, the Minister deliberately refuses to inform Ugandans that the same report observes that Uganda ranks 154 of 177 in the UNDP Human Development Index, putting it among the poorest and most disadvantaged nations in the World -(Laughter). 

According to a recent African Development Bank Report, rural poverty is on the increase due to limited funding for agriculture, weak agricultural prices, decreasing soil fertility, failure to target investments in the private sector to agriculture, and the tendency to grab all the privatised land by the wealthier members of society who also happen to be NRM leaders and loyalists.

For the last 20 years, the NRM Government has been talking of robust economic growth averaging 7 percent per annum.  This level of growth has transformed other countries from agrarian poor economies to industrial economic powers. For example, South Korea’s GDP grew at an average of 7 percent per annum between 1962 and 1989. During this period, real GDP grew from US$ 2.3 billion in 1962 to US$ 204 billion in 1989, growing to US$ 1.279 trillion in 2008. The per capita income rose from US$ 87 in 1962 to US$4,830 in 1989, rising to US$ 26,341 in 2008.

Mr Speaker, during the State of the Nation Address, the President argued that the economy had expanded 8.4 times its size of 1986 and that the GDP per capita had increased from US$ 264 in 1986 to US$ 440 in 2008/09. GDP per capita is the market value of all goods and services produced in the country divided by the population of that country. In order to compare GDP per capita between the two distant years, changes in inflation and exchange rates must be considered. Otherwise, this comparison, in the view of the Opposition, is misleading and should be discarded. 

Using the GDP deflator, the current US$ 440 is equivalent to US$ 294. This shows that for the last 23 years, our GDP per capita has increased by only US$ 30, being US$ 294 minus US$ 264, and before considering that our currency was devalued in 1987, knocking off two zeros and a further scale-down by a factor of 30 percent. This is why Uganda has remained the most Aid dependant country in Africa with most people chronically poor while our NRM leaders thump their chests that the economy is growing steadily. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the illusion of our much hyped growth has made Uganda an economy in which a few privileged are stockpiling land, houses and other assets that cannot be explained by their legal incomes, while the poor people are condemned to endless suffering and pain. 

The Opposition believes it is possible to achieve economic growth accompanied by decline in poverty and inequality. It happened in South Korea, Mauritius and Malaysia where leaders overcame greed. We ask the NRM leaders to explain why, with similar rates of economic growth as those of South Korea, the economy has remained a poverty-stricken agrarian economy.

Inflation

Mr Speaker, in strict economic sense, inflation is a measure of the overall increase in prices over a defined period. In May 2009, inflation was at 12.4 percent, implying that the real value of money for salaried earners reduced by the same percentage, as food prices increased by over 66 percent. However, Government only promised an increase in salaries by a modest five percent, which was unrealistic, and a disincentive to the public servant. We propose to streamline public administration, increase PAYE thresholds and meaningfully raise salaries of public servants.

Mr Speaker, our view is that inflation has been caused mainly by the structural problems in our economy that have made it unable to respond to the increase in effective demand for goods and services. Although Uganda’s population is growing at an average of 3.4 percent, the agricultural sector grew by only 2.9 percent in 2008/09, thereby causing upward inflationary pressures as supply cannot cope with demand from the increasing population. This is a direct result of the overall decline in agricultural productivity and output due to limited funding, soil exhaustion and lack of farm inputs. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda Household Survey of 2005/06 estimated the national average for use of manure at 6.8 percent, for improved seeds at 15.6 percent, chemical fertilizers at 1 percent, and agro-chemicals at 3.4 percent. As a result, the measure of production per person employed in agriculture is US$ 194 in Uganda compared to US$ 239 in Tanzania and US$ 317 in Kenya. We believe the only way to increase agricultural productivity is to remove the supply bottlenecks. We will then meet the increasing food demand for both the local and export markets, and reduce inflation.

Global financial crisis 

Mr Speaker, it is absurd that our NRM leaders continue to downplay the effects of the global financial crisis. This crisis caused the increase in prime lending rates to 21.0 percent; depreciation of the Uganda Shilling by 34.7 percent; reduction in local revenue collections; a fall in remittances from Ugandans working abroad, thereby increasing vulnerability of households dependant on these remittances; led to decline in transfers to Non-Governmental Organisations; and deterioration of the overall balance of payments to a deficit of US$ 157million. 
In addition, there is reduced investment by both the public and private sectors leading to job losses from companies, such as Zain and GTV. 

There is heavy reliance on rainfall for agriculture, which has turned out to be a real blunder, given the global trends in climate change. Government must quickly overcome denial, appreciate basic dynamics of economic downturns and tackle the deepening effects of the crisis on our economy. 

Balance of Payments

Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2008/09, the estimated deficit in the balance of payments account was US$ 48.3 million. In March 2009, the overall deficit was US$ 68.3 million. Total export earnings were US$ 218.0 million in February 2009 as compared to US$ 257.3 million in February 2008. The total import bill was US$ 329.7 million in February 2009 compared to US$ 242.6 million in February 2008. Import demand outstripped export earnings thereby hampering our capacity to sustain long-term foreign indebtedness.

National Planning

Mr Speaker, the major highlights here include the fact that the NRM Government has no long-term planning framework. The National Planning Authority (NPA), an autonomous body created to handle the planning function, is yet to take a firm root in designing comprehensive Government plans as it continues to be sandwiched in the Ministry of Finance. 

The focus here is that the Minister reported that the five- year National Development Plan (NDP) was being prepared within the provisions of the National Vision endorsed by Cabinet. He also promised that the plan will be ready in September 2009, in time for the FY 2010/11 Budget process. Clearly, the NRM government has been operating without a National Development Plan. So, while the per capita expenditure has increased, it does not trickle down to those it is intended to benefit because of lack of national development plans. 

I am now going to summarise some of them. 

Agriculture 

Agriculture remains the dominant sector of our economy, contributing over 90 percent of exports and providing over 70 percent employment. The NRM Government has rhetorically prioritised agriculture with minimum budgetary allocations. Public expenditure on agriculture declined from about 10 percent in 1980, to 5.7 percent in 2005/2006, to 3.6 percent in 2006/2007, to 4.1 percent in 2007/2008, and further to 3.7 percent in 2008/2009. In addition, real agricultural outputs significantly reduced from 7.9 percent in 2001 to 0.5 percent in 2005/2006, to 0.1 percent in 2006/2007 and 0.7 percent in 2007/2008. 

In this year’s Budget statement, Government listed agriculture as priority sector No.1. However, in terms of funding priorities, it is not ranked No.1. The political intentions to increase production end in public speeches, leading to a decline in agricultural contribution to GDP from 29 percent in 2005/2006 to 21 percent in 2007/2008, and further to 15.1 percent in 2008/2009. Funds that could revitalise the sector are being spent on presidential tours on Prosperity for All, unbudgeted presidential donations, handouts, and are lost through waste, corruption and embezzlement. 

The NRM Government admits that there is lack of reliable agricultural statistics for effective planning and monitoring. However, an agricultural census is not among their priorities. The last comprehensive agricultural census was done in 1965 with sample surveys done in 1991/1992 and 1992/1993. Therefore, most agricultural interventions such as PMA and NAADS were designed using outdated and unreliable statistics. Most of these programmes have also been politicised and viewed as government political objectives rather than economic sustainability principles. 

We propose to fund a comprehensive agriculture census to get adequate and reliable data on which to base policy interventions. We also believe that an agriculture-led poverty reduction focus would empower Uganda’s rural poor to improve their household incomes and reduce poverty. 

Last year alone, Government injected Shs 98 billion in NAADS, which is the focus of Prosperity for All, but there is nothing tangible to show for this expenditure in terms of improved welfare. Like other interventions under Prosperity for All, the NAADS programme is characterised by distribution of handouts for political patronage, manifested in the selection of the six model farmers per parish. Most of our agricultural land is exhausted, yet Government has made no provision for agricultural inputs such as fertilizers to revitalise the soils. This lack of policy focus and micro-management has led to low agricultural output and food scarcity.

In 2000/2001, Government proposed that NAADS would adopt a demand-driven approach to delivery of services. For unknown reasons, Government later switched to the supply-driven model where peasants are called for workshops. Government has again switched back to the demand-driven approach where farm inputs will be supplied to farmers on demand. This switch in models seems deliberate as government officials spend most funds on allowances while the rural people continue to sink in poverty. We recommend increased spending on agricultural inputs and research.

Government has pledged Shs 60 billion to support agricultural mechanisation and agro-processing. However, this will be accessed through commercial banks, which are profit-oriented and might make the funds too expensive for agriculture. 

The modalities of accessing the loans also remain unclear. Our concern is that it may end up benefiting a few connected people in Kampala instead of those engaged in agro-processing in rural areas. The Opposition has finalised a draft Bill for the creation of a Uganda Agricultural Development Bank (UADB) whose mandate will be to lend to farmers at minimal interests of around five percent and with grace periods.

Unemployment

Agriculture - the major sector which employs over 70 percent of the population in Uganda - has been marginalised by the NRM Government; fighting unemployment among the rural poor is not one of the top priorities of Government. There is also lack of a clear employment policy, and many youth have resorted to exporting cheap labour to the fragile Iraq. In Kampala, the youth unemployment rate is over 32.2 percent while that of university graduates is at 36 percent. Job insecurity is high and job awards are characterised by nepotism and cronyism. The privatisation process also benefited foreigners in terms of employment rather than the vulnerable Ugandans. 

We believe that any path towards industrialisation, which is not driven by agriculture, will create minimum employment. However, this seems not to worry the NRM leaders because their supporters are in some form of disguised employment, earning handouts from Government and benefiting from corruption. The Youth Enterprise Scheme (YES) has never been evaluated, even when funds seem to have been misappropriated. The result is increased crime rate in the country and jails filled up with petty offenders whose crimes include playing cards and omweso games. We propose to handle the problem through reforms in education, vocational training and proper remuneration of public servants. 

Land 

Land is a very important factor of production especially for an agrarian economy like Uganda. Under the NRM Government, Shs 21.5 billion was appropriated for purchase of land for the rural poor. This comprised of Shs 6.5 billion in 2001/2002, Shs 9 billion in 2002/2003, Shs 3 billion in 2007/2008 and Shs 3 billion in 2008/2009. Details of how these monies were spent have not been provided. The Opposition wish to demand that this information be made public.

The Land Act (1997) has been in abeyance for the last 12 years due to lack of funding for land committees yet Government is hurriedly introducing an amendment to the Land Act. In financial year 2006/2007, Government promised to revamp the Land Registry by amending the Land Registrations & Titles Act, but this was not done. We believe Government has no political will to resolve land wrangles as they continue to give land to foreign “investors” as citizens kill each other.  

Education

Mr Speaker, the last three years under the NRM Government have seen educational standards falling dismally. According to the Education for All Global Monitoring Report, UPE enrolment dropped from 90 percent in 2003 to 84 percent in 2007. Although government statistics show that primary school enrolment increased to 7.6 million pupils, close to 50 percent of those who enrol for P.1 do not complete P.7. In addition, 30 percent of school-going-age children are not at school. 

According to Byamugisha, in a publication of the Ministry of Education and Sports of 2006, while total enrolment in 2000 was 1.6 million pupils, only 452,000 of these completed primary seven in 2006. Further, out of 890,000 pupils who enrolled for primary one in 2001, only 444,017 completed primary seven in 2007. It should also be noted that the completion figures include those who completed primary seven from private schools. Also, one out of every four pupils is absent and the total drop-out rate after primary three is about 60 percent. Most of those who drop out of school are girls. 

In order to cover up the ghost figures in the UPE programme for purposes of accessing the capitation grant, the Ministry of Education and Sports has stopped publishing drop-out rates for the last three years. (Laughter)

The much touted UPE programme is poorly implemented and in most schools there is teaching without education. What seems to be clear is that Government pretends to pay teachers while teachers pretend to teach, as evidenced by the following PLE results, whose source is Uganda National Examinations Board. The percentage of pupils passing in division one has been on the decline, dropping drastically in 2008, and the percentage of those who failed to get a certificate of attendance is on the increase. 

Government still provides only Shs 560 per pupil per term as capitation grant yet this is not enough to maintain a pupil at school. Last year, we advised Government to provide lunch to pupils, but this advice was not taken. Failures seem not to concern the NRM leaders since their children are in private schools. Teachers should be motivated through provision of accommodation and improved pay, provision of lunch for UPE schools, increased funding for Special Needs Education and the school drop-out rates addressed. 

Our position is that the only way to retain girls at school is to build girls’ schools and improve sanitary conditions that address the unique concerns of the girl child. However, since it took over, the NRM Government has not built a single girls’ school. In addition, they have failed to renovate the existing ones. 

The Opposition believes the only way to emancipate women is to provide them with adequate quality education. We recommend renovation of all the existing girls’ schools, reinstating the position of senior woman teacher and providing separate toilet facilities for the girl child in all UPE schools.

Health

Mr Speaker, the Uganda participatory poverty assessment exercise identified health as the main cause of impoverishment in households. According to the Uganda National Household Survey of 2005/2006, 13 percent of sick people suffer without seeking medical attention due to high costs and unavailability of basic health facilities. 

In order to eliminate poverty, priority should be given to improving health standards. For the last 23 years, Uganda has been listed among countries that have failed to meet the minimum international health standards. The per-capita expenditure on the health sector in Uganda is only US$ 8, which is far below the minimum international standard of US$ 28. In most rural areas, health centre IIIs and IIs receive Shs 260,000 and Shs 60,000 on a quarterly basis respectively. There is shortage of anti-malarial and paediatric drugs, drugs for treatment of tuberculosis and haemorrhage, as well as HIV test kits. 

In rural health centres, there is one bed per 1000 patients. Expectant mothers cannot be admitted without gloves and mackintoshes, commonly known as kavera, and razor blades are used instead of surgical blades that used to be available even during the Amin regime.  

In addition, there is brain drain of our medical staff; they have left for greener pastures in countries such as Rwanda and South Africa due to inadequate pay, lack of hardship allowances and scholarships to support them in the rural areas. There is also no policy to bar doctors from having multiple jobs in various hospitals. 

The Opposition believes that with increased funding for the health sector, health workers will be adequately remunerated, enough drugs and equipment will be procured, and a healthy population will improve economic growth. 

In the financial year 2007/2008, Parliament appropriated Shs 8 billion for the rehabilitation of referral hospitals. However, accountability has not been received yet and nothing is on the ground. In addition, a rampant leakage of drugs to private health clinics is on the increase. 

While Government laments about inefficiency, corruption, poor service delivery and stock-outs as the core problems in the sector, its actions do not reflect this tone. Funds meant for drugs are diverted to funding foreign trips as people continue to bury for causes such as malaria.

In financial year 2009/2010, Government promises to focus on human resource development and preventive measures. It promises to improve the management of Mulago National Referral Hospital through public-private partnerships, thus running away from its core responsibility of providing health care. Government looks at privatisation as the only solution to all failed government projects. 

We propose that Government embraces its responsibility and increases funding for Mulago and other referral hospitals to provide adequate facilities and allowances for health workers. The Opposition is still wondering what a private investor would be looking for in Mulago National Referral Hospital. We believe this could be a ploy to access the land on which Mulago Hospital is located. (Laughter) Our worry is compounded by the recent sharing of Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital land with investors, against the advice of the hospital and Ministry of Health officials. 

Further, the proposal to have a public-private partnership for Mulago is like mortgaging the lives of Ugandans. We will do everything in our power to protect people’s lives and prevent the giveaway of Mulago National Referral Hospital land in the name of public-private partnerships. (Applause)

Environment 

Mr Speaker, pressure on the environment and the natural resource base is manifested in the encroachment on forests, swamps, wetlands, riverbanks, lakeshores and game reserves, which are resulting in sedimentation and destruction of the ecosystem. This largely results from ineffective management and sheer lack of commitment on the part of Government, leading to economic decline in Uganda. This practice has led to flooding due to lack of water catchment areas and persistent drought.

The mismanagement of the environment by the NRM Government costs this country a whopping Shs. 1.152 trillion per annum in GDP, enough to finance over 20 percent of Uganda’s national budget. 

A study by the International Food Policy Research Institute established that 95 percent of farmers were taking out more food nutrients from the soils than they and nature were putting back, with the cost of soil nutrient loss estimated at US$ 625 million per annum. 

In financial year 2008/2009, Government proposed a ban on plastic bags of 30 microns and below in order to protect the environment. However, there was no legislation to enforce this ban and the bags remained on the market. Despite that, Government has again proposed a total ban on plastic bags, old computers, freezers and refrigerators. We believe Government has no political will to protect the environment as sanctions cannot simply be put in the Finance Bill. 

Water and Sanitation

According to the Department of Water Development of 2008, 39 percent of the sub-counties do not have access to improved water sources. Over 50 percent of Ugandans do not have safe water yet the water table is dropping and increasing human insecurity. However, to date, Government has failed to solve the water problem in Karamoja and a lot of money has been swindled in the process. The promises to complete construction of bulk water supply schemes in Karamoja Region and Sembabule, and to construct over 100 shallow wells, 500 boreholes and 18 piped water schemes in other areas has remained on paper. No progress report was given on what has so far been accomplished. We reiterate that value-for-money audits be undertaken on water provision for Karamoja Region and other areas. 

The average sanitation coverage measured by access to latrine and hand washing facilities was at 62 percent in 2008 in rural areas against the target of 74 percent. This increases the incidence of dysentery and other sanitation-related diseases. We propose that attention be paid to this sector because health plays a key role in poverty eradication and development.

Industrial Development

Industrialisation in Uganda has not been informed by a coherent industrial policy. Most industries established have minimum forward and backward linkages, and they remain largely import dependant. 

Financing of the industry sector has not escaped patronage politics and networks. Rather than enhancing local industry through financial support, the NRM Government has, on a number of occasions, sank massive resources into ailing companies where the political leadership seems to have personal stakes. Most beneficiaries have been Asians and the locally entrenched entrepreneurs.

We notice that over Shs 100 billion appropriated for industrial parks in the last three years is not evident on the ground. This money includes: Shs 22 billion in the financial year 2005/2006; Shs 5 billion plus US$30 million from the World Bank in 2006/07; and Shs 16 billion in 2007/08. In addition, the regional industrial parks that were promised are nowhere to be seen. The Opposition believes this money was put to wasteful use, unless Government shows the parks, roads, utility infrastructure and serviced plots it intended to construct, plus full accountability.

In terms of industries, the President mentioned edible oil and fat products, dairy production, grain milling, sugar processing and cotton ginning. It is our position that the level of industrialisation cannot move the country forward. In addition, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute is almost turning into a car depot yet it is primarily for research and development. The Opposition recommends that a value-for-money audit be undertaken to establish how the industrial research fund has been spent. 

We further propose investment of adequate funds in research and development through the Uganda Industrial Research Institute. In addition, we propose that a clear industrial research policy be formulated and an Industrial Credit Bank (ICB) be created to support industrial development.

Transport Infrastructure

For the last three years, the NRM Government has appropriated huge resources, over Shs 1.1 trillion in financial year 2008/2009 alone, for construction, upgrading and rehabilitation of the road and railway infrastructure. However, little progress is seen on the ground. 

Available statistics show that over 20 percent of the trunk road network in Uganda is still in a poor condition, while 60 percent is in a fair condition, but rapidly deteriorating due to the poor workmanship exhibited by the contractors and delays in and/or non completion of projects. All our feeder roads are in deplorable states due to limited funding for local governments and corruption. 

In financial year 2008/2009, Government promised to secure road maintenance equipment for all districts, but this has not been fulfilled and no account has been given. 

In 2006, a railways concessionaire, Rift Valley Railways (RVR), entered a contract with Government to improve the rail sub-sector. However, to date, this contract has not been honoured by RVR yet Government remains silent.  

In financial year 2006/2007, the Minister reported that RVR had an obligation to invest US$ 18 million to rehabilitate the existing infrastructure and make new investments. The Minister also reported that rail cargo would double in five years. However, to date, there is no evidence of new investments yet Government remains silent, but with RVR reaping where it did not sow at the cost of Ugandans, with the knowledge and consent of Government.  

For the last three years, Government’s promise to rehabilitate the Kampala-Kasese and Kampala-Tororo railway lines has not materialised. In addition, the promise to replace the Kabalega Ferry to Mwanza has not materialised either.

The Opposition recommends that a detailed programme for rehabilitation and extension to the Sudan, of the rail infrastructure be availed to ease follow-up of Government promises in the sector. 

We also recommend that the contract with RVR be terminated immediately, invoking the penalty clauses for remedies, and a forensic audit be undertaken on all road projects.  

We further recommend a special audit for the Road Fund whose proceeds Government has since kept secret from Parliamentary scrutiny.

Energy Infrastructure

For the last four years, Shs 406 billion has been appropriated to the Energy Fund to solve the power supply problem, which is an impediment to industrialisation and value addition. This includes Shs 20 billion appropriated in the financial year 2005/2006; Shs 99 billion in 2006/2007; Shs 119 billion in 2007/2008; and Shs 109 billion in financial year 2008/2009. In addition, US$27 million, which is equivalent to Shs 59 billion, was diverted from the Privatisation Unit of Uganda without the authority of Parliament.

The problem of power supply is still persistent. Electricity rates are high and a disincentive to value addition. Energy losses estimated at 38 percent indicate the extent to which the cost of inefficiency is transferred to the unsuspecting consumer. 

In this financial year, 2009/2010, an additional Shs 85 billion has been allocated to the Energy Fund without accounting for all the money previously appropriated to the Fund. 

For unknown reasons, the Minister for Finance continues to operate this fund rather than transfer its management and operation to the responsible sector minister, which is highly irregular and suspect. We ask Government to inform Ugandans why money was illegally obtained and diverted from the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture (PERD) account outside the provisions of the PERD Act and without Parliamentary approval. We also recommend that all funds previously appropriated be handled by the line ministry. 

Governance and Accountability

Governance and accountability are some of the cornerstones for development of any country. Without good governance and full accountability, funds meant for delivery of social services are squandered, leaving the people poor. In Uganda, corruption is one of the most formidable challenges of good governance, development and poverty reduction. Corruption benefits leaders personally, rewards supporters, greases the political machinery and traps millions of the population in poverty. All Government contracts are always given to only those who make handsome contributions to the ruling NRM party as a reward for their support.  

The debate on corruption has not moved beyond proselytising about corruption to practical solutions. Contrary to high profile and widely quoted pledges by President Museveni to stamp out corruption, it is still rampant today. Examples include the wastage of resources on Tri-Star and Phoenix, and Shimoni, Butabika and UTV land giveaways. All these have happened under the watchful eye of our NRM leaders. The most recent is the misuse of state resources for NRM party work.

Beyond public statements condemning corruption, there is no political will or commitment to fight corruption. Whereas in 2007/08 the NRM Government received a grant of US$10.2 million from the US Government to strengthen investigation, documentation and prosecution of corruption cases, this has not yielded results. Corruption that rages on from petty bribes to bureaucratic and administrative corruption is evidenced by the following reports:

•	The 2005 Chr. Michelsen Institute reports corruption in tax administration in Uganda manifested through political interference, patronage, nepotism in recruitment of staff and corruption at managerial level.

•	The 2006 Global Integrity Report on Uganda estimated that more than half of government’s annual budget is lost to corruption every year. It also cited political interference in areas of police work such as investigations.

•	The 2006 Freedom House Report demonstrated widespread patronage and corruption in government with political patronage and favouritism characterising the NRM administration and extending to the private sector.

•	The 2007 African Peer Review Mechanism Report shows that Uganda loses US$ 258.6 million annually through corruption in the procurement system. This estimate excludes other forms of corruption such as wasteful expenditure and outright theft.

•	The 2008 Freedom House Report observed that the Executive does not guarantee independence of the Judiciary with instances of intimidation and raiding courts by the military to re-arrest suspects cleared by court.

•	The Heritage Foundation 2008 Report shows that Uganda is weak in respect of freedom from corruption.

•	In 2008, Uganda fell from 111th to 126th in global corruption rankings, scoring 2.6 percent, which was an indicator of rampant corruption.

•	The 2008/09 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report identified corruption as one of the major constraints of doing business in Uganda.

•	The 2009 Transparency International Global Corruption Barometer ranks Uganda the third most corrupt country in the world.

For the last three years, the NRM Government has promised Parliament that the Anti-Money Laundering Bill intended to fight financial crime and enhance corporate governance and accountability would be tabled. It was promised in financial years 2007/08, 2008/09 and in the recent budget. 

The behaviour and dilly-dallying of the Finance Minister raises our long held suspicion that this Government is buying time to enable its senior members continue exploiting loopholes within the present legal regime. It was compounded by the arrest of senior officials of State House in Britain. 

Provision of resources, power, independence and self-accounting mechanisms to the anti-corruption bodies has been lacking. This is exemplified by failure or refusal by Government to release funds required by the Auditor-General to conduct special audits to ensure value for money in the implementation of Government programmes. 

In addition, Government has kept secret the special audit report on CHOGM where Government spent over Shs 300 billion, with Shs 34 billion in unknown arrears yet to be verified and cleared. 

The corruption vice continues to be a major cause of helplessness of the people as resources are allocated to sectors where it is easier to obtain kickbacks rather than to the most deserving sectors. We shall later propose measures aimed at tackling corruption.

Public Administration

Mr Speaker, under the NRM Government, Uganda has emerged as one of the countries in the world with the highest percentage of budgetary allocation to public administration. It has an inflated parasitic political bureaucracy comprised of over 70 ministers, over 75 presidential advisers, over 40 private secretaries, over 150 Resident District Commissioners and their deputies. This costs the tax payer over Shs 14 billion per annum on salaries alone. This money is enough to recruit and pay 70,560 UPE teachers badly needed by the country, or to enrol and support additional three million UPE pupils per year, or to construct 1,760 classrooms. 

Government plans to recruit additional 80 deputy Resident District Commissioners in charge of youth at a cost of Shs 6.865 billion per annum; create additional 14 districts to increase the number of Members of Parliament, which is wasteful and a burden to tax payers. This seems to be the fundamental change promised to Ugandans in 1986. We propose to reduce this public administration burden from the tax payer.

Local Government

Local governments still face a challenge in implementing their programmes due to shortage of revenue. The much admired programme of decentralisation was reversed as some of the administrative powers have been returned to the centre. 

Decentralised administrative power has not been accompanied by adequate resources. Local governments continue to receive less than 40 percent of the national budget. In financial year 2009/10, the local governments will receive only 21 percent of the budgetary allocations yet the majority of the population is in the rural areas. 

In 2005/06, Government hurriedly abolished graduated tax and covered the resource shortfall by increasing VAT from 17 percent to 18 percent. Surprisingly, graduated tax was reintroduced in form of local service tax yet VAT was not reduced. Local governments face financial difficulties but the NRM Government continues to politically create districts putting more economic burden on the taxpayer. We propose to rationalise creation of districts and send additional resources from the centre. 

UPDF, Police and Prisons

Government has improved the overall security in the country and made efforts towards training and professionalising the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). However, the Opposition is concerned that a number of challenges still face the forces in the performance of their national duties. 

For the UPDF, there is mismanagement of funds and abuse of office which has led to loss of funds, unexplained supplementary expenditures and unnecessary delays in paying auxiliary forces. The Integrated Financial Management System is yet to be completed. There is luck of standardisation of military vehicles. Management of the payroll is still poor, characterised by ghost soldiers. Modernisation and professionalisation of the UPDF still faces challenges due to lack of transparent systems of recruitment, training and promotion. 

The general welfare of the UPDF is still affected by lack of decent accommodation, pay and insufficient provision of pension funds for retired officers and men and families of fallen soldiers. Disposal of army land such as Kiseka, Kitante Courts and Mbuya land were not properly handled. There is general mismanagement. Deployment of soldiers outside Uganda is done without approval of Parliament. The UPDF still engages itself in partisan politics. Ex-combatants have not been paid their terminal dues.

For the Police Force, there are no proper systems of recruitment, training and promotions. The general welfare of Police officers is still wanting in terms of accommodation and pay.

For the Prisons Service, the welfare of the prisons officers in terms of accommodation and pay is still wanting. There is general lack of transport; there is congestion and inadequate facilities in most prisons. 

Government Assurances 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Opposition believes that in order to win and retain the people’s mandate, Government must be honest with the people it leads. For the last three years, the NRM Government has made a number of unfulfilled promises which should be brought to the attention of the people as this amounts to abusing the trust the people put in Government when they sowed their mandate. 

It has totally failed to ease the incidence of the tax on the poor working people. This budget, like the previous ones, does not indicate how it will bring to book those who continue to evade taxes. Domestic arrears have become a way of diverting public resources outside of the budget process. Fiscal indiscipline is persistent, leading to increase in domestic arrears as funds are diverted from social programmes to non-priority areas. 

In 2007, Ministry of Finance developed a debt strategy in which it promised a number of measures to strengthen existing initiatives to prevent further accumulation of domestic arrears and to make external debt sustainable by limiting borrowing to priority areas. Among them were: 

•	Issuance of public debt management regulations. To date, these regulations have not been issued. 

•	Publishing on a quarterly basis a shame list of accounting officers who commit Government without the authority of the Accountant-General. None has been published in the last one and half years. 

•	Preparing a Cabinet Paper on a quarterly basis on the performance of the commitment control system, listing defaulting votes and recommending measures to be taken against culprits. There is no evidence of action in this regard. 

•	Issuance of a statutory instrument to clarify the functions of the different stakeholders in external debt management. No action has been taken. 

•	Announcing the maximum debt Government could contract in any one year in a national budget on a rolling basis. No annual borrowing caps have been announced. 

As a result of this, the Uganda Government domestic debt has increased from approximately Shs 300 billion in June 2000 to 2.14 trillion in March 2009. In addition, the external debt increased from 2 billion to 4 billion in just two years. This fiscal indiscipline has endangered our private sector companies by causing serious cash-flow problems. The huge and growing public debt increases the tax burden on the citizens. Most businesses have collapsed and lost their valuable property to banks. Pensioners have perished in poverty due to lack of commitment by Government to clear arrears and prevent further accumulation. 

Government promised to implement minimum health service delivery standards in all health centres and to label drugs that belong to the public. It further promised to implement the minimum health care package and to carry out a cost benefit analysis of setting up a national social insurances scheme. In addition, funds for the rehabilitation of regional referral hospitals were appropriated but no results are seen. 

In 2008, Government advanced Shs 60 billion to M/s Quality Chemicals Ltd to purchase anti-malarial drugs and ARVs from their factory in Uganda. No drugs have been delivered and Government has not reported on progress. We recommend that the money be urgently recovered to procure drugs for the vulnerable people. 

A number of promises that were made under transport and infrastructure remain unfulfilled. These include completion of several roads such as Kampala Northern Bypass, purchase of road maintenance equipment for districts, the replacement of the Kabalega Ferry, provision of additional ferries and rehabilitation of the Kampala–Kasese and Kampala–Soroti railway lines. 

Government promised to decisively deal with energy loses, technical and commercial, and also carry out energy efficiency audits in public buildings including universities, schools, industrial and commercial buildings and hotels. In addition, Government has not reported on the progress of Waki, Bugoye, Buseruka and Kikagati renewal energy schemes which it promised would commence in financial year 2007/08, and the 100 megawatts Isimba Hydropower Project under public-private partnership. 

For the last three years, under Prosperity for All, in the NRM Manifesto, Ugandans were promised that every homestead would improve their annual incomes to Shs 20 million per annum. To date, the country has not been informed as to how many Ugandans now receive Shs 20 million annually. 

The 2008/09 promise to mechanise agriculture by introducing 500 walking tractors by September 2008 remains to be seen despite budgetary allocations of Shs 2.8 billion for the activity. In addition, for several years, Government promised to avail money for water for production and establishing irrigation schemes, but this remains on paper.

Mr Speaker, Government promised in the financial year 2008/09 to refurbish primary societies, including refurbishing 173 commodity stores in parishes, and constructing at least 10 warehouses at LC III levels, and to strengthen co-operatives by bringing an amendment to the Co-operative Societies Act, 1991. Government further promised to revitalize co-operative societies as a way of increasing agriculture productivity and marketing. It also promised the much awaited Regulatory Framework for Tier 4 institutions, a SACCO-specific Bill by September 2008, and a Regulatory Framework draft Bill by December 2008, but nothing came, yet public funds continue to be channeled through these unregulated SACCOS. The public continues to be fleeced by unlicensed money lending organisations under the watchful eye of Government.

Mr Speaker, in 2007/08, Government promised to review the outdated tax system to assess whether it meets objectives of today’s changing environment and national needs, having been last reviewed in 1996/97. This has since been abandoned and the poor continue to bear the incidence of tax while the rich get tax exemptions and write-offs. The promise to increase non-tax revenue levels to over 20 percent of the Budget also still remains a dream.

Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2008/09, Government launched the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan as an affirmative action towards lifting the plight of the marginalised people of the greater north. Shs 1.1 trillion was budgeted but for unknown reasons, government decided not to implement the programme as planned. This back-tracking is an act of bad faith and an empty promise to the people of the greater north who have the highest incidence of poverty.

More than three years ago, the NRM Government also promised to build a technical training institute in every sub-county of Uganda to absorb the high number of school dropouts. Other promises include: keeping inflation to single digit, payment of all pension arrears, establishment of regional industrial parks and starting early production of petroleum to produce oil by mid 2009.

Most of these promises remain unfulfilled yet funds were appropriated by Parliament. The NRM Government has demonstrated lack of will to deliver on its promises. This is the highest form of corruption that has led to the culture of irresponsible and wasteful spending on non-poverty related programmes and thus kept people in abject poverty. The Opposition believes that the only way to hold government accountable to the public is to point out these unfulfilled pledges. We are also making policy proposals which we believe will benefit the public and move this country forward if adopted and implemented.

Budget Proposals for 2009/10

Mr Speaker, our response and proposals aim at creating a sustainable fiscal environment through increased funding of the agriculture sector. We believe these proposals will help government rediscover its direction by increasing funding for pro-poor programmes. The proposals seek to correct past economic imbalances caused by fiscal mistakes so as to achieve equitable development for all Ugandans. A summary of these proposals is included in Appendix 1 to this budget response. 

Unemployment

The problem of unemployment, especially among the youth, is very high and poses a threat to growth. It raises levels of crime and is a disincentive to potential investors. We propose to:
a)	Formulate a National Employment Policy for Uganda,
b)	Introduce skills training for school leavers and youth,
c)	Give affordable loans for small cottage industries and the informal sector,
d)	Reform the education system to train job creators, 
e)	Adequately remunerate public servants and professionals, and 
f)	Adequately fund the agriculture sector to a minimum of 10 percent of the annual budget.

Domestic Arrears

Mr Speaker, domestic arrears have a negative impact on the economy, especially on businesses struggling amidst the effects of the global recession and high interest rates from banks. The sacrifice and contribution of senior retired citizens is paramount. We, therefore, propose that government should: 
a)	Clear  the outstanding domestic arrears expeditiously;
b)	Enforce the commitment control system;
c)	Clear all pension arrears and ensure pensions are paid promptly; and
d)	Implement the 2007 debt strategy.

Agriculture

In an agrarian economy like Uganda, agriculture and its associated industries are essential for spurring growth, reducing mass poverty and enhancing food security. However, the sector is grossly underfunded, thus limiting its rightful contribution to economic growth. Government should:
a)	Increase budgetary allocation to the agriculture sector to a minimum of 10 percent, in line with the Maputo Declaration signed by African heads of state to improve investment in large-scale commercial agriculture, mechanised irrigation, agro-processing and provision of farm inputs.

b)	Revive the producer and marketing co-operatives.

c)	Establish a Uganda agriculture development bank to fund agriculture and co-operatives at affordable interest rates not exceeding five percent.

d)	Undertake a national comprehensive agricultural census to obtain reliable data for planning, policy formulation and monitoring.

e)	Provide two hand hoes to every household in Uganda.

f)	Scrap NAADS.

g)	Mainstream agricultural extension services into line government programmes instead of being project-based.

h)	Provide adequate funds for research and extension services.

i)	De-politicise all agricultural intervention programmes under poverty eradication initiatives.

j)	Rehabilitate, retool and equip all agricultural training institutions.

k)	Revitalise and rehabilitate all irrigation schemes such as  Mubuku, Kibimba, Doho, Odina and Kige schemes.
l)	 Provide adequate funding for afforestation, irrigation development and rain water harvesting.
m)	Undertake national soil mapping.
n)	Introduce improved seeds, veins, cuttings and seedlings that are resistant to drought and diseases.

Education 

Mr Speaker, an educated population would boost Uganda’s economic growth. This requires adequate resources to recruit additional teachers and remunerate them handsomely. Education is an opportunity to cause a common citizenship. We, therefore, propose that government should:

a)	Raise the salaries of primary school teachers to a minimum of Shs 400,000 per month and introduce performance-based pay. As a result of this measure:

i.	teachers will concentrate on their work, thereby improving the quality of education;

ii.	incomes will be equitably distributed all over the villages of Uganda as there is no village which does not have a teacher;

iii.	teachers will employ the available labour in the villages for production, thus reducing unemployment;

iv.	productivity will increase and thereby enhance food security and agriculture contribution to GDP;

v.	the standards of living of the poor working class and the rural poor will be improved drastically;

vi.	rural-urban migration will reduce and the level of crime will drop; and

vii.	income inequality will be reduced as resources will be equitably distributed in all villages and districts of Uganda.

b)	 Recruit additional teachers to meet the 1:40 teacher-pupil ratio for primary schools and fill staffing gaps in secondary schools, currently at 12,000 teachers.
c)	Provide lunch for all UPE schools.
d) 	Provide pens, pencils and exercise books for all UPE schools.
e)	 Provide separate toilet facilities for girls and boys in UPE schools
f) 	Reinstate the position of a senior woman teacher in all UPE schools.
g) 	Provide sanitary support for the girl-child.
h) 	Support equipping of laboratories in private schools.
i)	Increase capitation grant for all public universities to make university education affordable to all.
j)	Provide sponsorship for all students admitted in public universities instead of only 4,000 students.
k)	Provide specialised equipment such as Braille and hearing aids for Special Needs Education.
l)	Rehabilitate traditional girls’ schools such as Wanyange and Kidetok to promote girl-child education.
m)	Provide adequate housing for teachers at both primary and secondary levels.
n)	Establish an education fund for the advancement of education in this country.
o)	Put in place and implement an effective national food security policy. 

Health

Mr Speaker, health is the main cause of impoverishment in Uganda. This has to be addressed through adequate funding. Government should, therefore:
a) 	Provide adequate funding for health and stop diverting funds to foreign trips.
b) 	Increase the minimum salary of health workers to Shs 300,000 per month.
c) 	Recruit 46,000 health workers to fill the existing gaps.
d) 	Brand all drugs in government health units and hospitals.
e) 	Increase funding by 50 percent for Mulago National Referral Hospital and other referral hospitals instead of privatising them.
f) Provide adequate funding for procurement of essential drugs.
g) Put in place mechanisms to stop wasteful expiry of essential drugs.
h) Equip the Heart and Cancer institutes, and all specialised health units.

Transport and Infrastructure Development

Mr Speaker, improvement and maintenance of the road and rail network are primary for development. The problem that the NRM Government faces is the quality of works, value for money, poor axle control, and delay in completion of contracts, declining road safety, and poor management of traffic. We propose that government should:

a)	Undertake value for money audits for all road works.
b)	Publish and implement the Kampala Traffic Management Plan.
c)	Provide pedestrian walk ways and cyclist lanes on all roads.
d)	Survey and mark all road reserves.
e)	Terminate the RVR contract and rebuild the Kampala-Tororo-Pakwach and Kampala-Kasese Railway lines, and extend them to the neighbouring countries.
f)	Account for the procurement and distribution of road units for districts.
g)	Increase budgetary allocations for traffic and road safety.

Water and Environment

The Opposition recognizes that the environment plays a vital role in cleaning the air and regulating the climate. Government’s attempt to address environmental concerns by banning plastic bags, old computers, freezers and refrigerators is not adequate. No proposals or plans were given to make new computers, freezers and refrigerators affordable to those who were earning a living from computer training and sale of cold drinks using the second hand equipment. There is also no comprehensive plan for disposal of that equipment already in the country. We propose that government: 
a) undertakes value for money audits for all water projects;
b) enforces the ban on plastic bags in a phased manner to allow for adequate sensitization;
c) Support companies that were engaged in production of plastic bags to produce alternative bio-degradable bags;
d) Removes tax on importation of new freezers and computers to make them affordable to Ugandans;
e) 	Provides incentives to companies engaged in recycling plastic material;
f) 	Establishes a national tree planning day when every citizen will plant at least one tree per year;
g)	Refill all excavated land;
h)	De-lease all swamps that had been leased without NEMA’s authority; and
i)	Review the education curriculum to include environmental conservation with emphasis on tree planting.

Land 

Mr Speaker, lack of access to land is the leading cause of powerlessness in Uganda. In order to increase productivity in the agricultural sector and improve household incomes, we propose:
a) 	Immediate implementation of the Land Act, 1997.
b) 	An increase in the Land Fund to assist the landless poor acquire land for agricultural production.
c) 	Publication of beneficiaries of the Land Fund for transparency and accountability.
d) 	That land titles or certificates of customary ownership be processed for land owners whose titles have no disputes.

Energy

Mr Speaker, the performance of the energy sector is vital for increased productivity and value addition, which are necessary for the country’s economic growth and development. We, therefore, recommend that government:
a) 	Accounts for the energy fund;
b) 	Accounts for the illegal diversion of US$ 27 million from the Privatisation Unit without Parliamentary approval;
c) 	Introduces a specific Bill for an enabling law to regulate the Energy Fund and provide an independent management structure for the Fund.

Industrial DAevelopment

Mr Speaker, industrial development is vital to an agrarian economy like ours which is still dependent on exporting raw and semi-processed products. We propose that government should:
a) 	Provide a clear industrial policy.
b) 	Adequately fund the Uganda Industrial Research Institute.
c) 	Establish an Industrial Credit Bank (ICB).
d) 	Undertake a forensic audit for all the funds released for the construction of industrial parks.

Public Administration

Mr Speaker, the bloated public administration is one of the major problems with adverse effects on Uganda’s economy. This has been caused mainly by increased appointments motivated by political patronage to sustain the NRM regime in power. 

We propose that government be downsized as follows: 

•	Merge the offices of CAO and RDC;
•	Abolish DISOs and GISOs; (Applause)
•	Reduce presidential advisers to ten;
•	Reduce presidential secretaries to ten; 
•	Restructure government in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution;
•	Stop the creation of tribal districts; (Applause)
•	Aabolish the use of government vehicles and establish a vehicle hire purchase scheme for public servants; and 
•	Rationalise the number of public holidays.

Corruption

Mr Speaker, Uganda is a signatory to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, but penalties against corruption are not implemented. Whereas the country has an adequate anti-corruption framework, it faces implementation challenges. 

This was underscored by the US Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) scorecard which placed Uganda’s effort to fight corruption at 51 percent in its peer group, which is just above average. 

Further, the 2008 Global Integrity Report shows that whereas Uganda scores high in terms of quality of anti-corruption laws, she remains weak in terms of implementation.

The war against corruption in Uganda has failed not because of inadequate laws, but for lack of political will from the NRM leaders and inadequate funding for anti-corruption agencies. 

The United States State Department Investment Climate Report cites failure by government to demonstrate political will to reduce corruption. 

To eliminate corruption, the NRM Government leaders should walk the talk. We propose the following: 

•	Strengthen the anti-corruption agencies and court;
•	Apprehend and effectively punish all the corrupt; 
•	Recover all the stolen property;
•	Immediately table the overdue Anti-Money Laundering Bill; and
•	Reduce wasteful expenditure and allocate resources to fund priority sectors.

Local governments

Mr Speaker, the decentralisation policy transferred service delivery from the centre to local governments. The central government has a responsibility to fund decentralized services through adequate fund transfers. Graduated Tax Compensation and local Service and Hotel Tax are unsustainable mechanisms for funding local governments. 

We therefore propose that: 

•	Local Service and Hotel Tax be abolished to stop the double taxation on citizens; 
•	One percent of total VAT proceeds be transferred to local governments as intended in financial year 2005/2006, when VAT was raised from 17 to 18 percent; and 
•	A minimum of 40 percent of the Budget should be transferred to local governments as we await increase in local revenues enhanced by the new proposed tax reforms.

UPDF, Police and Prisons

Mr Speaker, government has managed to reduce internal and external conflicts, thereby reducing public expenditure on operations. 

We now propose that government does the following:

•	Increases salaries of all the forces to a minimum of Shs 300,000 per month; (Applause) 
•	Pays outstanding arrears of all auxiliary forces; 
•	Regionally recruits, trains and promotes forces in accordance with the Constitution; (Applause)
•	Gazettes official uniforms of all forces; 
•	Re-establishes the Special Branch Unit in Police;
•	Constructs 1,000 family units for the UPDF; 
•	Constructs 3,000 family units for Police in Kampala Metropolitan, for example, in Nsambya and  Naguru Barracks; and
•	Constructs 1,000 family units for prison officers.

Tax reforms

Mr Speaker, the challenge government faces in tax administration is the fact that people do not see the benefits of paying taxes reflected in service delivery. This makes it difficult for government to exercise leverage to widen the tax base for fear of resistance and backlash.  

Our Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) collections are only one percent of GDP compared to 11 percent of Kenya, and nine percent of Tanzania. The ratio of tax revenue to GDP is less than 13 percent compared to the sub-Saharan average of 18 percent. 
The recent household survey showed that the poor are increasingly paying more VAT as a percentage of their total incomes than the rich. This has widened disparities between the rich and poor.  

We, therefore, propose the following measures to expand the tax base and increase the ratio of Tax to GDP close to the average for sub-Saharan Africa: 

•	Ssimplify tax administration guidelines to encourage voluntary tax compliance; 
•	Close all tax administration lapses and eradicate evasion of taxes;
•	Amend tax laws to remove any absolute powers given to the Minister for Finance to grant tax waivers at will and ensure that all waivers are done with prior approval of Parliament; 
•	Revamp and computerise the company registry to ease tracking of business entities; 
•	Introduce a personal identification system for all citizens to ease identification and tax administration. This will be required for opening bank accounts, contesting for public office, getting a passport (for adults) and approval of building plans, among others.

We also propose the following measures: 

•	Through the above, capture all informal sector activities into the tax loop; 
•	Abolish VAT on paraffin, bar soap, second hand clothes, shoes and iron sheets of gauge 30; and
•	Increase the tax threshold of PAYE from the current Shs 130,000 to a minimum of Shs 350,000. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, the Opposition believes that the above tax policy recommendations will, if adopted, improve the standards of living and realise additional tax revenue of Shs 1.6 trillion accruing from the expanded tax base; improve tax administration and transparent use of tax revenue for service delivery.  

We also appreciate government’s move to adopt our 2007/08 recommendation by reducing excise duty on beer made from barley, produced, grown and malted in Uganda. This will be an incentive to agricultural production. 

Financing the proposed reforms

The above economic policy proposals can be financed by additional resources raised as follows:
a) 	Shs 1.6 trillion per annum accruing from tax reforms.
b)	Shs 600 billion per annum saved from procurement-related corruption.
c)	Shs 10 billion per annum saved from donations to connected parties.
d)	Shs 30 billion saved from reforms in public administration structures.
e)	Shs 4.5 billion per annum saved from proposed patriotism and Kyankwanzi-related activities.
f)	Shs 1.152 trillion realised from environmental conservation efforts.

As a result of implementing these policy proposals, the following proposed core objectives will be achieved in the short to medium-term:

a)	Reducing the number of poor people from the current 9.6 million people to 2.0 million in five years.

b)	Reducing dependence on donors to finance the national budget to less than 10% in five years.

c)	Reducing gross inequality in wealth among individuals and regions from current levels to half in five years.
Conclusion

Mr Speaker, the Opposition is concerned about the worsening levels of poverty in Uganda, yet our leaders inform us that the economy is growing. This is due to the failed policies and programmes of the NRM Government as a result of adhoc plans. The prophecy of Churchill has been made a dream due to lack of planning.

Hon. Speaker, we believe that government has lost direction and the will, and there is complete lack of patriotism by the NRM leaders. Our task was to highlight areas where government has gone off course and to help you salvage what remains of the wreckage by putting it back on track. The NRM Government has the duty to listen to the Opposition, and has the freedom to take or leave our proposals made in good faith for the benefit of Ugandans. This country has enough resources for everyone to share equitably. Additional resources can be saved from wasteful spending practices of the NRM Government to benefit the poor Ugandans.  The ball is now in the court of Government, and we rest our case.
I thank you. (Applause)
For God and my Country

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oduman, I want to thank you for the presentation of the Opposition response to the government budget. It has been clear and I think people will be able to debate it. Thank you very much.

Now, according to our rules, I should be inviting the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. I do not know whether you want to make your response now or you want more time. 

4.47
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just received the response by the Opposition to the government budget statement this afternoon in our pigeon holes. Therefore, I will not be in position to give a response now, but I will in due course. I will do that on Wednesday. Thank you.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ENONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the shadow minister for making this presentation.

Mr Speaker, as you have seen, the National Resistance Movement Government is a very good listener. Even where we should react immediately, we do not, so that there is harmony. 

But there are a number of issues which are incorrect and which we are going to respond to appropriately. For instance, you mention that the Minister of Finance has got powers to grant tax waivers which, Mr Speaker, you know very well, we do not have. There are issues raised about the global financial crisis and we need to separate financial crisis with economic crisis. You have mentioned something about the level of the number of Members of Parliament whether it is sustainable or not, and whether you would want to reduce the number of Members of Parliament. There are a number of issues which are challenging.

Of course, we need also, in a report like this, to recognise the good aspects of what has been presented in the budget rather than dwelling on the side which you consider to be inappropriate as far as you are concerned, so that your presentation is appropriately balanced. Also, the measures that you are raising are looking more at the expenditure side rather than at the revenue side. So, once these two are not balanced, it becomes very difficult for us to effectively appreciate this. 

But as I have said, we shall give an appropriate response to this submission by the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.49
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my Minister of Finance in the Opposition for this good presentation. I think the concluding statements were very important advice. Now, if the whole Ministry of Finance can get up and say that there is nothing talking about revenue when he has talked very clearly about widening the tax base and how to increase the revenue, I think it is being unfair.

Mr Speaker, I think it is good the Opposition has made its case. I think at the appropriate time we shall come up to see how to dissect the two documents. But again, I want to thank my colleague for this good presentation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Does this mean members are not ready now to respond? Should I give you time tomorrow?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: So, you go and study the budget again and this response. You can use the morning to finalise the committee work. I request you to make an executive summary of your reports. When you tender them they should have an executive summary which we shall use to understand what you have done.

So, with this I think we adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. so that I allow you the morning to polish up. So, House adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.51 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 August 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
