Monday, 28 August 2006

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to take this opportunity to welcome you and I hope you had a peaceful weekend. We are happy with the developments that we hear over the radio are taking place in Juba between our Government representatives, and Kony. We hope they will bring peace to the area. I know that at some point the Minister concerned will come and brief us but I thought I should mention the fact that we are happy with what is going on. 

I did not know that today we would have power from morning and that is why I adjourned to afternoon because I thought we would use the generator. But when I came this morning I found that actually we had power and we lost that time. However, we are trying to contact those concerned to see whether they can give us power throughout this week because according to the Budget Act we should finish with the estimates by 31st of this month, which will be Thursday. 

I have looked at the Order Paper and it seems we have ten reports, which have not been completed and which we have to complete within the stipulated time. I do not think it would be fair to accuse a new Parliament of having lost steam. You are new people and you have the energy. Therefore, you should try and comply with the law by completing the work on time. 

I have realised that in the past we would debate policies and how ministries were being run when considering this budget. What I said before still holds. Should you want to have detailed debates on the workings of ministries then requisition for that time and we shall give it to you. For now we want to concentrate on the Budget, pass it and see how we can handle our policy matters. 

In view of the ten reports, which we have to deal with within three or four days, I suggest that we curtail the period we spend on each report and spend one and a-half hours on each report. I think this is sufficient and will allow us to deal with at least two reports this afternoon. When we start in the morning we can deal with four reports so that we clear them because we have a problem of time.  

As you remember, last week the Minister of Finance tabled five Bills. These Bills are also important because they are the ones to back up the Budget. One of them is the Finance Bill, 2006, which deals with the collection of revenue for purposes of effecting the Budget. We also have these to handle. Therefore, please, bear with me if I curtail the period we spend on each report. I thank you for understanding.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND 
APPROVAL OF:
I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nsubuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Before I read the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the policy statement of the Ministry of Finance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If I may interrupt, are you going to read a report or give a summary of the report?

MR NSUBUGA: I am going to give a summary, honourable Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NSUBUGA: I want to lay the minutes of the proceedings on the Table. Mr Speaker, as you have already guided, this report was read on Friday and it was given to Members then so I assume that most of them have actually gone through it. The committee considered Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Vote 108 for National Planning Authority, Vote 141 for Uganda Revenue Authority, Vote 143 for Uganda Bureau of Statistics and Vote 153 for Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance and his technical team and also met the board and management of NPA, PPDA, UBOS and URA. The following semi-autonomous organisations under the Ministry of Finance also appeared before the committee: Uganda Investment Authority, Departed Asians Custodian Board and the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. 

Mr Speaker, the committee came up with recommendations on Vote 008 for Micro-Finance. 

1.	The committee observed that interventions are not regulated in the country and government has failed to come up with the Bill to regulate Tier 4 Institutions. There is no clear policy for co-ordinating all the stakeholders in delivering micro finance services in the country.  
2.	The committee also observed that whereas the agricultural sector employs the majority of the people in the country, there is no clear focus and strategy of providing this sector with affordable micro finance services among others.  

The committee also recommends that: 

1.	The Government should urgently bring the Bill for regulating Tier 4 financial institutions to Parliament. 
2.	The Government should as a matter of priority come up with a concrete strategy to provide micro finance services to the agricultural sector, which employs more than 80 per cent of the population. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee also considered domestic arrears and it was observed that domestic arrears have accumulated to a tune of Shs 799 billion, which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development intends to clear within the next three years. The committee recommends that the Government should commit herself to clear all the domestic arrears within the three years and tighten the mechanism to ensure that domestic arrears are incurred only when it is extremely called for, for example, court awards, but not in cases like procurement of services.

The committee also observed on Energy that last financial year 2005/2006, the Government provided Shs 22 billion for generation of 50MW of thermal power while during financial year 2006/2007 Shs 70 billion is provided for generating 100 MW of thermal power. This financial year the budget for thermal power is abnormally big, the committee expects government to spend about Shs 45 billion on generation of 100MW, or Shs 70 billion should generate 150MW of thermal power.

The Committee on Energy recommends that the Government should integrate energy planning and budgeting into the national planning and budgeting frameworks to avoid erratic budget allocations for this sector, which affects the performance of other key sectors in the economy. 

The Government should also ensure that funds provided for priority areas such as energy are always realized in time and projects are implemented.

The committee also had made a proposal regarding funds to be procured from PU. Parliament should stand over the approval of Shs 30 billion for the Bujagali Dam project until Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute, Cap.98 is amended. However, on the 24th we received a letter from the Minister of Finance and if I can read it before laying it on the Table, it was addressed to the chairperson of the committee and made reference to the utilisation of the Energy Equity Fund for the financial year 2005/2006. 

It reads:  “As you are aware, I pronounced the establishment of an Energy Equity Fund in the financial year 2005/2006 Budget Speech and earmarked Shs 20 billion of the divestiture account for this purpose. The intention was to ensure that government would have its own resource to participate in the construction of Bujagali Hydro Power Dam Construction. During the implementation of the financial year 2005/2006 budget, the financial closure of Bujagali Hydro Power was not concluded thereby pre-concluding the need to utilise the Energy Fund. It was, therefore, not necessary to transfer the resources from the divestiture account. 

As a matter of information, I have now provided an additional Shs 79 billion to the Energy Equity Fund that normally should have the initial Shs 20 billion. The Energy Equity Fund will, therefore, have a total of Shs 99 billion for the financial year 2006/2007. The entire amount will, however, come from the budget rather than the divestiture account. I am, therefore, putting it on record that no resources from the divestiture account were used to support the budget for the purpose of financial year 2005/2006 and reaffirm that this is the position for financial year 2006/2007. However, should the need to utilize the divestiture account arise, I will seek the necessary approval from Cabinet and Parliament.” 

Mr Speaker, the reason we had come up with this recommendation was because when you read the Divestiture Statute it does not empower the Minister to get money to handle a project like energy. However, after receiving this letter, this recommendation became redundant.  

We also made an observation on capacity building and noted that as regards poverty reduction in the country, a large portion of funds for most projects is allocated to capacity building activities other than direct poverty reduction interventions such as agricultural inputs. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates substantial funds on staff training yet there is no clear mechanism of retaining such high calibre and skilled professional personnel. The committee made the recommendation that government should reduce the number of workshops planned per project. Also during negotiations with the donors, the project terms should ensure that the biggest proportion of funds focus on direct poverty reduction interventions.

The committee also made some observations on the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. The legal life of the Trust ended in October last year and the proposal to extend it has been lying with Cabinet since then. The committee observed that the delay to resolve the fate of the legal life of the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART) might cause a big financial loss to government in form of damages that may accrue from court judgments.

The committee recommends that government must fast track the process of renewing the legal life of NPART for a two-year period and thereafter wind it up. This is to allow it to implement the new mandate of the Uganda Development Bank, which had not been anticipated earlier on. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, regarding revenue and expenditure estimates, the committee observed that the draft book for estimates of revenue and expenditure, that is, recurrent and development was submitted to Parliament on 09 August 2006 when committees were concluding analysing the ministerial policy statements yet this book provides a great input to the budget analysis process.

The committee also noted that there are inconsistencies in figures presented in the policy statement, Budget Speech and draft estimates for the financial year 2006/2007. For example, Shs 1,049,645,000 was noted as a difference between the actual addition of the figures in the ministerial policy statement (Shs 239,494,989,000) and the draft estimates and revenue expenditure resultant figure was Shs 238,445,344,000. 

On the above, the committee observed that when you crosscheck figures of the Ministry of Finance as regards the revenue and expenditure book, the policy statement and even the Budget Speech, you realise that they all had different figures and it took us a lot of time to agree on which figure the Minister was referring to. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always provide the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure before the committees start the process of analysing ministerial policy statements. 

Also, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always provide consistent figures in all its submissions to Parliament. This is because after taking a whole week discussing, the Minister comes up to say no and to give another figure! 

Regarding the recurrent budget, the committee observed that in the non-wage recurrent budget there are purported domestic arrears of Shs 22,782,229,000 that have been integrated into the non-wage budget of Shs 43,202,229,000 thereby causing an overshoot of 111 percent on the MTEF ceiling. The committee noted that these domestic arrears could not have been accumulated only in the last financial year, 2005/2006.

The second observation is that if the ministry’s domestic arrears were genuine they should have been reflected under a separate item like the case in other ministries such as the Office of the Prime Minister, Defence and Education and Sports. 

It was also observed that there was a sharp increase in the non-wage allocation for the budget and policy evaluation from Shs 1,396,293,000 in the last financial year to Shs 14,421,076,000 in the financial year 2006/2007. This represents an abnormal percentage increase of 933 percent. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee also recommends that bearing in mind the MTEF ceiling for Vote 008, Shs 22,810,000,000 should be approved as the recurrent expenditure to cater for wage and non-wage expenses for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2006/2007.  

The committee also made some observations on the development budget. There was wrong addition of the donor and government funds for supporting the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and government purchases including taxes causing a variation of Shs 320 million. 

We also made an observation that some of the new projects in the Ministry are not integrated in the resource envelope and the committee wondered how these would be implemented. We cited an example of Finance Management Reforms under the Accountant-General’s Office. 

Furthermore, the development budget proposal of Shs 239,814,997,000 is above the MTEF ceiling of Shs 120,030,000,000. This represents an upshot of 99.8 percent above the MTEF ceiling. 

The committee made the recommendation that the Ministry should harmonise the figures in the draft estimates, Budget Speech and policy statements before submitting these figures or documents to Parliament.  

Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s MTEF ceiling of Shs 120.03 billion should be raised by Shs 99.4 billion to Shs 219.43 billion to accommodate the Energy Fund.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee proposes a recurrent budget of Shs 22,810,000,000 and a development budget Shs 219,430,000,000. The committee requests the House to adopt the report and recommendations thereof and approve the budget proposal for Vote 008 for the financial year 2006/2007.

The committee also considered Vote 108 for National Planning Authority and we made some observations. First of all it was noted that according to the NPA Act of 2002, the National Planning Authority is required to submit an annual report to Parliament. However, this has never been done. They have also failed to produce sectoral plans. 

The committee also expressed concern over the channelling of independent projects through the NPA. The projects include: Market Research with Shs 1.4 billion, Presidential Initiative on Banana Development with Shs 3.3 billion and Support to Scientists with Shs 4 billion. According to the policy statement these are independent projects that will be manned by a board and management committee appointed by the President of the Republic of Uganda with the full mandate of over seeing the implementation, reporting and accounting of this project. 

However, the committee recommends that Parliament approve Shs 1,190,000,000 for NPA to cater for personnel costs in the financial year 2006/2007 instead of the Shs 930 million. 

The committee also recommends that the planning function of NPA be streamlined and its funding increased. 

The committee, therefore, recommends a recurrent budget of Shs 1,940,000,000 and development budget of 9,130,000,000. The committee begs the House to adopt the report and approve the budget allocation for Vote 108.

The committee also made some observations on Uganda Revenue Authority. There was an increase in revenue collection performance with the achievement levels of 100.4 percent of the target. The domestic tax collection reached 51 percent, which is an absolute share on the total revenue collections.  

The committee also made an observation that SRPS is being reoriented to join the mainstream tax authority and will continue to fight smuggling. Informal cross border trade has increased and the revenue from the activities has also gone up.  

In conclusion the committee recommends that the following resource be allocated to Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority, as total funding for the financial year 2006/07. In the recurrent budget, the committee recommends Shs 68,030,000,000 and for the development budget, Shs 10,367,454,000.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee also considered Vote 143 for Uganda Bureau of Statistics and we made some observations. The committee noted that UBOS has a number of core activities, which will not be carried out this financial year due to budget constraints. The core business as noted earlier is generation of national statistics.  

It was further noted that the bureau plays a major role in providing vital statistics for planning and works closely with NPA in addition to being a member of its extended board.  

The committee made recommendations that government should provide for the shortfalls in the budget proposal of the bureau to enable it generate the core statistical information, the basis of which effective planning could be realised. This can be addressed as a supplementary provision since the resource envelope is reportedly small.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that a total of Shs 12,646,562,000 be approved for UBOS for the financial 2006/2007 to be broken down as follows: recurrent expenditure Shs 4,890,002,000 and development expenditure Shs 7,756,560,000.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee also considered Vote 153 for Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority and it made some observations:  

The Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets is one of the most abused activities in the country with high levels of corruption involving huge sums of money.  

There are some government institutions that are violating the regulations in procurement and disposal of assets and Bank of Uganda was singled out as one of them.  

The committee came up with some recommendations and I want to quote just one that Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets should be empowered and strengthened to implement the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. 

In conclusion the committee recommends that the following resources be approved by this august House for Vote 153. Recurrent budget Shs 3,514,000,000 and development budget Shs 3,762,000,000.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee would like to thank all the ministers and other government officials who appeared before the committee for their cooperation. I would also like to thank the committee members for their contribution. I wish also to thank the Members present. I beg to move that this report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson and members of the committee for the report.

3.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members I would like to start by thanking the chairman of the committee for their concise report. My Shadow Minister of Finance is in Mbale, he has a court case that he has to attend to and the person who was asked to stand in for him is in Bukedea District where elections are going on. That is probably the reason why some of the people are not here as we have a number of elections going on in the country. 

I would, therefore, like on behalf of the chair to table his response to the policy statement for the record of the House and to take this opportunity to give a brief outline of the contents. It will take about five minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I should say that the shadow minister already made a very detailed statement on the budget, but you may proceed.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Yes, I forgot that because he actually mentioned in his report that he had made a detailed response to the Budget in his earlier response but there are a number of things that have been covered by the chair of the committee that I wish to comment on.

First of all, we in the Opposition are very concerned about the penalties and commitment fees that the country is incurring on account of not drawing from the loans that the country has secured. To date we are paying as penalties Shs 6.5 billion. We think this is a waste and we should really commit ourselves to borrowing when we can use the money.

Secondly, we were very concerned about the status of the National Planning Authority. In our view the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still clinging on to the planning functions of the National Planning Authority. We think that the Ministry should relent and give full authority to the National Planning Authority to handle planning so that the Ministry of Finance can concentrate on handling the business of managing our resources. 

We like the committee are equally concerned about government’s plan to bring into the National Planning Authority funds that ought not to come under it. The effect of this is to minimise the budget that can come under the direct function of the National Planning Authority. 

We were particularly concerned about the Shs 3.3billion for banana development. I appreciate that a breakthrough in the processing of our bananas can help this country a lot, but we believe that the right channel would have been to provide these funds under NARO or under the National Council for Science and Technology. 

Also, as somebody who was in the Faculty of Agriculture and who has a fair appreciation of how scientific breakthroughs translate into functional industrial process, it is important for the developers of the banana processing procedure to publish their findings in reputable international journals. It is only through peer review that the processes that you claim you have achieved can be scrutinized so that at the end of the day adopting it as an industrial process will not fall on the way side. As it is, I do not know of any publication that reflects the scientific quality of the research that has been conducted for banana processing and, therefore, we stand the risk of seeing the Shs 3.3 billion going down the drain because the final product may not have been marketed. 

Mr Speaker, we expressed our concern about domestic arrears. It now stands at Shs 800 billion and we think that something must be done as regards focusing on pensioners such as issuing promissory notes and other instruments so that those to whom government owes money can have access to this money in other forms and continue to do business and live their lives.  

On the issue of energy, we note that Shs 20 billion was allocated in the budget but this was not reflected in the ministerial policy statement. It is important for the ministry as was pointed out to reconcile its figures on all grounds because they are responsible both for the budget and the policy statements.

On the Public Procurement and Disposable of Public Assets Authority, we agree entirely with the committee. This is probably one of the messiest institutions that we have in the country. One of the problems that we identify is the law that provides for the functioning of that institution. For instance, the executive director alone can actually authorize procurement of very substantial amounts of money and we think this is vulnerable to abuse.  

On Uganda Development Bank, the need for long-term, affordable credit as opposed to the micro finance that is being emphasized is very important. For years now the ministry has come up and promised that “the restructuring of Uganda Development Bank will be completed this financial year”. We are very concerned that this has become a sing song and we ask the ministry to explain to us and give us the last assurance as to when Uganda Development Bank will be reorganized so that affordable credit can be availed to this country for development.

Concerning projects, we note, as the committee also noted, that a number of projects do not appear in the policy statement or expenditure estimates of the ministry for example the regulation, finance, administration project, sexual and reproductive health, audit projects and others. We think that not reflecting this means that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have access to extra budgetary resources, which is irregular and undermines accountability.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we concur with the observation of the committee that the Ministry of Finance has the necessary staff, the necessary expertise, the computers, equipment and most of all the money. It is very disappointing that we find discrepancies in the figures of the ministry. That kind of sloppiness makes us wonder whether our money is safe. I thank you.  

3.17
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My contribution is on the Ministry of Micro Finance. It cannot be the business of government to go around the countryside dishing out cash to people. That is the business of banks. I think the Government should confine itself to creating an enabling environment in which our people can work and earn their own money as they used to do. If this fund is there, it should have been given to banks and micro finance institutions that are now established in the countryside. It is the duty of the Central bank to control and manage the finances of this country. I am a bit worried when we talk of a ministry that is set up for the purpose of giving out cash!

Mr Speaker, the experience of Entandikwa is still with us. Normally people take loans given by government as their money and recovery can be a big problem. Therefore, I really think that this policy of having a minister for dishing out money should be reviewed so that the banking system is left to do its work –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that actually it is not the Minister himself who dishes out the money as he alleges. The Rural Micro Finance Support Programme that is housed here in Kololo handles this money. This company was established by the Government of Uganda in agreement with the African Development Bank who loaned us that money. There is a process though which these micro finance institutions in the rural areas get this money and it is the Rural Micro Finance Support Programme that gives out the money, not the Minister himself. I thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for the information but I did not say the Minister, I said the ministry. I am just trying to express my fear because people are not aware - not even the committee in their report - the committee complained that there has been no sensitisation. At my level I did not know about the presence of this body in Kololo. I think that if this money is going to be given out it should be regionalized so that every region knows its quota and the office. If it is to be squandered, let it be squandered all over Uganda –(Interruption)  

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. Hon. Okello-Okello has just stated the weaknesses that were in the Entandikwa scheme that is how the money was squandered. And he is the same person recommending that this money should be regionalized and that if it is to be squandered, it should be squandered countrywide. I am seeking clarification: how do we guide our people? These are two contradicting statements! One, you are saying we should not follow that and on the other hand you are saying it should be squandered.

Mr Speaker, I am not a lawyer but somewhere it is said ignorance of the law is no defence. Some of the things like what hon. Banyenzaki has been saying have been around us for a long time and releases are advertised in the papers before people come and apply for these loans. I would like to say that there are several schemes that are being mixed up. At an appropriate time the Minister in charge of Finance will clarify this. Otherwise, I would like to know which side we should take from the honourable member.

THE SPEAKER: But don’t you think that he is being sarcastic? He does not believe in the scheme and that is what he is saying.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for the information. It is the mix up that the Government Chief Whip is talking about because if things are mixed up then you do not expect me to understand. I used the word “if”, I said if it is to be squandered like Entandikwa let it be equitably done, this is all I am saying. I am using the word “if” and I am not saying that it is going to be squandered. I am saying that should it be squandered like the other one, then let everybody have his or her share. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.25
MS FLORENCE HASHAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I happen to be on the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I think that the honourable member is not in order to use the word “squandering”. The use of this word is demoralizing to the people we represent and does not promote the programme that is already spearheaded by the Government. If the people we represent hear that we are squandering and using the programme of micro finance in that way, I do not think it is going to work. We have to look for a way of how we can promote the programme and see how it is going to help our people down at the grassroots. We are not here on the business of squandering and everyone is entitled to the equal distribution of these loans that are coming up. These loans are going to help our people. 

Some Members of Parliament also have got loans -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am no longer on the Floor. Is the honourable member, who is a committee member, in order to labour so endlessly on a matter, which is not there?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I told you that hon. Okello-Okello does not believe in this programme. That is why he made the contribution the way he made it. Therefore, take it that that is his stand. We can continue if there is any other submission.

3.27
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make three comments: one is on the circles. When I see in this paper the committee recommended that for the circles to succeed, they should use voluntarism and I am totally against voluntarism because in this country voluntarism has never worked. If you are going to put it in our policies then we shall fail. 

I wish to say that the Entandikwa, which we are talking about, had that voluntarism, which never worked because the money was given to LCs who were supposed to distribute it at no cost. So they instead decided to get some of it and pocket it somewhere and things went like that. So, if you are going to succeed, I think let us cost whatever inputs we need in this programme and not depend on voluntarism. Voluntarism in this country has never worked and it will not work.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member for giving way. That recommendation actually came from the Minister when he was answering the queries raised by the previous Parliament. When you read the policy statement on page 9, one of the recommendations of the Minister was community ownership voluntarism to reduce the operational cost and hence the interest rate. So, the committee just adopted it from the ministerial policy statement.

MS NAJJEMBA: Yes, but I am also suggesting that voluntarism cannot work. Everything should be costed. You do not expect people at national level to be paid for whatever we do and expect people at community level to volunteer services free of charge. They will need something. That is why at times they use that money to do other things because they cannot volunteer services free of charge.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. In 2001 we saw a need to start a micro finance institution for our community and we asked - that is in Agago County, Pader District - and we asked some of our colleagues to offer resources to start it when we had limited resources. A number of my colleagues who were experts in their own drives volunteered to support this micro finance and right now the micro finance, which is called Agalu Circle, is one of the most successful in the country. Since 2002 we have posted profits every year and that is largely because we did not charge for the level of expertise that manages the micro finance. 

I think that is the spirit that the Ministry of Finance is talking about. Even we as Members of Parliament should help to support without taking our exact political prize for helping it and it will help to succeed eventually. But if we do not do that, nobody - we do not even have the level of expertise to go all over Uganda to do these things. So we really have to find a degree of supporting our community through self help and I think that is the spirit.

MS NAJJEMBA: I still insist that everything should be costed. People can volunteer at will but things should be costed. If we are going to work on policies and you put in voluntarism, that means if they do not want, it will not work. I feel people - it also depends on what extent they will volunteer to do because if at national level we are going to be paid for whatever services we do and we expect the community to always volunteer, then we are getting it wrong.  

On the energy crisis, this has been over emphasised and I do not want to talk much about it, but I expected at least a recommendation on solar energy. Solar energy and bio-gas will help to reduce environmental degradation.

Lastly, capacity building; I have a problem with it. So much money has been put into capacity building, a lot of money, and in fact it is becoming a catch word that if you want to get money from a donor or from somewhere, you have to include training workshops, and sensitisation. It is sensitising, and sensitising, with very little to go down to do the actual work! 

So when I look at the community, I look at the capacity and there is no capacity. Look at the agricultural sector: sensitisation workshops, training workshops but when you get to the real practices, we are still backward in the traditional practices. So, let us review these things. Capacity building should be to some extent and we should put more emphasis on the direct beneficiaries and the direct activities that benefit the people. Thank you very much.

3.34
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the various micro finance institutions that we have in this country, for their work. I think my biggest points of concern and really contention with the people I represent are really. 

One is one the high interest rates charged by most micro finance institutions and two is on the short loan payment period, which has really rendered the number of our young entrepreneurs victim to loss of collateral security. I would like to recommend further that we need an elaborate policy that will help this country in guiding the operations of micro finance institutions because if we do not have that we shall keep on talking about micro finance institutions but instead of alleviating poverty from our people, there will instead be increasing poverty. That is my point of submission, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

3.35
MS MARION TUUNDE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to say something on the Uganda Investment Authority and at the same time thank the Opposition and the committee for their good report; it was thorough. We as the workers of Uganda, when the Investment Authority was created we thought we had got a saviour, especially in this era of adjustment programmes because we thought there was going to be creation of jobs. But what is happening is that when the investors come to Uganda, they come with their human resource and so we are not benefiting at all. And if they employ our workers, their rights are violated. So I think somebody from the Opposition said that we need to have a real report; we need to know how many Ugandans are benefiting from those investors. Thank you very much.

3.35
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, honourable Speaker, for the opportunity to respond to the committee’s report and I also thank the committee for the work they have done.

I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 2 of the report, section 3.1.1, where it is reported that, “Real GDP was at 5.3 percent versus a target of 6.8 percent.” I am seeking clarification on this point because I do not know how GDP is expressed in terms of a percentage; percentage of what? The last time I checked the guidelines to the Budget issued by the Minister of Finance, he gave the nominal GDP as Shs 17,041 billion. My clarification is on the expression of GDP as 5.3 percent.

Mr Speaker, my other concern is about complacence in both the committee report and the ministerial policy statement. I just do not know whether such complacence is desirable in the ministry that is charged with planning for economic development and the committee that is charged to oversee that. 

If you look on page 2, again section 3.1.1, the committee reports an economic growth of 5.3 percent against a target of 6.8 percent. They also report that the growth of 5.3 percent was a drop from 5.8 percent last year. Then they conclude that this was very commendable. You do not achieve your target, you perform worse than last year and you say it was a commendable achievement? I find that very complacent and I think that if that is commendable, then what is regrettable -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What was commendable here was the other one, which was 5.8 percent. They are not talking about 5.3 percent; I think they are talking about 5.8 percent of last year, which was commendable and they expected a rise but there was a fall. That is my understanding of that sentence.

MS KAMYA: Which is a commendable level?

THE SPEAKER: Of last year.

MS KAMYA: Thank you for your wise counsel, honourable Speaker. But I think it can be debated also. My point though is, if they did not achieve last year’s, then they should have said something about not achieving last year’s level –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: They were not praising 5.3; they were just comparing the performance with the previous one, which was a good performance.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, it is in the present term “is”, not “was”. I think they are saying that real GDP at 5.3 against the target of 6.8 of the performance of last year which is a commendable one. I take “is” to be the present and “was” perhaps to be the past. Well, if that is the case, I am happy. But I still think that there is a degree of complacence in not noting that the performance is regrettable in both instances.

I get this feeling reading through the report; the feeling of complacence and laxity right until the end when on page 25, after noting that the PPDA is the most abused activity in the country with high levels of corruption, involving huge sums of money, they just recommend that the PPDA should be empowered and strengthened to implement the PPDA Act. I think that the recommendation should have been stronger. 

Services at Mulago Hospital have been hiked over 300 percent; the poor administrators have threatened to send people back home to the local hospitals all because of lack of facilitation and money. I expect that if the PPDA is not complied with, and if there are many procurement deals that have been conducted outside the PPDA, and if huge sums of money are lost because of this, then we expect a stronger recommendation. I think there should be an enquiry in the procurement outside PPDA. 

We should also be told how many activities were conducted outside PPDA; how much money is involved in the activities that were conducted outside the PPDA and also punitive measures from people that have squandered or violated the PPDA. Mr Speaker, the people of Uganda work very hard to keep us here. I think we ought to protect and promote their rights and interests.

Finally, on page 3, section 3.1.5, I highly recommend the continued increase in tax collection last year and here it says, from 1,877 to 2,212, which amounts to 17 percent growth. However, on page 19, section 2.0, it is reported that a growth of 100.4 percent was achieved. I need a little clarification on the two figures; they do not seem to relate. However, it is commendable that we have increased our collection of taxes but I think it would have made a lot more sense if a mention was made of the collection costs. If taxes have been collected, there is increase in collection and we have been told that this is because of increased monitoring and evaluation. For it to make sense we need to know that collection of taxes was not in direct proportion to the cost of collection.

I am concluding, Mr Speaker. As I said, reading through the report, my impression was that there was some laxity and I think that this is coming from a ministry that is charged with overseeing the economic growth of this country. We need to see some stronger recommendations; we need to see some punitive measures; we need to see inquiries being asked for; we need to see stronger measures that will bring confidence back in the public that something is being done. The general view is that a few people are getting too much money; the general view is that there is a lot of permissiveness towards corruption. The President of Uganda has vowed to stump out corruption and if it is the role of the ministries to implement the President’s manifesto, we need to see stronger and tougher action on corruption. We need to hear stronger voices on corruption. 

I commend the recommendation on page 12 of the committee’s report that the ministry should always be availing the draft estimates on revenue and expenditure before committees begin to sit because this was a serious difficulty for me in the Committee of Agriculture when we considered activities and plans without their financial implications. Thank you very much.

3.45
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a brief joiner to what hon. Beti Kamya has stated on the issue of the application of PPDA and probably to seek a clarification from the Minister on some issues of public concern. We have got a report here to the effect that there is defiance from a number of government institutions to the application of PPDA. The Minister singled out Bank of Uganda, but I believe there are a number of other institutions. I think we should come up with a comprehensive statement on how many institutions are defying the PPDA.

Secondly, we have got press reports that the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA), defied PPDA in awarding a contract to Jacobsen to establish the thermal power plant either at Mutundwe or Namanve. These press reports are to the effect that the matter went up to the IGG and the IGG made a recommendation that that contract should be cancelled; it defied all the rules and procedures made under the PPDA and the rules there under. But to our surprise, we have received further reports that the Vice-President, the Attorney-General and indeed the President himself recently sat and made directives that the contract should be implemented yet there was a recommendation from the IGG that that contract should be cancelled because of non-compliance with the PPDA procedures. 

The question I would wish to put to the honourable minister is whether these reports are correct. If they are correct, then it would be unfortunate for the highest seat of the land to encourage defiance of the rules and procedures laid down under the PPDA and regulations. 

How are we going to enforce financial discipline in these institutions, especially the procurement and disposing entities, which are flagrantly abusing the PPDA process? How are we going to ensure that there is discipline when the highest offices notably the Attorney-General, the Vice-President and the President himself are encouraging non-compliance and defiance of these procedures? I wish to get a clarification from the honourable minister. I thank you very much.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. I would like to thank the committee for a good report that they have presented to this House. I also wish to acknowledge receipt of the position of the shadow minister of Finance, which has been tabled today.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, permit me to start by reacting to the statement from the Leader of the Opposition in this august House. The first point that he brought out is on the issues of penalties and commitment fees on loans that have been acquired by this country. We take note and we shall endeavour to ensure that whatever we borrow is put to use. 

The second issue, which he raised, was on the NPA which should be permission. I will request the Minister responsible for Planning, hon. John Omwony Ojok to respond to it.  

The third issue was on the issues of domestic arrears, which he quoted to be about Shs 800 billion outstanding. I wish to put it on record that the outstanding, verified domestic arrears as at the end of June 2006 stand at Shs 540 billion and government is committed to ensuring that we deal with this to its end. 

The fourth issue, which was raised, was on the Energy Fund of Shs 20 billion. The chairman of the committee has already read a note to us, which indicates that this money was not utilised by the Ministry of Finance and it will not be utilised during this financial year. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on the issue of the Uganda Development Bank, I would like to put it on record that we are committed to recapitalising it and this financial year we are going to put a total of Shs 4.5 billion. As I talk now, Shs 1 billion has already been disbursed towards this capitalisation. 

On the issue of projects deregulations, some projects, which do not appear under the Ministry of Finance, have actually ceased to exist and, therefore, they have not been reported in the ministerial policy statement. 

On the issue of micro finance, which was very ably articulated by hon. Okello-Okello and many others, I wish to assure the House that my ministry has put up a committee, which is working on the regulations and this will soon include the policy issues, be sent to the Cabinet and in an appropriate time, this will be brought to this House to be discussed. This will also include modalities of how to give out the micro finance loans that are being sung all over the country and we should be coming to you soon on these issues.

On the issue of high interest rates and the short time that is being given for the pay back of these loans, the Government is trying its best to ensure that loans to agriculture by government will be given at 9 percent for agriculture and at 13 percent for other involvements like in trade and others. The micro finance institutions may make up some small mark-up of about 3 to maximum or 4 percent.

On the issue of the Uganda Investment Authority, we shall do everything possible to ensure that these investments give benefit to the people of Uganda. And as I talk now, a number of jobs have been created and we could answer this best if a formal question was put to us towards this so that we give you the full benefits of the details. 

On the issue of the draft estimates coming a bit late, which was raised by hon. Beti Kamya, we do apologise and promise that in future the draft estimates for expenditure will come early enough so that you can all partake of it and benefit from the things that are put inside there.

And then from hon. Lukwago on the issue of PPDA and in particular the contract on the thermal power, I can only assure you that government is finalising its position on this and will give an appropriate response.

Mr Speaker, having made these observations, permit me to mention that the issue of the real GDP growth rate was at 5.3 percent against the targeted 6.8 percent and that gave only a decline of 0.5 percent from the performance of last financial year.

Then the issue of financial sector development initiative, the principle of the anti-money laundering Bill was appropriated by the Cabinet and the Bill will be presented to Parliament this financial year.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on the issue of revenue collection, which hon. Kamya did mention, the actual figure that was realised was Shs 2.230 billion. That is two trillion, two hundred and thirty billion shillings and we commend URA for a job well done and we believe that this financial year they will do equally well.

There was an issue which was raised – observation number 8.2. I have already mentioned that domestic arrears was only at Shs 540 –(Interruption) 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Minister because when we last met him he actually gave us the answers and one of his submissions gave us a schedule of how government intends to clear these domestic arrears. Actually, they had proposed that Shs 148.9 billion was supposed to be cleared this financial year. The Shs 300 billion was supposed to be cleared in 2007/8 and Shs 350 billion was supposed to be cleared in 2008/9 and that gives us a total of Shs 799 billion. And now the honourable minister is telling us that they have budgeted for Shs 540 billion. So, we are actually in disagreement on that issue.

Another issue is regarding the Uganda Investment Authority. The committee’s concern is that Uganda Investment Authority licences all investors and, among others, they are supposed to be receiving annual returns from the investors they have licensed. These returns include the employment - so many things like the profitability and the like and actually when we had the meetings with the executive director, he confessed that they do not receive these returns. It is only firms, which are willing, which submit for appraisal. 

So the committee was actually wondering if you just invest, some of these investments just remain on paper. We want the Minister to emphasise that actually, because it is mandated under the Investment Act, investors are supposed to submit returns. Let the Minister actually emphasise those two issues and clarify.

MR OMACH: Thank you. We are not in disagreement. The figure of Shs 799 billion as it was given to the committee was estimated. But the verified is Shs 540 billion, and the breakdown. This will be paid over a period of three years. 

On the issue of the Uganda Investment Authority not giving returns, we are in touch with Uganda Investment Authority and we have urged them to start giving returns so that this can be passed on to all stakeholders accordingly.

Mr Speaker, under 9.1, bullet five on thermal power, the committee did mention that last financial year we used Shs 22 billion to procure 50 megawatts of thermal power and this financial year we are putting aside Shs 70 billion under the Energy Fund and now the Shs 22 billion that was set aside to pay for the capacity or lease charges for the thermal plant from Aggreko. 

The actual cost of generating 50 megawatts was actually Shs 108 billion. Because this Shs 22 billion did not include other considerations like subsidies in the tariff stabilisation fund, if you bring in that plus the fuel costs and the fuel duty free, which is up to 70 percent, the haul operation and maintenance charges, this comes to Shs 108 billion. Therefore, what is being given this financial year of Shs 70 billion will be able to effectively give us 100 megawatts of power.

Mr Speaker, observation 16.1 and bullet 2 and the recommendation on 16.2, we agree with the observation and the recommendation of the committee in regard with some inconsistencies in the numbers. The actual and correct number that we have clarified to the committee is Shs 239.495 billion.

Under observation 17.2 under recurrent budget, we wish to clarify to the House that the MTEF does not include arrears and non-VAT taxes for any vote or institutions. However, the draft estimates include the entire government expenditure, including statutory expenditures and arrears. For this particular year, there is a total of Shs 10.085 billion of which Shs 8.27 billion are outstanding arrears to international organisations. 

Then under programme 2, there is Shs 13.049 billion and not Shs 14.421 billion and this is to cover domestic arrears of Shs 7.469 billion, which is salary arrears catering for the whole government services. These resources are released conditionally upon receipt of salary arrears payment from the Ministry of Public Service. 

Then, we have a total of Shs 5.58 billion, which is grants to other agencies, which is meant for the sub county model. The disbursement of these funds is contingent upon finalisation of guidelines, which are being worked out on the collaboration with the stakeholders. Once this is finalised, these funds will be disbursed to local governments accordingly.  

Mr Speaker, non-appropriation of these funds as the committee had wanted to guide, would make payment of salary arrears to the whole service for which the majority of beneficiaries are teachers and health workers extremely difficult if not impossible during the financial year 2006/07. So, in addition, non-appropriation of this Shs 5.58 billion for the sub-county model would render the implication of these activities extremely difficult. And we are, therefore, appealing that the amounts that were requested for of Shs 45.588 billion be appropriated accordingly and not Shs 22.789 billion.

Mr Speaker, another observation under 18.1 bullet two, we note the committee’s observation and wish to clarify that the Shs 34 billion alluded to was initially a planning figure. However, at the time of finalising the budget, donors had committed Shs 4.8 billion and government counter part fund of Shs 1.0 billion so that the actual amount that is going to be immediately utilised could be about Shs 5.0 billion only. 

Now, observation 18.2, bullet two about the clarification on MTEF and allocation to the Ministry of Finance as an institution for its operations fall under the accountability sector for which Shs 120 billion is for development budget and the energy fund is under economic function and it is only being appropriated under Ministry of Finance for re-fencing as already mentioned in the budget speech.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in conclusion, in view of the above clarification, we request that Vote 008 be appropriated Shs 45.588 billion and in addition, Shs 239.495 million be appropriated as development budget for the ministry. Mr Speaker, I request hon. Omwony Ojok to give us an explanation on the National Planning Authority. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, why do we not dispose of this difference?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we settle the issue of the arrears, I want to make the record clear. The honourable minister in answering actually has just told us that last financial year, they used Shs 108 billion to procure 50 mega watts, whereas the committee’s concern was that Shs 22 billion was allocated to procure 50 mega watts. Now, the minister is confirming they used Shs 108 billion. And if actually they used Shs 108 billion, how can Shs 70 billion now procure 100 mega watts? I want him really to clarify on that issue.

THE SPEAKER: It means you want a detailed costing. Is it possible to give a detailed costing?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the proportionality - because Parliament budgeted for Shs 22 billion, but the minister is confirming they used Shs 108 billion. Then the committee was just concerned with the Shs 70 billion to procure 100 mega watts. When you take his answer, if Shs 108 billion was used to procure 50 mega watts, how will now Shs 70 billion be used to procure the 100 mega watts? I just want him to correct the answers.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I will table the document, which gives the detail of the remittances. For instance, fuel; duty is only charged 30 per cent, 70 per cent is remitted. Now, when you calculate that in real terms, it comes to $14.9 million, just because of remission of taxes on heavy-duty fuel.  Then you have capacity charges; we have got subsidies, as I mentioned earlier, which is handled under the tariffs stabilisation fund. 

So, this same facility will have to be given in addition to the Shs 70 billion that is being asked for or budgeted under this financial year. And so, when you do this calculation, the Shs 70 billion that is being asked for will be much more than this. But the point I was trying to make was that, the amount that is being appropriated now is not in excess of the amount, which is required to generate 100,000 mega watts. I will lay this on Table accordingly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to explain Vote 108, which is the Vote for the National Planning Authority (NPA) and knowing the pressure of time, I will try to be brief. First of all, I would like to start by thanking the committee as well as the interventions from the opposition with regard to the spirit with which they are taking very seriously the importance of the National Planning Authority and of the planning function. I think the spirit is very positive and I commend them. 

Now, in answer to the specific issues that have been raised, one specific issue is on the fact that the National Planning Authority has not submitted the annual reports in accordance with its statutory provisions. I wish in kind to apologise to this House for the fact that this has not been done and I wish to state here as I have already done to the committee the fact that the National Planning Authority has already produced the report, which we have committed ourselves to finalise and make available within the shortest possible time. In any case, not more than two months from now.  

The second point made by the committee is on the issue of the need to streamline the NPA to increase its funding. I think that is very useful and on behalf of the Ministry of Planning, this point is very seriously taken note of and action will certainly be taken in regard to this matter, especially after the budgetary pressures that have been on us as a country particularly ensuring that the energy crisis is properly resolved. The Minister of Planning has already taken note of this and you will see appropriate response.

The third issue is that efforts should be made to raise the levels of political supervision of NPA.  Mr Speaker, with regard to that issue, I would like to draw the attention of this House to the constitutional provision relating to the function of allocating ministerial positions as well as actual functions and this is contained in Article 113 of this Constitution which provides that and I quote: “`Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament…” and then it goes on that the Cabinet minister appointed shall have responsibility for such functions of government as the President may from time to time assign to him or to her. 

In other words, whereas the spirit of raising the profile of the National Planning Authority is a correct one and it is appreciated, I suggest that this discussion cannot be resolved by a minister in this House. As the Speaker, you know that there is a procedure through which Parliament can interact with his Excellency the President on such a matter of a constitutional nature. (Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, our concern on the National Planning Authority emanates from the experiences we had. For instance, when we were debating the Bill that formally established National Planning Authority, there was extreme resistance from the Minister of Finance and there were certain provisions which were inserted in that Bill that were really counter to the function that was envisaged in providing for the National Planning Authority in the Constitution. Some of us tried our best. I happened to have served as the agricultural sector expert in Uganda Vision 2025 and we used that opportunity to try and formally inform the process. 

So, what we are talking about is not a question of disregarding the powers bestowed upon the President held by the Constitution, but we think that this matter should be raised and supported on all sides of the Floor so that the position of Parliament is unanimous. It is loud and clear that the National Planning Authority should be left to do the planning because a country without sufficient planning is challenged by the way it will move. Thank you.

MR ODONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just on the National Planning Authority, in one of the committees I attended in the last Parliament, members of the National Planning Authority came to the committee with a long list of lamentations including the fact that they are not given funds by the mother Ministry of Finance. In fact, in the financial year 2004/05, the only recognisable activity the National Planning Authority did was to organise an end of year party. I was in that committee and they presented that as the only fund released which was about Shs 215 million. 

So, I think the honourable minister should make a firm commitment on whether the Executive, specifically the Presidency, is committed to empowering the National Planning Authority or they are committed to planning from State House and then undermine the national planning authorities. If we cannot empower them, we close shops and they go home so that the Minister of Finance would do the planning. Thank you.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, again I am appreciating the spirit that is being exhibited towards the elevation of the planning function and also towards the need to have the National Planning Authority do its work with appropriate funding. I would like to state here that ever since the formation of the government that was established following the last elections, which took place, extensive discussions have actually been going on.  

As you know, I was put in to take charge of the planning function and I am happy to report to you that the Ministry of Planning, the National Planning Authority and other stakeholders which are under the political purview of the Ministry of Finance have been having discussions and a consensus has emerged that the National Planning Authority is going to be empowered with the capacity to do the work that is being required.

Mr Speaker, only one last issue, which has been raised and this is the question of the three projects - this is on page 18 of the report of the committee - whose budget has been included in the National Planning Authority. These projects are those relating to market research, the presidential initiative on banana development and the support to other scientists. We appreciate the concern that the committee had on this matter. 

However, I would like to suggest that some of the argumentation on this matter was flawed. First of all, when it comes to market research, the National Planning Authority by its statute is empowered to carry out research. I quote: “To study and publish independent assessments of key economic and social policy issues and options so as to increase public understanding and participation in economic and social policy debate.” There are many others.

In the National Planning Authority, one of the key issues that is coming up on our productive capacity and especially on our capacity to export has been the issue on the market. Where is the market?  What type of market is it? What type of quality is required? What type of quantity is required? How do we ensure regularity of supply? I think it is only correct that as far as monies relating to market research is concerned, the National Planning Authority can and should be involved. In fact, it is also part of enhancing the planning function within government. It does not mean that other institutions cannot do it. I am saying that the function will compliment the efforts of the other institutions –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, honourable minister.  You earlier on gave us hope that you are deeply concerned about the National Planning Authority and the need to empower it. However, when you quote that provision whereby what we provided for was for the National Planning Authority to carry out an evaluation research that will allow input into its planning which is totally opposed to what is provided for, I get worried.

More importantly, as far as I know, these monies are merely provided under the National Planning Authority and none of the functions of the National Planning Authority will benefit from the money.  Unless I am wrong, the money was merely stuffed under National Planning Authority for the use of somebody else. Therefore, if it is the case, it would have been a vote within the account of the National Planning Authority, not an independent account that is distinctly provided for even in the policy statement. Thank you.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I was trying to develop arguments relating to three sets of activities. I said that the aspect of market research is part and parcel of the mainstream work of the National Planning Authority.  When it comes to the money for the presidential initiative for banana development and also of support to other scientists, the two being linked, I would like to say that originally the aspect of science and technology has always been conceived of in Uganda here as an activity which falls under planning.  That is the reason why in the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology Statute that council was deliberately put into the Ministry of Planning. It was under the political purview of the Ministry of Planning.  

When the Ministry of Planning was merged with the Ministry of Finance, it went to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The point we are presenting now is that, the role of supporting scientists and empowering them and ensuring that they carry out certain important initiatives, which are of significance to our economy are actually functions of planning. This is the point I am trying to make.  

I am going a step further and arguing that in spite of that (that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development), we are carrying out further reviews of the whole relationship of the ministry itself. In fact, the ministry is under the directive to restructure itself and also work with those who are supposed to restructure government as a whole. In that process, ways and means will be found to ensure that a realignment, a reorganisation and a restructuring is carried out along the lines that are being suggested here.

I would like to make one last caution. If we decided now that we should shift these monies away from the Ministry of Finance at this stage and especially from the National Planning Authority, we could only do so through a corrigendum. A corrigendum has technical implications. It would amount to a new process that would greatly delay the whole implementation of this initiative and yet the whole purpose is to ensure that we get these resources in time to enable us do the activities planned in an appropriate and a fast-flowing manner. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Subject to the comments and observations made, the question is that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON 
THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/07

4.31
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Onyango Kakoba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is my pleasure to present the report of the committee. However, before I do that, I beg for your indulgence because my voice is not good. I have had a cold for some time and that explains why I did not even sign the report. I am presenting this report because I agree entirely with whatever is contained therein. Secondly, there are some copies that have been distributed but unfortunately the machine broke down and these may not be enough. I request Members to bear with us.

I would like to lay on Table two documents: the minutes of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the committee report itself. As you can see, the report is quite voluminous; I am not going to read it word for word. I have an executive summary, which I am going to follow.  

Mr Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate sessional committees to critically examine government recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations thereto. In accordance with the stated documents, the Committee on Foreign Affairs considered Votes 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Votes 201-229 - our Missions Abroad. 

The methodology we used is similar to that used by most of the other committees: We went through the policy statements of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We also made a visit to the ministry to acquaint ourselves with what is on the ground. We held meetings with the minister and his team on 3rd, 10th and 16th of August to discuss the ministerial policy statement and for them to respond to the issues that we had raised. It is from these discussions that the committee compiled this report. 

The committee highlighted the key planned programmes under section (a) and activities for the FY 2005/06, the funds appropriated for the same period and the funds that were actually released by the Ministry of Finance. The committee also highlighted the achievements of the sector during the FY 2005/06 and the pending or ongoing activities and programmes for the same period.

Under section (b), the committee highlighted the planned activities for the FY 2006/07 and the amount of funds requested for by the sector.

The committee then made recommendations in section (b) and this was specifically in reference to a report by the budget committee of 2006. In this report, there are a number of recommendations that were raised by the committee and before the committee came out to discuss the new recommendations we first looked into this.  

The committee in the Budget Committee report had recommended that funds for CHOGM and the East African Community be separated from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The committee reports that funds for CHOGM continue to be channelled through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, as a matter of procedure, I do not see any Minister of Foreign Affairs in the House. I do not know who is going to respond.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyonga holds that portfolio. 

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr Speaker, thank you for that clarification. The Budget Committee recommended that funds to CHOGM and the East African Community be separated from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs budget ceiling. However, when we met the ministry officials during the examination of the policy statements, the committee was informed that CHOGM funds are still being channelled through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs while those for the East African Community have moved to the Office of the Prime Minister where the newly created Ministry of East African Community Affairs is temporarily housed.

In addition, the Budget Committee had recommended that the management of properties abroad be retained by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the ministry be given a status of Appropriation-in-Aid for purposes of managing the property. When the committee met the ministry officials, we were informed that the missions’ property abroad would now be managed by our missions through funding releases from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The funds available to the missions are however not sufficient to carry out the necessary regular renovations, repairs and maintenance.

In the report of the Budget Committee, the committee observed that budget lines for CHOGM have been scattered over many ministries. They were concerned that it could create an avenue for the misuse of public funds. The committee recommended that allocations to CHOGM be channelled to a self-accounting CHOGM secretariat.  However, when we met the ministry officials, the committee was this time round informed that the activities for CHOGM are crosscutting and involve many ministries.

During the past one year, the identification of activities and cost centres for CHOGM 2007 has been done. A sum of Shs 65 billion has been allocated for CHOGM planned activities for 2006/07 in addition to Shs 37 billion for the completion of State House in Entebbe. The details are on page 11 of the report.

Having looked at the report of the Budget Committee, the committee then went down to consider the policy statement itself and make comments as follows:  

Implementation of ongoing sector policies. Under this, we looked at the item, which concerns the categorisation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The committee noted that despite its previous recommendation that the ministry be shifted from the public administration sector to economic sector, the ministry has continued to be categorised under the public administration sector.  This subjects it to frequent budget cuts that hinder the ministry from fully performing its roles that are vital for the survival of Uganda’s economy. Outstanding among these roles is the mobilisation of donor funds.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will realise that Uganda’s budget is 41 per cent donor-funded and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the key ministry in resource mobilisation because it is the main link with the donor community in its effort to solicit for foreign aid for the country. Equally outstanding is the ministry’s role in the creation of external markets for Uganda’s produce and promotion of Uganda as a tourist and investment destination as well as sourcing for scholarships for Ugandan students.

Judging from the above roles, it is obvious that the contribution of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Consolidated Fund is indispensable not to mention the non-tax revenue it brings into the country in form of visa fees and issuance of Uganda passports abroad.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to maximise the country’s benefits from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the ministry should be moved from the public administration sector to the economic sector as a matter of urgency.

The committee further recommends that the ministry comes out to assert itself and make its role better understood both to the government and the general public.  

We also looked at the involvement of Members of Parliament in the preparation for CHOGM. The committee was concerned that Parliament is not involved in the preparation for CHOGM. However, the minister informed the committee that the role of Parliament is to oversee the activities of the Executive arm of government. The minister informed the committee that the preparation for CHOGM is a component of the implementation of government programme, which is the role of the Executive. 

The committee observed that for Parliament to be able to oversee the preparations of CHOGM, it is important that it receives periodic briefs. We recommended that Parliament receives briefings on the progress for CHOGM because as Members may realise, there is that gap. Ever since we came into the Eighth Parliament, Parliament has never got an official brief on the CHOGM and I think there is need for this. However, the committee received this initial briefing on the subject on 16 August 2006 and the minister assured us that the House would be briefed very soon.

The other issue that we looked at was the issue of honorary counsels. The committee observed that Uganda honorary counsels are not mentioned in the policy statement and yet they do a commendable job in promoting Uganda abroad. As you may be aware, we have diplomatic missions where we have representatives of different countries in this country, but we also have honorary counsels where normally the counsellor generals are appointed and are citizens of the hosting countries. These were lacking in our report. The committee, therefore, recommended that details of the performance of the honorary counsels be contained in the next policy statement.

We also looked at the issue of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs building. The committee as I have already pointed out was hosted to tour the Foreign Affairs building on Tuesday, 1 August 2006. During the tour, the committee observed that the building that was commissioned in 2004 is already showing some signs of weakness. For example, the dome that constitutes part of the roof is leaking. This has caused paint to pill off some areas of the wall.

Another problem that was cited is that the lifts have functional problems. It was also reported that last year’s earthquake tremors left some cracks in the wall. The committee was however assured that although the people’s Democratic Republic of China had handed over the building to the Government of Uganda for occupation, it had not concluded the work on the building and that there is a balance of US$200,000 that is meant for its completion. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has already pointed out a number of the defects to the Chinese contractors. The contractors attributed the defects to the use of inappropriate material due to under estimation of the weather conditions in Uganda.  They are however reported to have said that the defects would be rectified during the completion exercise. Important to note is the fact that the Chinese constructors will still have a presence at the ministry with their construction house still standing at the premises.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that a status report that points out the weaknesses in the building that must be rectified should be prepared and forwarded to the contractors before the commencement of the next phase of the work.  

The other issue that the committee examined is the issue of Uganda’s obligations to international organisations. The committee is concerned that Uganda’s arrears to international organisations remain outstanding at the tune of over Shs 16 billion. The committee observed that arrears of this magnitude are a great embarrassment to the country and proposed that Uganda should limit her membership to only those organisations from which she benefits most and to a number, whose annual contribution she can afford to cover.

The committee was informed that Uganda had cut her membership to international organisations only leaving those that she must subscribe to and those from which she receives most benefits. These are IGAD, AU, Commonwealth, UN and OIC. However, from the budget ceiling allocation, the Ministry of Finance has consistently made no provision for this item, which creates pressure on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs whenever summits and other meetings have to be attended. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance must provide funds to clear the outstanding arrears to international organisations and to pay the annual contributions to organisations which Uganda subscribes because non-payment of these funds are postponement of a problem and constant embarrassment to the country.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the other issue that the committee looked at was the issue of career diplomats versus political appointees. The committee was informed that while they are 17 career ambassadors of whom two are heads of missions and nine deputy heads of missions abroad, six at the headquarters, there are 28 political appointees at ambassadorial level, of whom 26 are serving in the missions abroad and two have been recalled home. 

The committee was concerned that political appointees have dominated the appointments to the ambassadorial positions for a long period of time.  Honourable members, as you may note, this de-motivates career diplomats. The committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a 50-50 balanced appointments between career diplomats and political appointees.  

We also looked at the relationship between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs in handling foreign affairs. The committee wanted to know the relations between the two ministries in handling foreign affairs. The committee was informed that the two ministries work very closely on this matter, although there are a number of areas, as indicated in the main report, where the Ministry of Internal Affairs needs to review and to expedite its method of handling and delivering services. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has in the past requested for a meeting to address the problem but it was not availed.
 
Specifically, the committee raised the issue of the number of aliens in the country. These normally come under the guise of visiting the country. Leave alone the investors; there are categories that come as visitors but vanish after some time and eventually remain in the country. Therefore, the committee recommended that a meeting be urgently convened between the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to handle this problem. 

The committee also supports the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ recommendation on the reciprocity procedure for giving out visas. In this case, we were informed by the Minister of foreign Affairs that Uganda has introduced a reciprocity process of handling visas. If in country A we are required to pay for visas then Uganda citizens of that country have to pay for visas to our country before they are allowed to come here. The committee was in agreement with that decision.  

Mr Speaker, the other issue that the committee looked at was the repatriation of Ugandans from Tanzania. The committee noted that over the last year, some people said to be Ugandans were expelled from Tanzania. The government of Tanzania is in the process of repatriating them to Uganda. The committee was however concerned that the repatriation exercise is not well handled by our neighbours. Therefore, the committee recommends that all people concerned be screened with a view to ensuring that only Ugandans are accepted to settle in Uganda. We were informed that in this exercise, not all people claiming to be Ugandans are Ugandans. There are some who are just using it as a scapegoat. 

The other issue that the committee looked at was the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs. The committee was concerned about the location of the ministry. We were concerned that the minister for EAC Affairs was under the Office of the Prime Minister and yet the ministry is concerned with issues outside Uganda, which in effect means it handles matters of foreign affairs or international affairs. 

The committee was informed that the Ministry for EAC Affairs was established as a result of the decision taken last year by a summit of East African heads of state. The President then appointed the First Deputy Prime Minister/Minister for EAC Affairs on the same model as the ministers holding the portfolio of EAC Affairs in Tanzania and Kenya. The current location of the Ministry of EAC Affairs in the Office of the Prime Minister is a temporary arrangement that took into consideration protocol in government. 

However, the minister and his delegation assured the committee that when necessary arrangements have been put in place, the Minister of EAC Affairs would be taken out of the Office of the Prime Minister and made a stand-alone ministry. In the meantime, the necessary officials had been seconded from the relevant ministries to the Office of the Prime Minister to assist the Minister for EAC Affairs. 

During the meeting, the committee also wanted to know from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the relationship between the EAC Affairs ministry and that of Regional Cooperation. We got an explanation that the EA Affairs ministry handles matters of EAC whereas the other one of Regional Cooperation handles other countries in African countries and also the matters of East African countries to the UN. 

Still on the EAC, the committee was concerned about the lack on the side of the government to popularise the EAC among the population more especially the federation, as you know. The committee was informed that there has been several sensitisation workshops held in Kampala and other parts to achieve the very objective of familiarisation of the importance of the EAC to Uganda. 

The committee was informed that the three member states have agreed to sensitise the fast tracking of the EA federation, which is to be launched on 15 September 2006. As a committee, we fully agree with and support this fast tracking because we want an expanded area. Federation would do better for this country. 

However, our concern was that the people at the grass root have not been sensitised enough about the process and that is why the committee recommended that there should be enough sensitisation. This will enable the people to get on board and help us avoid problems that may lead to the collapse of the EAC. As you know, that was one of the reasons that led to the collapse of the EAC the other time. In this respect, the committee further recommended that the report of the fast tracking of the EAF be presented to Parliament for debate.  

During interaction with colleagues from the other two partner states of the EAC, we got to learn that these fast tracking reports have been presented to the parliaments of Kenya and Tanzania. It is only Uganda, which has not presented it here. We feel that we should expedite it by presenting it here so that as representatives of the people we debate it and that way, get involved. We shall have then started the process of involving the local persons in the process.

Mr Speaker, the other issue that the committee looked at on the issue of the EAC is the issue of the promotion of the Swahili language. The committee observed that the Government of Uganda has not put in a deliberate effort to promote the Swahili language among Ugandan adults, yet the other member state of the EAC have Swahili as a second language. The committee is concerned that not knowing Swahili puts Ugandans at a disadvantage both at meetings within East Africa and to different fora where there is need for private discussions among East Africans. In fact, during the meeting, you know, you may have some separate discussion but it was very difficult for us because the only language we understood was English. Therefore, normally it becomes a problem when you are in such meetings. 

The situation also creates a gap between Ugandans and other East Africans. The committee, therefore, observed that for a strong cohesion to develop among East Africans, there is need for a common language that is unique to the region. The committee recommends that for government to show total commitment to the EAC, it must get a framework for promoting Swahili in schools right from nursery, not just primary.
 
Another framework should also be developed to promote the language among adults. The committee further recommends that the administration of Parliament organises Swahili classes for Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, still on the EAC, the committee was concerned about the issue of briefs to Parliament, as I said. This is somehow related to fast tracking. The committee recommends that the Minister for the EAC Affairs briefs the committee and Parliament quarterly about the affairs of the EAC. 

The other issue that the committee considered was the second Vote, that is, 201- 229, for missions abroad. Under this, we looked at the facility of Uganda missions abroad. The committee observed that there is gross under facilitation of Uganda missions abroad resulting into lack of motivation among the staff deployed there. In many of the missions, staff are only paid salary but not given the facilitation that they need to perform their duties. It, therefore, turns out that they are paid to just stay in those countries but not to do any work. This, the committee observed, is a wastage of Uganda’s limited resources and an embarrassment to the country. We recommend that Uganda scales down on the number of missions abroad to a level that can be adequately facilitated.  

Still related to the mission’s abroad is the budget line for advertising Uganda. You know, in foreign countries it is normally a system of lobbying. The committee observed that due to resource constraints, Uganda missions abroad hardly advertise Uganda abroad unlike other countries that heavily invest in this area. This causes the country to lose out on very many lucrative opportunities in form of investment and tourism. The committee was informed that there is no budget line in the missions for advertising Uganda abroad.  

However, in their role of representing the country abroad, the mission liased routinely with and disseminate information provided by relevant government entities such as Uganda Tourist Board, Uganda Investment Authority and the private sector which are responsible for providing information on tourism, trade and investment promotion. The missions are guided in their actions by public diplomacy strategy, which sets out the criteria, which they are to carry out if they are to promote the image of Uganda properly. The committee recommends that the ministry should have budget length to fulfil the missions’ mandates.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee also made one general observation. We observed that its mandate covers all happenings outside the boundaries of Uganda and it noted that in the Government of Uganda today, there are two ministries under this category namely; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of EAC Affairs. However, as you may note, we only examined the policy statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The one on the EAC was not presented to us. We had no alternative but to accept when it was explained to us, because it was a new ministry. However, our view is that, in future - this is even in the Rules of Procedure - the Ministry of EAC should report to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that is where the budget should be.

There is need to make the whole thing uniform. Recently, when there was a seminar in Dar-es-Salaam, there was an agreement to the effect that there should be a parliamentary committee to handle EAC affairs. In that respect, the committee recommends that the Committee on Foreign Affairs be renamed as that of East Africa and Foreign Affairs because we believe the committee on Foreign Affairs could adequately handle matters of EAC instead of creating another committee for the same purpose. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Approaches have been made to me suggesting that we establish an independent committee on East African affairs. (Applause) However, I have to bring it to the attention of the Committee on Rules to consider after which they will report to the House. It will then be up to you to decide on this. 

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that clarification. 

As I conclude, I would like to look at the budgetary proposals and requests. The committee recommends to Parliament the approval of the following Votes for the FY 2006/07: 
·	Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 69,080,790, 000
Development expenditure – Shs 776 million.

·	Vote 201-229 - Missions Abroad
 Recurrent expenditure – Shs 28,299,000,000 
Development expenditure – Shs 800 million. 

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson and the Members of the committee for the report presented. 

5.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee for his presentation. As has been the practice, where detailed debates were not forthcoming from our side, we were supposed to table our position for the record of the House. Unfortunately, good practice is that the Office of the Clerk has implied that it gives me an early copy of the Order Paper. This was a problem today. 

The early copy of the Order paper that was sent to me had consideration of the report of the Committee on Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. Therefore, our arrangement was for Agriculture to present. In fact, hon. Beti Kamya came here when the technicians were still testing the facilities and unfortunately hon. Reagan Okumu is not in the House. So, I would like to take just a very short moment to give a small response to the report on behalf of the Opposition.

First of all, we thank the committee for its consideration of Foreign Affairs in the manner that it has. However, Mr Speaker, we must really express our disappointment with some of the contradictory positions that the committee came out with. I would like to make very brief comments on issues that are on pages 7, 9, 11, 16, 18 and 25.
  
On page 7, under planned and proposed activity programmes for the financial year 06/07, the committee lists as capital activities a number of things: promoting and supporting of investment in processing raw materials; negotiating and attracting investors to develop Namanve Industrial Park, Jinja Industrial Park, etc; facilitating and strengthening of the Uganda Investment Authority; and facilitating and building of one new factory in every district. 

These as capital activities of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs were extremely amazing to me. I even imagine that if the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is going to get involved, their activities will be promotional, non-capital based and largely recurrent in expenditure.  

My concern is that, while the ministry later decries the lack of attention to the upkeep of its capital assets, which ought to be provided for, the ministry focuses on sets of activities that truly belong to other ministries as capital. It, therefore, allows itself to be blocked from demanding the kind of money it needs to make our missions decent and reflective of our country.  

You just have to go to our Mission in Trafalgar Square. It is in a prime location, but look at the facilities there; it is just shocking! Even the people who rented – Rwanda was renting when I was last there - used their money to rehabilitate their component of Uganda House in Trafalgar Square, so that it looks better. When you went to ours, the roof was leaking. It is just amazing! We in the Opposition are actually deeply disappointed that the ministry can focus on activities of another ministry as its capital activity.

On Page 9, under funds to international organisations, I really want to read the committee’s recommendation. On the funds to the East African Community, we agree with them that they should be separated from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs budget because, in their argument, it distorts the budget ceiling. 

For us, more importantly, we think government should take a step further, and it is an appeal that our colleagues who represent us in the East African Assembly have been making. The component budget for the East African Legislative Assembly should be moved from Foreign Affairs and not even go to the East African Community Ministry but be moved to Parliament. These are parliamentarians and they represent the constituency of Parliament. The practice in Kenya and Tanzania is that those funds, and the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly from those countries, are managed by Parliament under the Parliamentary Commission. 

We make a very passionate appeal in support of the position presented by our Members, that the funds in the Vote for the East African Legislative Assembly Members be transferred from wherever they may be to Parliament. Also, that the terms and conditions of service of these people be defined by the Parliamentary Commission, to protect them from the situation that they are in now.  

On Page 11, the committee talks about the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM).  We would like to put it on record that we are not against CHOGM; we support Uganda hosting CHOGM.  Secondly, I would also like to let Parliament know that I hosted the Commonwealth Secretary General sometime ago, when he came to visit Parliament and the Rt hon. Speaker. 

We are, however, deeply concerned by what is contained in the committee report on Page 11, where the budget allocation, item 1, is Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd. We would not have any problem with that, except the explanation given under the table on Page 11. It says: 

“Item 1, Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd: This is a joint venture between Government of Uganda and the private sector. It is a requirement from the Commonwealth Secretariat that the country hosting CHOGM should have such an arrangement.”

I was deeply perturbed by this.  What if we had all the facilities and we did not need to build another one, would the Commonwealth Secretariat impose on us a requirement to create a company and even build some infrastructure to host the conference? I doubt the validity of this statement. I am going to write to the Commonwealth Secretariat to find out. Unless the minister can explain to us whether this is just a statement of the committee and it is not the official position as known by government. I will write to the Commonwealth Secretariat seeking clarification on this, because we are entitled. If you are going to form a joint venture, if you are going to breach the principle of privatisation, private sector participation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you seek authenticity of the statement?

PROF OGENGA LATIGO: Yes, I said, “If the minister does not”; in other words, I am seeking clarification from the minister but also giving him early warning on the steps I will take.  

We would also like to know, as he brings clarification, which other activities have got funds from government to support private sector preparation for this Commonwealth meeting. It is not bad to us, but it is very important that we know so that we stop having rumours that circulate all over, that so and so got eight billion, so and so got this. It is not good for our country when we act on rumours; so we ask to be informed.

Mr Speaker, on Page 16, under obligations to international organisations, I was again extremely shocked. While we have the failure to subscribe, it was rightly described by the committee as embarrassing. The recommendation of the committee was a shame, in my view. This is what the committee said: “The committee observed that arrears of this magnitude are a great embarrassment to the country and proposed that Uganda should limit her membership to only those organisations from which she benefits most and to a number whose annual contributions she can afford to cover.” They made a similar recommendation on Page 25, about closing some of our embassies. 

First of all, if you look at the figures of contributions required of us: IGAD Ugshs 500 million, African Union Ugshs 500 million, the UN Ugshs 367 million. It is only OIC, which is over a billion, the rest are less than Ugshs 500 million. Our country, and our committee of Parliament, now recommends that we should just stop being members of IGAD because we have accumulated arrears of Ugshs 7.0 billion. They recommend that we should cease being members of the Commonwealth, which we are hosting, because we have arrears of Ugshs 1.03 billion. I think this is not right for this country.  

The committee should have recommended that government finds money first of all to pay the arrears for the Commonwealth. It is very embarrassing that we are going to be hosts and yet we have arrears. It is not fair! We expect to benefit from the Commonwealth but we cannot pay even small arrears of Ugshs 1.0 billion. Those arrears should have been part of the budget for CHOGM. Maybe the Ugshs 1.0 billion allocated for spouses’ activities should be transferred to pay for these arrears.

Mr Speaker, the last matter that I want to raise is a matter that is worrying. The committee reported the lack of reciprocity, where we allow foreigners to come to our country without imposing large visa fees but Ugandans get subjected to serious payments of visas. On the 18th August, one Alfa Khan, who is the Director of House of Quality Spices Ltd, wrote to me on the case of Tanzania charging business visa fees of $100. On 30th, they travelled to Tanzania for a regional show. At the border, each of the companies that went for the show was charged $100 for a business visa. 

He points out the position as established by the East African meeting, where it was agreed that the regional business visa fees of $50, which was charged across the border in East Africa, be abolished. Uganda does not charge this. If Tanzanians are coming to do business here or to participate in a show, they are not charged for a business visa. So we are asking, why should this happen? Is the ministry aware? 

I sent an advance copy of this letter to the Chief Government Whip to give the line minister, so that he has the full content of the letter. He should be able to respond. This is very disappointing. The person writing even says that the Kagera Sugar Factory actually gets some of its sugar from Uganda and they are not charged anything. This to us is very unfair. The issue of reciprocity, in providing visas to our people as we do to peoples of other countries, must be put into consideration. We seek clarification from government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.21
COL. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have about four points. The first point is the recommendation by the committee that Foreign Affairs should be removed from public administration sector to the economic sector. This is the third year this recommendation is being given. In 2004/05, that recommendation was put forward, it never happened; in 2005/006, the same story. Now the Eighth Parliament is also recommending that Foreign Affairs moves from public social sector to economic sector. It will not happen at all. 

What is interesting is, why actually bother to recommend moving Foreign Affairs from public administration sector to economic sector! Defence, which has quite a good budget, is not in the economic sector. Education, which has a good budget, is not on the list of the economic sector, neither is Internal Affairs nor State House; it is just single. 

The Government of Uganda should appreciate and understand that Foreign Affairs is a very important ministry. It should be given a good budget so that the foreign service officers, the ambassadors, can do their work. Foreign Affairs defends Uganda outside and on the borders. Internal Affairs does it here internally. Therefore, the Government of Uganda should understand that it pays to have the Ministry of Foreign Affairs well funded, having a good budget. You do not have to escape the problem by moving Foreign Affairs from public administration sector to economic sector.

Two, I am really happy that hon. Kutesa is now Minister of Foreign Affairs because he was in Finance before, and hon. Musumba has also ended up there. There was a time when I was in Foreign Affairs and we used to go to Finance to ask for funds. The colleagues who were there are now in Foreign Affairs. It is really good that they will now appreciate the problem of not appreciating –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is innuendo. You mean then they did not understand?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Let me not go into that. In the case of Uganda’s contribution to the Commonwealth, I think the minister should not worry. The CHOGM is coming here, and I am sure a month or two before the meeting takes place, we shall pay all our arrears. We shall not allow ourselves to be embarrassed by not having paid.

My third point is the 50/50 percent ambassadors appointed by the President as recommended. The majority are political appointments; they are not career diplomats. This is very important because every foreign service officer now knows that the highest he can go to is head of the chancellery. It is very difficult to be appointed ambassador. Maybe the only person who has been lucky is the man seated in front of me here, the hon. James Baba, who was a career diplomat. He did get appointed full ambassador and is now a minister. He is a very lucky person. 

The initiative of foreign service officers really dies out. They never expect to be appointed ambassadors because of the big number of political appointments that does take place on all these top ambassadorial positions. 

What we have to appreciate is the fact that the President is also under pressure to appoint people from different areas of the country to these ambassadorial appointments; nevertheless, a career diplomat appointed ambassador is a civil servant being promoted by the President to the top most diplomatic position of ambassador. He is more grateful than a politician being appointed to the post. For a politician, it may be a bargain, but for a civil servant it is a promotion. 

We should encourage and advise, where possible, so that the President considers promoting career diplomats, career foreign service officers, to ambassadorial positions. They are more grateful. They are more disciplined; in fact, their input is usually better and higher than political appointments.

Finally, I will comment on the East African Federation. The chairperson of the committee said that the people of Uganda need to be sensitised about what is going on. I want to remind the chairman of the committee that the East African Federation was in the manifesto of NRM and we campaigned on that manifesto. Where a Member of Parliament campaigned, your constituency should know by now that there is going to be an East African Federation come 2015. 

When I was campaigning, I made sure that at every rally I held, I explained to my constituents that this is one of the reasons why we want to be elected; we intend to federate East Africa. As far as I am concerned, my constituency is clear. They voted and that was one of the reasons why they voted me into Parliament and why they voted other very distinguished people like the President. The constituents should know by now that NRM has a programme for the Federation of East Africa. Come 2015, there should be one country in East Africa. I support the committee that there should be a fully-fledged committee of Parliament on East Africa Community affairs.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

5.30
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi East, Kanungu District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have two comments. One is to reiterate the point, which has been raised regarding the status of our Missions abroad. I happen to have worked in international service and interacted with a number of Missions. We need to allocate more money to make them functional and attractive.

I also want to get clarification from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on how it interfaces with the sister ministries in terms of getting information and sending it to the Missions abroad. 

I participated in a workshop where one of the Ambassadors was making a presentation. I realised the information and data he was presenting on Uganda was quite old. It gave me an impression that there is no regular interface with the ministry in terms of sharing information, updating the Missions of the information and so forth.

My next comment is on CHOGM. I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition; he says the opposition supports CHOGM. I have two comments on it. One is the role of Parliament in the preparations for CHOGM. I note that on page 13 of the report, the Ministry says the preparation for CHOGM is the function of the Executive and therefore Parliament can only participate by way of receiving reports from the Ministry. 

While I accept that, I also wish to suggest that this Parliament creates a committee which can assist Government in the preparation and arrangement for CHOGM, so that Parliament can be much more involved, in addition to the periodic briefs we shall get from the ministry. This will not contradict any law. It would enhance the workings of Parliament and the Government in terms of realising the CHOGM meeting.

Secondly, still on CHOGM. I have looked at the budget and I note that the budget for infrastructure is Ugshs 12 billion. I represent a district that is a tourist destination. We have the Bwindi impenetrable forest where the mountain gorillas are found. We have information that some of the participants in CHOGM are actually going to see the gorillas. 

I was wondering whether part of this budget could be used to improve infrastructure in my district, Kanungu, particularly the roads. The easiest and shortest way to seeing the gorillas is through Kanungu via Rukungiri, or even via Kabale, and the roads in my district are pathetic. Some of the money can be used to improve infrastructure in some of the areas which, in one way or the other, are going to be part of the CHOGM arrangement. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.34
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga District): Mr Speaker, when it comes to the planned activities for 2006/2007, there is negotiating and attracting investors in building industrial parks in Jinja and other towns. I would propose to this committee and the Parliament that we come up with the minimum standards of who investors should be.  

There is a general influx of Asians in Jinja, under the guise of being investors. You find that they are selling cool cool bar, ice cream; they are even shoe shiners and radio repairers. You wonder whether they are really investors. These people are repeating what happened in the 70s. We hear that morally, they abused the wananchi of Uganda. If we do not take keen interest, we might end up repeating what transpired some years ago.

We come to the Mabira saga, the issue of giving Mabira Forest Reserve to Metha. Mr Speaker, yesterday I was hosted at one of the local FM radio stations, but it was tense. The public is totally considering that the Government has ignored promoting local investors at the cost of the foreigners. Mukono District Local Council alone passed a resolution, I think on Thursday. I was chatting with one of the district councillors who said that they are petitioning Parliament, to see that we do not endorse Mabira Forest to be given to Metha as a matter of enlarging their sugar plantations. We have alternatives, like promoting out-growers, instead of giving Mabira Forest. 

The people of Mayuge are likewise being traumatised because they are encroaching on forest reserves. They hear Mabira Forest is being given to Metha, a foreigner, yet they are being chased from Mabira because they are encroaching on forest. 

Mr Speaker, as we promote investors –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This should come when we are dealing with the report on natural resources.

5.36
MS NAGGAYI SEMPALA (FDC, District Woman Representative, Kampala): My take on the committee report is about CHOGM and the issue of Parliament not being involved. The chairperson has informed the House that when officials from the Ministry were queried about the role of Parliament, they were informed that the activities have already been finalised and they have been given to different ministries. I want to ask whether the committee had a role to play in this whole process of CHOGM, or whether they just meant to have a physical presence of CHOGM in their report.  

The committee also recommended that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should come out to assert itself and make its role better understood, both in government and in the general public. I wonder if this assertion did not go on to the committee. I feel the committee did not assert itself when it was trying to point out the role of Parliament in this whole process of CHOGM.

There is a point on the infrastructure. I know that Kampala City Council officials have been co-opted on the committee of CHOGM. As a Member of Parliament of Kampala, I feel the role of Parliament should also be present. The infrastructure that they budgeted for is already in Kampala. If we do not know our role, how can we follow up on what has been put in place and what should be in place. We will not be able to follow up on the process of the infrastructure and also the allocation of the money to the different sectors as it has been put.  

I also have a query about Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd. I wonder, is it a separate entity from Munyonyo Resort Beach, or is it a new entity called Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd? I want to know whether the committee found out which new entity this is. Thank you so much.

5.39
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this report. I have four points to make. One of these points is in regard to the honorary consuls.  Honorary consuls, as I know them, are people of high social status in their own countries. I do not know whether governments that employee them pay them. One of the recognitions given to them is to make them appear on our books. I am just surprised to note that they are not mentioned in the policy statement.  

The other aspect I would like to contribute on is the question of arrears. We have heard about domestic arrears and now we are talking about arrears to international organisations. My understanding is that when you made budget lines, I am sure these funds were mentioned in the budget lines. The question of arrears, therefore, implies that government ministries are not following budget lines. That is my understanding. Maybe the hon. Minister can educate me on this.

The third point is about the East African Community. I appreciate hon. Butime’s remark, that people were sensitised during the campaign. In my opinion, a one-time sensitisation is not enough. The people of Uganda at the grassroots should know about the East African Community, people of Kenya and Tanzania should know about the East African Community, so that the East African community we are talking about becomes their own. That is why continuous sensitisation is necessary, not one-time sensitisation.

Mr Speaker, our Missions abroad represent our dignity, culture, honour, and of course our outlook. If they are not facilitated, what are we telling the outside world?  The Minister of Foreign Affairs may be in a position to explain why the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has not funded our Missions abroad, our dignity, our honour, and representatives of our culture outside Uganda. Thank you very much.

5.43
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader District): Thank very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for giving such an elaborate report. I would obviously support the budgetary request to Parliament, but I just want to make some few observations that would help the whole country.

Mr Speaker, on CHOGM, there is urgent need for Parliament to be brought on board. As Parliament, we also owe this country an explanation as to whether we deserve to be brought on board. We have seen in the media, reputable Members of Parliament are ready to die if the Queen is ever to step on Ugandan soil. It was in the media! In fact, I was almost hanged in a public market for having stood my ground to say I will support the Queen’s visit. 

I am glad today those who did not accept my views are now saying, on the Floor of the Parliament, “We support the Queen’s visit”. I still request that an official statement, on behalf of all the opposition members, be made to this Parliament on our position towards CHOGM.  Several statements have appeared in the media, and it was really very worrying that in a country like ours, some people can say, “let the Queen not step at Entebbe Airport”. This is a big embarrassment.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from hon. Otto. The Leader of the Opposition has clearly told us that they support CHOGM, but now he is saying that we need another report from the opposition to actually pronounce themselves on CHOGM. That is the clarification I am seeking. I believe that the Leader of the Opposition is a spokesperson of the opposition.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, the statement is just for the records, so that those who would want several copies can easily obtain them. It should also be e-mailed to the CHOGM Secretariat and to the countries abroad. This is because of the statements I have made. I am not just saying this out of the blue. 

Secondly, can’t we be told how much of these CHOGM funds are going to be used to develop this country at regional level? This is a big amount of money.  We have got information that government is already negotiating with the Tanzanian Government for Mwanza landing sites and also Nairobi. They may have to pay money to upgrade the facilities.

As a country, have we thought about the urgent need to upgrade Soroti Airfield, to deliberately channel some flights into Soroti Airfield? At the end of the day, as the people of CHOGM pack their bags to leave this particular country, we would take advantage of having facilities in Soroti and areas like Kanungu, which my friend talked about. I do not think we may even have the absorption capacity in Kampala alone for all the money which we are pumping in Kampala. That is my personal opinion. It is not a professional opinion.

Lastly, there is need for Ugandans to prepare for the East African Community in the same spirit hon. Tom Butiime presented to this Parliament. I respect his views because he joined St. Leos in senior one together with my dad, about 50 years ago. 

What I would tell him is, the East African Community is good for all of us, even those in Karamoja. Showing steps that you are first of all a Ugandan, irrespective of which part of the country you come from, then you are East African, will really bring the East African Community on board, not to the exclusion of other ethnic communities. Maybe it would be very nice for you to share your thoughts on those issues.  

As I sit down, there is an urgent need, Mr Speaker, to demystify Kiswahili Language. I will be one of those who will resist learning Kiswahili because of my personal orientation on what the purpose of Kiswahili is for. I think many Ugandans, specifically of my age, would understand what I have said. 

I do not think you will take it as a very kind comment if someone outside the Parliament tells you “habari gani”. The orientation in our heads is that this is a rude language for those rude people in military gear. This is the common impression. If someone speaks in Kiswahili, you have a second look at the person talking. 

There is need, specifically for the Minister for Children Affairs, to ensure that through civic education in primary schools, we try to demystify the Kiswahili language from the military gear, which we see in every other place. If it were possible, we would compel soldiers to speak English, to give us an opportunity to speak Kiswahili. Many people got thorough beatings, including myself and the Leader of the Opposition. These were executed amidst the language called Kiswahili, and this is the language the committee is recommending we should start learning. Maybe hon. Nankabirwa would want to give information.  

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Odonga Otto for giving way. I just want to tell hon. Odonga Otto that Kiswahili is constitutionally the second official language. What the committee is saying is that everybody should be encouraged to learn this second official language.  

Secondly, Sir, there is now a global movement towards civil military relations, such that when you see somebody in military attire, he is a friend; he is a friend who is there for you rather than a person who is there to finish you. Uganda had portrayed this by including some of these people in this very House so that you rub shoulders with them. Sometimes they come in their military attire and I have not seen anybody running away from these Members of Parliament, not even hon. Odonga Otto. 

I am therefore surprised when I hear my long standing friend, Odonga Otto, insinuating that the military, or that the uniform for the military, is related to Kiswahili and therefore it is not good to encourage people to learn Kiswahili.  Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am not in any way showing that I am fearful of those in military outfit. I just have a kind of mental situation; not only me, there are many Ugandans out there. If you see someone in military wear speaking Kiswahili, it is perceived by many as a very unfriendly language. Maybe my advice would help those who will design the curriculum to see how to address those issues. 

I am not substantially opposing Kiswahili as a second national language. I also do not want to oppose the good views given by my long-term friend, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.52
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I just want to say something about the Ministry of Foreign Affairs finding itself in the area of industry.  Our colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, was saying, “Why should the Ministry of Foreign Affairs do the work that is meant for other ministries?” I think he was talking about what they called development and capital activities, on Page 7. I just want to say, as hon. Butime said, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is indeed a ministry that defends Uganda in foreign areas. 

Secondly, it also promotes foreign investment. What they are saying here on Page 7 is not to actually build all the industrial parks they mention there, but to negotiate and attract investors. They are the ones that are in foreign affairs and in the foreign countries. The best they can do for Uganda is to attract foreign investment for this country as a major opportunity that they have.  

I do share your concern that Missions abroad are dilapidated, and you quoted one of the buildings at Trafalgar Square. I really would like, as I am sure all Ugandans would, to see our Missions abroad being repaired, looking much better, and our staff paid better, so that they can do their work better. Nonetheless, the work that they are talking about here also should be done by Foreign Affairs since they happen to be there.

Secondly, I just want to also comment on the question about visas, that we are not charging people coming to Uganda. If I got you rightly, you said that there was an agreement by all East African countries that visas should not be charged for, and Uganda is therefore not charging people who are coming to Uganda. 

What we ought to do, as Members of Parliament is to work with our colleagues in the other East African countries. We should ask them questions, and also cooperate with them, to help them see what we are doing - because that is what we agreed on - so that they also can do what we are doing, instead of saying, “why is Uganda not charging when others are”. We are fulfilling what we agreed. I think that is not bad.

My last point is just to say that I still agree with my colleague here that Parliament should have a committee for CHOGM. I said this sometime back, if I remember. I believe a committee of Parliament on CHOGM, specifically, would help to monitor the funding on CHOGM budget. I think they have a big budget on CHOGM alone. 

If the Parliament had a Sessional Committee, which would just stand as long as there is CHOGM, after CHOGM it can be dissolved, it could help to monitor that funding that may be misused if it is not correctly monitored.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.57
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification and I am seeking assurance. I read in the newspapers over the weekend that, actually, the CHOGM deal is not yet sealed. There are detractors who are still arguing that Uganda is not yet ready to host this meeting. 

Among the arguments being raised is that the hotels are just under construction, and that these hotels, which are being hurriedly constructed, may collapse on the delegates when they come here. I want to seek assurance from the committee whether they addressed themselves to this question. Is there money, which has been allocated, to counter these detractors? Is the CHOGM deal a sealed deal for which we should appropriate money. I thank you.

5.59
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Female Representative): Mr Speaker, my first comment was to seek clarification on the issue of confusion of roles, which was highlighted on pages 2 and 7. The Member of Parliament for Ruhama has tried to give the clarification I wanted to get, but she was still saying that it is not the ministry that is actually going to implement these activities, but maybe it is the foreign institutions. 

When you read this document, you still see that it is the ministry here trying to perform these duties. Maybe we need a revision of the activities of the different ministries so that we do not confuse roles. These functions still fall under a particular ministry, and I think they fall more under the Ministry of Trade.  

Mr Speaker, my second point is on what the Member of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, normally, in these Missions you find what they call “commercial attaches”. He works in the Mission itself and his purpose is to do commerce, to do trade, but he operates in the Mission. That is what happens actually. 

MS SAFIA NALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Maybe if we see it in practice we will be very happy. 

My second comment was related to what my colleague from Kanungu was saying, that maybe a committee is set from Parliament here to see how these preparations, which are highly costly, are going to be implemented.  

I would like to beg, if it is possible, if this committee is created a person with disability is put on this committee. Why? So many big functions happen in a country like Uganda and people like us end up not participating. Sometimes when we stretch ourselves to participate, it is very strenuous. 

Let me just give you an example. On page 11, sector No.2 is on infrastructure, and it is highly costed at Ugshs 12 billion. However, you find that venues are not accessible; you cannot get there. When they see you trying to get to the venue, they say, “Oh! Safia, very sorry, very sorry”; you know, we are tired of those apologies everyday. 

Mr Speaker, item No.5 is media and publicity. Much as this budget is very big, I do not think people will remember to cost sign language interpretation. Some of our deaf members may end up not participating because the thing is taken generally. People will come up, they will see but they will not get the message.  

Another issue is security, Mr Speaker, which is of great concern to us. I may fail to get a driver that day, maybe he is sick, and I drive there and they tell me “go and park the other side, some important people are coming to park in this area”.  You park at the end but then you have to walk up to the venue. 

So, I highly recommend that whether this committee is formed or not, our concerns should be taken into consideration. You know, the person who is going to respond to these questions may rise and say, “Oh, Safia you know, we even passed a policy on accessibility and that will be catered for.” But at the end of the day the conference comes and then those issues are not catered for. So, I beg that they are taken into consideration.

I also want to seek clarification on “Item No.15: Peoples Forum. Who are the participants in this people’s forum? Because at least with “Item No.16: The Youth” it is clear. But who are the participants in this people’s forum? 

Lastly, I have already sent you a note that as we were discussing the report of the Committee on Finance, some of us actually did not have the report. You know, I laboured to talk to those people putting on white suites, Stewards, but nobody was responding and finally one of them told me, “Forget the copies are finished.” And we need to get these reports in time. Tomorrow I know we are going to discuss the report on Agriculture, but let us get these copies now so that we can read and debate from an informed position tomorrow. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr James Baba):  Mr Speaker, first, I would like to really commend and appreciate the Leader of Opposition for the constructive manner in which he has been conducting business in this new multiparty democracy. This is my first session in Parliament - first time in politics and first time in a multiparty system. And the way the opposition have been conducting themselves, personally I would like to appreciate.   

I rise to raise one or two things. One of which was raised by the Leader of the Opposition on page 11, about his concern on the requirements by the Commonwealth Secretariat for this government to have this kind of facility. Sir, I do not think you will get a reply from the Secretary-General of Commonwealth if you wrote to him about this particular issue. 

What is referred to here is that in many Commonwealth Summits, a conference is held, and then there will be a retreat for Heads of States, an exclusive retreat. It could be on the hills of a mountain, by the seaside, and in our case it is going to be at Munyonyo. What the Commonwealth Secretariat does not require is for a joint venture between government and private sector to put up a facility. This is our own internal arrangement. But what is required is a retreat. So, I plead with you not to take your concern very far.

But more importantly, Mr Speaker, I rose as a former diplomat in the Ugandan Diplomatic Service. I have worked there for 33 years and it was through thick and thin. I would like to appeal to this Parliament to really consider facilitation of the work of Ugandans in Diplomatic Service. You are the image of the country abroad and an image, which is dilapidated, which is an isle, is not a good image for this country. 

On page 10, the list of properties, these are our own properties bought by the taxpayer’s money in London, New York, Washington, Cairo, all over the world in prime areas. But these properties have never received resources for their maintenance. We have taken our culture here of not maintaining anything. I believe including this House hon. Speaker. We have to develop a culture of maintaining properties and particularly so outside where everybody is watching us. You go to our missions, to the residences and to the chancellors where people come to see us, it is terrible! 

Through you, Sir, I would like to plead to the Ministry of Finance, for the first time please, consider maintenance of our properties. You can pay the officers less allowances, less salaries, less facilitation, but let the image be right. Let the cars be cars which can move and be presentable, not dilapidated structures which die on the way many times.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much hon.Baaba. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Ambassador Baaba, he is a Member on the frontbench and I want to know whether he has raised those concerns in Cabinet before pleading with the minister here since he is part of the frontbench?

MR BABA: Yes, I am sorry I should have mentioned that I am a member of this bench, I am in government, I have avenues to raise this and I have raised it in Cabinet. But this one is now to appeal to the whole House so that you can support what Cabinet has put before the entire nation in this House. And it is a real concern. I am taking it very seriously hon. Member.

Finally, on the issue of arrears of contributions to international organisations: I recall we had many more organisations to which this country belongs to - for which we were members. These were restructured and reduced in numbers. We now have this bear minimum in numbers but we still fail to meet our obligations. Yet all these organisations are the ones from which we benefit from a lot either directly through finances or through efforts to promote peace and stability in our regions, the way IGAD or the African Union is doing. 

Through OIC, the Organisation of Islamic Conference, we get a lot of resources. So, again Cabinet has tried to raise these concerns, the priorities are many, but still I would like to appeal to this House that these are areas where we can even mobilise more resources for the country and therefore our government should consider it. If what I have said is outside a frontbencher’s mandate, I am sorry but I thought I had to bring it out. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause) 

6.12
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to respond to the report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I am so disturbed about the building, which I thought was so glittering to have a defect. 

In a building there is always an inspection phase. So, I thought this building should have been inspected before occupation so that the defects period can be estimated and rectified. Now, is the ministry concerned with housing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see the kind of works that make a construction, be it roads, there is some retention, which is retained, and the period to examine what has been done.  It is normal for things that – you construct, but there is a defect.  The amount of money, which remains on the account, is meant to make sure that if the defect is detected, then it can be repaired.  It is normal.

MS OBURU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that clarification.  So, I was just wondering whether the amount of money, which is due, would be enough to clear the defect and complete the building.  Thank you.

6.14
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have just a few comments on pages 22 and 26 about popularisation of the East African Community. You remember two weeks ago, there is a group that went to Dar-es-Salaam and the concern was that most of the nationals are not aware about the benefits of the East African Community.  

I would suggest that we look into our law and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, that when Members of the East African Legislative Assembly are here, they could be allowed in and maybe if they have something it is put on the Order Paper.  

It was a concern from all the Members of the three member states.  So, maybe through our legal counsel, we could look into this. When these members are on their recess, we give them that leeway such that they can come and deliberate with us. 

I would also like to slightly differ that instead of having the Committee on Foreign Affairs and East African Community Affairs, we should have a fully-fledged committee. Because I remember in Dar-es-Salaam, I was among those Members who raised it and I think that meeting took it.  

So, if it comes to this House, I would like to appeal to Members that we support it and have a fully-fledged committee on the East African Committee. We have the minister in charge and this Committee will be requesting the minister to brief them about what goes on in the East African Community. Maybe we could be having weekly briefings about the East African Community in order to popularise like we have weekly government briefings.

The Wako Report:

Mr Speaker, you remember that when this report came, it was just laid on table and that was the time we were carrying out the constitutional review.  So, we did not really have time to discuss it. It is unfortunate that the two member countries have discussed it.  So, when they talk about the Wako Commission, the Ugandan side is really – we as members of Parliament of Uganda are very ignorant about it. So it is in my appeal that as we finish the budget process, this report is discussed and we know its contents.  I thank you.

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for a report well written and well presented. 

Sir, I would like to give some response to some of the issues that came on the Floor in a summarised way.  Many of them have been clarified, for example when the honourable Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ogenga Latigo, asked about Munyonyo and he threatened that he would write to the other people abroad.  The explanation was given in part by hon. Ambassador Baba.  

It is not that the Commonwealth Secretariat obligates a host government to go into a joint venture, no.  But there are standards, which are expected of a host government before they can be allowed to host.  Some of which are; you must have not less than 54 presidential suites in one place, where they will retire after the conference. 

Now, you go to an investor and tell him I want 54 presidential suites. He will say, “Yes, but what will happen when these people go?  You want me to turn so many floors into presidential suites, what will happen?”  So you engage into a discussion with this person and in this particular case we did engage with an investor to meet the standards that are required. 

In the process of engaging the investor, we agreed as a government that we are going to have a share in the complex that is being set up for this purpose. We will finance it, and our shareholding does not exceed 25 percent. The purpose of this is to ensure that we give comfort and participation to the other party to make the appropriate investment.

Sir, one thing that has been consistent through, is the issue of CHOGM and the briefing to Parliament.  My belief is that –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO:  Mr Speaker, the issue of Munyonyo Resort Limited, which we raised through the Leader of the Opposition, required more than what the Minister has given us. This is particularly according to the statement is in the report that it was a directive from the Commonwealth Secretariat to be a joint venture.  

We need to get a clarification whether it was actually a directive from the Commonwealth Secretariat that it must be a joint venture and how this was arrived at?  I mean how the investor was sourced out, the criterion that was used, whether actually the company is already registered, because a joint venture presupposes a company and I can see it is a limited liability company?  

If it is already registered, who are the partners in that joint venture? Is it already functioning?  If it is in place, how much is being contributed by the other investor?  Here we can see you were seeking for Ugshs 8.8 billion, how much is being contributed by the other investor?  And this resort, if it is going to be a resort, is it already constructed, have you already started? Is it half way constructed? Are you just about to start constructing it and growing the lawn, which is needed?  I mean we have one year to CHOGM and there are so many other questions associated to that which arise.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I quite see definitely, you will not be able to answer these questions - to give clear explanation of all the questions asked.  What we do, we take what he has – the number of questions as paused to you as questions formally put to you so that we get time to come and explain to us with details.  You do not have the details now. You will come back in respect of this issue to make more clarification.  So you can proceed with other issues.  I think honourable you see, it is better that way, because he may not have the details with him here if you expect the answer from him now.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, in light of the advice you have given, may I just add a supplementary concern so that when he brings the response we have it all in one package. Since the Government of Uganda - the people of Uganda are going to put money into this venture, would the honourable minister also tell us what happens after CHOGM. Shall we continue to reap from our shares in Munyonyo or not? Because as Ugandans, that is our money, now that we are shareholders in Munyonyo, at what rate shall we be reaping subsequently from now on and after CHOGM? Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I obviously thank you very much for that guidance. We would like to give this House all the answers to the questions that have been raised and even more.  In fact, had I been allowed to finish the statement I was making, hon. Elias Lukwago would have heard from me that - I believe consistently throughout the discussion this afternoon the theme that has continuously come up is that the Parliament wants to know what is happening in the CHOGM activity. 

Sir, we are entirely in the hands of Parliament.  We are prepared to submit ourselves to the committee of Parliament, whichever committee the Parliament will institute - a CHOGM committee, which means therefore, that you go back to the Rules of Procedure. Parliament can designate the Foreign Affairs Committee which we thought was a natural home or whichever committee, Sir, we are ready, willing and prepared to submit ourselves to this committee and answer all these questions and then a full report can come to the House later.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see the committee reported. It is as a result of the committee’s report that this matter has now come on the Floor. So, when you come back do not go to the committee, it will be specifically to answer these queries here for all of us to hear. Once for all, you will be able to give us satisfactory details so that we can hear.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Sir. We will do that although my additional concern is that there will be something on the roads, the airports and what have you. But we can handle it in the way you have guided.

THE SPEAKER: No, if you think so, you can make a comprehensive statement for us. Now since this matter is going on for quite sometime, you will be working with the committee which will periodically be reporting to us. But for this matter you come so that we clear.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you. We shall oblige. So, Mr Speaker, the hon. Latigo also did raise the issue of East African Legislators being moved to Parliament for their facilitation.  If you recall, this matter did come up in the Seventh Parliament and in the Parliamentary Commission. So, we will refresh this House on what decisions were taken after we have referred to the various documents - the Hansard and we will advise the House what was decided at that time.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister clearly refers to what was agreed in this House the last financial year. It is on the record - the Hansard of this Parliament that it was resolved here that the East African Legislative Assembly Members would be shifted to the Parliamentary Commission.  

It is not a question of refreshing us as though Parliament has forgotten its own decisions last financial year. That is besides the issue, is actually telling us what happened. The administrative arrangements that have been undertaken by government to ensure that this shifting takes place or if they want whether the decision should be revisited. 

For me, that is crucial and given the fact that we are about to pass the budget, if this is postponed, it means we are going to pass this budget with the East African Legislative Assembly Members still being hosted under Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is undesirable for this institution to make a decision and then it is not acted upon. You are not advised whether it has been reviewed and then you just continue grappling with institutions.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe to remind you, this is how this issue came about. The three countries are being represented in Arusha and we sent our nine Members whose term is ending sometime in November.  The funds for Members of the East African Legislative Assembly from Kenya is being administered by their Parliament and therefore, the funds meant for our Members of the East African Legislative Assembly should be administered by Parliament rather than the Executive. It was decided here in one of the sessions that that fund - it is a question of transferring it, be it from Foreign Affairs or the Ministry of Finance to Parliamentary Commission to administer it for them. That is all.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The position is that we are to be bound by what was decided in this House.  However, all I want to do is to get an opportunity to update this House on how far - first what was decided and two, how far has the implementation gone. That is all I am asking for, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, again hon. Latigo did say that the Tanzanians are charging US $ 100 as temporary visa fees at Mutukula border.  He also did say that he has sent a letter to the Government Chief Whip to pass it on to us.  

Indeed we have received this letter and we are due to carry out further investigation. But two weeks ago, I was at Mutukula and I did get this report that they are charging US $ 100 even for Ugandans who are crossing into Tanzania just to go and trade however short the period of time they want to stay there is.  

Mr Speaker, when I got this report, I had occasion to take it up with the Minister of East African Affairs and we will advise this House on the outcome of our interaction with the East African Community on this matter.

Honourable Butime said, “Whether you transfer Foreign Affairs to the economic sector from public sector or you do not transfer it there is no difference. The important thing is to give more money to Foreign Affairs.” 

To a certain extent he has a point.  Why we are looking forward to see it transferred to the economic sector is: one, to get adequate funding and two, that fund to be protected. Because once you have been transferred to the other category then you do not suffer cuts, which are otherwise applicable in the course of the year to other sectors.  If this can be achieved any other way we would be better off.

The hon. Chris Baryomunsi wants to know whether the Ministry of Foreign Affairs interfaces with the others ministries to get an update.  We do interface with other ministries. What maybe needs to be done is to ensure that whenever the ministries have updates that they once served to us for notification to the international community, they give these updates to us when they fall due.  Sometimes they are in arrears but I believe this is something that will be looked into. The basic point I am making is that, yes, we do interface with other ministries for updates.  

Infrastructure:

He did ask whether it will be regional as well so that we can have Bwindi and the roads going to Bwindi via Kanungu included.  Sir, we are working with both the local governments and the Ministry of Works to ensure that all the places that we want our guests to access are given special attention.  To this extent, therefore, I believe Kanungu will be one of those that are likely to be considered.

The honourable member from Kigulu South said we should have minimum definition of an investor.  Indeed we do.  The investment law defines who qualifies to be an investor.  It is true that people who peddle Cool Cool bar or stuff like that may not fall in the statutory definition of a foreign investor. 

But, Sir, many people who come here, come under a series of guises, for example, some come originally as tourists to Kenya.  If you have come as a tourist to Kenya, you can access Uganda by just coming through the boarder point.  Once here, Internal Affairs is supposed to actively follow you up because at that point it ceases to be a Foreign Affairs issue. And Sir, we are working hand in hand with the Ministry of Internal Affairs –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think his contribution was also alluding to the issue of colour in that when you talk about an investor, you do not take into account a local person here who has money to invest?  I think that was his complaint that you only think about Asians and Europeans.  

MR MUSUMBA: Well, Sir, as Minister of Foreign Affairs I was really answering for the foreign component of investors –(Interruption) 

MRS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, this issue about investors has again come up in our discussions. It has unnecessarily gone far because Uganda has got a lot of people from different countries especially our sisters and brothers from Indians.  

In Masaka I have investors who are nationals but of Asian origin. So we should not take it for granted when we see Indians participating in certain businesses - that they are automatically investors. Some of them are nationals. I just wanted to have this on record.  Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much hon. Sauda Mugerwa because that is true. Not everyone who is yellow, brown or white is necessarily a non-Ugandan investor.  

The hon. Sempala Nabillah from Kampala asked whether the committee had asserted itself on CHOGM during the discussion. I guess the committee chairperson will answer that one.  But we believe that this point was most ably put before us and that is why we are saying we are ready and willing to discus the issue of CHOGM with a relevant parliamentary committee.  

On the issue of the joint venture, the hon. Speaker has guided but we shall come back here with full information on what is happening in the Munyonyo joint venture.

Prof. Anokbonggo asked whether honorary councils are paid.  You know they are not.  Honorary councils as you said are people of substance in those countries and their payment is the honour they have in representing foreign countries in their own countries.  So they are not paid, we do not put money into the budget because they are not supposed to be paid.

Sir, there was also a question: “Why do arrears arise, is it because of poor management of the budget or what?”  The answer is that sometimes we do not get the money from the Ministry of Finance.  If we got the money, we would pay but sometimes we do not get the money, which results into accumulation of arrears.

I thank hon. Odonga Otto for reiterating that he would want to see the Queen of England come to Kampala, and also asked how much of this CHOGM money is going to develop the regional level. 

He quoted examples of planes parking in Dar-es-Salaam, Nairobi and so forth.  Sir, at this point there are options being examined. In certain instances we are arranging backup positions some of which we can reveal or discuss with the committee. Some of them are s of a security dimension.  We would want to do so in a smaller forum of the Parliament.

East African Community sensitisation:  

This issue of the East African Community and its being a ministry of its own, maybe I should handle it now. The Ministry of East African Affairs is being established as independent from either Foreign Affairs or the Prime Minister’s office.  

As I speak today an Acting Permanent Secretary, Ambassador Balinda has been appointed for that purpose. He was borrowed from our ministry for the purpose of working towards the establishment of this ministry.  So there will be a Ministry of East African Affairs in due course.

The honourable MP from Ruhaama –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you. Honourable Minister you actually made a very definite response to the concerns of my colleague from Kanungu and I do not think there were fears of security concerns.  

The question hon. Otto asked was more of infrastructure benefit, and it is really known that we have been as a government in the business of negotiating with the Government of Tanzania for parking in Mwanza Airfield and another parking space at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. 

We are wondering because we have our own infrastructure - the Soroti Flying School is there waiting for an opportunity to be built - to be refurbished - to be developed and we have a great opportunity coming in through this CHOGM.  

Besides the multiplier effect of putting money into Soroti Airfield, is that we will have this road that has been called by the locals the Nasasira road - which has been re-launched three to four times and accidents continue happening every other day.  We would then have an opportunity to work on the Nasasira road, which people coming from Soroti Flying School by road would use to Kampala. 

It would be very good to know from you, hon. Minister, how much money do you hope to put into hiring parking space the other side? Wouldn’t that amount of money help us with the Soroti Airfield and working on that road? It would be very good for us, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, again, honourable members, these are not matters we can decide now on this Floor because they have been raised. We seem to agree that there will be constant interaction between the ministers and the committee on this subject.  These are issues that will have to be discussed in that committee.  

But for instance, do you expect him now to say, “Yes even Soroti will be catered for.” These are issues that – let us get the ideas and then pass them in the right forum, which will be a special committee or the Committee of Foreign Affairs to handle it. I do not expect him to give a positive answer on this right away.  He can say that is a good idea but he cannot give a positive answer on that.

MR MUSUMBA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The honourable member from Ruhaama, first of all, I want to thank her for the clarification she gave on the role of Ministry of Foreign Affairs as one that promotes investments, industry and trade.  If you have a foreign mission that does not address among its core business, this kind of thing, you will have lost out substantially -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO:  Thank you very much honourable minister.  Mr Speaker, when the hon. member for Ruhaama stood to make her clarification, I chose not to respond because what she was clarifying was the same position I had.  

My only problem was not with what she said in her clarification.  My problem is that, the committee knows that the terms “recurrent” and “capital” are applied very specifically. It would be unfortunate for a committee of Parliament to write in their report in such a way that they do not seem to understand the terms as applied in the budget process. 

On the previous page, there is recurrent activities and then on the next, development or capital activities. That was my problem; it was not the problem that – because I know that is the job they should promote the country.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker I thank the Leader of the Opposition – of the shadow government okay.  Sir, if there was any spelling error, typing or classification in the report, the report chair will clarify. But the intention is that we in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs do these assignments as part of our core competences.  

The hon. Kiyingi asked whether the CHOGM deal is sealed.  Let the whole country know that yes, the CHOGM deal is sealed and everyone should work towards a successful CHOGM when it comes.  

Hon Nalule Sophia, MP for disability, you want when the committee is formed people with disability to be represented. I think that in the purview of this – within the mandate of this House.  But again the committee report may require clarification - our role in trade and so on as presented, but the essence is that, that is what we do.  

I thank the honourable Baba for the clarification. 

The honourable member for Tororo was surprised at our building. She called it a defective one. It is not defective, Mr Speaker. You clarified, it is just a period between the – period of observation during – and we have secured this money and it is enough to finish the little things that are supposed to be finished.

Honourable Kubeketerya says East African Members of Parliament should come and legislate with us.  Well there are rules. Mr Speaker there are rules, so if this House wants, it would have to work with the general East African Community to change the rules. Otherwise as far as I know, the rules do not allow the Members to come and sit in the chamber.  

Mr Speaker I want to thank the honourable members and I pray that the honourable members pass the budget -(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister for giving way.  I want to seek clarification from either the minister or the chairperson on page 9 regarding management of mission properties abroad.  

If I recall correctly, this government established Uganda Property Holdings Limited whose mandate was to manage all Uganda’s properties within and abroad. The Minister of Foreign Affairs was to transfer all these assets to this ministry with a view to harmonise their management.  

I want to know from the minister how far they have gone regarding this issue. When you consider the recommendations made by the committee regarding the funding to these missions abroad - they were actually proposing that Parliament should allow them to use appropriation on aid – to use the non-tax revenues. 

But I just want to inform the committee that not all missions abroad collect a substantial amount of money, but there are those who actually- for example, we have commercial houses, which actually collect a lot of money and if this House just decides to allow that, still the improvement will not be there because some Missions would be disadvantaged.  

So, I just want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister and conclude by urging Parliament instead of using this idea of operation to aide, to give Foreign Affairs more funds so that they can look after their properties.  I thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the issue of dilapidated properties abroad has been a major theme in today’s afternoon discussion.  My apology is that- as I was winding up, I had not a mentioned or commented about this.  

It is true that our properties abroad are in very deplorable condition on the whole.  But I now have the good news.  The good news is that His Excellency the President has written and directed that all properties abroad, which were formally the concern or the mandate of that company, Properties Management Company that was hosted in Ministry of Finance, be transferred to Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

We are now working out modalities for more effective and efficient management of those properties which we shall take to Cabinet and finally here, and make our requests to this House to approve on the best way forward.  Because, Sir, there is simple logic here.  If those properties belonged to a businessman, they would not be looking like that.  So, it is possible to actually improve on those properties.  It is a proposal that we shall take to Cabinet and finally come here to this House.  I thank you, Sir.  I beg that the Members do pass our budget as requested.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, subject to the comments made –(Interruptions).

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I have done a quick count of the Members present, we have about nine Members from the Opposition and 39 from here; 48 in total.  I am just wondering whether this House is correct to proceed with the business.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will explain to you later.  This Constitution was changed and because it was changed, I am able to make a decision with the number you have.  I think you are alluding to the numbers.  There is no problem.  Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I thank you very much for having dealt with these two reports this afternoon.  I wish we had started early in the day, but I thank you for your understanding.  Tomorrow we shall deal with four reports. We shall start around 10.00a.m so that you can go and read.  We shall begin with report on Agriculture, and then go to the report on physical infrastructure.  I hope it is ready.  But certainly we have two reports, one on Social Services and the Gender, and the other on Labour and Social Development.  So, please, take your time and go through those reports.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.54 p.m. and adjourned until 29 August 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)










