Wednesday, 27 August 2003

Parliament met at 10.45 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i)THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/2004

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Ndawula Kaweesi): Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. This is the report of the Committee on Natural Resources for the financial year 2003/2004 budget estimates for votes 029 and 012: Vote 029 is Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Vote 012 is Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.  

The committee has scrutinised the policy statements of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and raised questions to the relevant ministries.  

The committee held meetings with the ministers of the respective ministries and the staff of the autonomous institutions under these ministries, namely: 

• Nation Water and Sewerage Corporation, 

• National Environment Management Authority,
 
• Uganda Land Commission, 

• Uganda Electricity Board and the three sister companies: Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited, Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited and Electricity Regulatory Authority.  

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has got one technical Directorate made up of three departments: Energy Resources, Petroleum Exploration and Production and Geological Survey and Mines.  

The ministry got support structures of the ministry, which consists of Finance and Administration Department, Sectoral Planning Policy Analysis Unit and a Resource Centre.  

The mandate of the ministry is to establish and promote the development, strategically manage and safeguard the rational and sustainable exploration and utilization of energy and mineral resources for social and economic development.  

The method of presentation of the policy statement by the ministry did not comply with Section 6(2) of the Budget Act.  We have agreed with the ministry that in the next policy statement presentation they will adhere to the Act.  

The committee observed that this ministry receives 87 per cent of their budget from donors, leaving only 13 per cent funded directly by Uganda Government, which hampers its performance. The 23 per cent was cut in the financial year 2002/2003 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I have a problem; where is the Minister of Finance, or who is standing in for the Minister of Finance? Let us suspend the proceedings for 10 minutes to find out.

(Proceedings were suspended at 10.45 a.m. and resumed at 10.55 a.m., the Speaker presiding.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/2004

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Chairman and honourable members, I wish to apologise vehemently for having brought a bad mood to this Parliament for not being here when Parliament resumed 10 minutes ago.  The truth of the matter is that I was here 20 minutes before the proceedings started, but I went outside to make a very urgent call. By the time the Speaker entered, I was still attending to the call of nature - (Laughter)- Nevertheless, I really apologise vehemently. I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Apology accepted. I want to use this opportunity, really, to appeal to members and ministers to take the work seriously, especially this work, which we have to do within a given period of time.  The law requires us to complete the budget process by 31st.  We are handicapped in that Saturday and Sunday are not working days although they fall within the period, but we should try to finish this work on time. That is why ministers and members should be here on time, because you are expected to be here to transact business on behalf of the people you represent.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: With your permission, Mr Chairman, I would like to add that what you are saying is so important that Government must know that Government is all about finance. At this time when we are streamlining the mechanics of the economy and we witness regularised absence of the front bench, we get very worried so much so that we would like to appeal to them to be more responsible –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (MS Nankabirwa Sentamu): Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member, really, to take more time expounding on the issue which you ably put across; pin-pointing the front bench and when you take the percentage of the presentation of the front bench to that of the backbench, the front bench has got a higher percentage than the back bench.  

You ably said that it is the responsibility of everybody, be it a minister or a Member of Parliament to take this work serious. Is it in order, really, for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to spend more time as if he is emphasising the point the chairman has ably put across?

THE CHAIRMAN: I have said what I said. I am now following to see whether you have appreciated what I have said. Let us proceed.

THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Chairman and colleagues.  I would like on behalf of Government to apologise for Cabinet.  As you are well aware, today there is Cabinet meeting; otherwise it is not our habit not to be present. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, apology received. The only comment I can have is that you can adjust your Cabinet meeting because this is a statutory requirement in that we have to pass the budget by 31st. At least they should know that, but if they over looked it, then next time they should not.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Ndawula Kaweesi): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  This is the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the 2003/2004 budget estimates for the two votes: Vote 029 of Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and vote 012 for Water, Lands and Environment.  

Mr Chairman, my committee scrutinised the policy statements and raised questions to the relevant ministries. 

The committee held meetings with the ministers and heads of institutions that fall under the direct supervision of the Ministry of Natural Resources.  

Mr Chairman, the structure of Energy and Mineral Development, consist of one technical directorate and three departments, namely: Energy Resources, Petroleum Exploration and Production and Geological Survey and Mines. 

The Ministry received support services from the Finance and Administration Department, Sectoral Planning Policy Analysis Unit and a Resource Centre. 

Mr Chairman, the ministry did not comply with section 6(2) of the Budget Act in presenting their policy statement. However, they have agreed with the committee that in the next presentation they will adhere to that requirement.  

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is 87 per cent funded by donors. This greatly hampers their activities. The 23 per cent cut of the budget last year affected the activities in this ministry. It affected the rural electrification programme where the ministry had intended to have 20,000 rural electricity consumers connected to the supply, but only 12,658 new consumers were connected.  

The committee noted that in the development budget of this ministry there is one project, Jinja storage tanks (ME19(A)), where one expatriate will earn a total annual package of Shs 144,299,159.4  compared to 15 local experts who will receive Shs 155,000,000 altogether. 

Mr Chairman, the wage to non-Wage bill in this ministry is 1:1.5, while many other ministries, the average is 1:5. This demonstrates that the productivity of this ministry is greatly hampered by the resource allocation.

The Energy sector:

Mr Chairman, the overall policy objective of Government is to improve quality and quantity of service through appropriate sector reforms and establishment of an enabling environment.  

There has been quite a number of power sector reforms, notably, there was the unbundling of the former UEB into four corporate bodies, namely: Uganda Electricity Board Statutory, Uganda Electricity Distribution company limited, Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited.  

There are other institutions created which include: Electricity Regulatory Authority, Rural Electrification Agency, Rural Electrification Board, Rural Electrification Fund and Electricity Disputes Tribunal. The reforms, among others, are expected to increase efficiency and effectiveness in the sector.  

Electric Power Generation Programme:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, concessioning of generation business of Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited was accomplished and Eskom Enterprise of South Africa took over the business. 

Bujagali Hydro Power Project:

The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on the 29 July 2003, informed the committee that the Department of Justice of USA had cleared AES of all allegations of corruption in respect of Bujagali project. Financial closure for the project was expected to take place in March 2004.  

On 14 August 2003, The New Vision carried contrary information stating that AES Corporation had pulled out of the project. The committee wrote to the minister seeking for clarification. The Minister appeared before the committee on 22 August 2003 and stated as follows:

AES Corporation had notified Government of their withdraw from this project citing low levels of return investments. 

The committee was informed that the ministry has already enlisted the services of Hutton and Williams of USA to study the withdrawal notice and advise on the consequences.

It was noted that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is working with development partners to use the existing financial structure of the project and intellectual property to move the project forward with new developers. 

A time frame of at least six months has been promised to find a new developer for the project.

Karuma Power Project:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the hydropower development master plan for Uganda indicates that Karuma will be developed after Bujagali since there are to benefit from the same source of funding.  

Kakira Co-Generation:

The Power Purchase Agreement has been signed and production of electricity is expected in June 2005.

Nyagak Mini-Hydro:

A private company WENRECO was granted a concession to build the Mini-hydro, manage the new distribution network and connect at least 1000 consumers per year. Government has put a subsidy of US $ 6 million in the project in order to achieve an affordable tariff. 

Rural Electrification:

In the year ended, the Ministry managed to do 37 rural schemes in different areas and they indicated to the committee the criteria they used to arrive at that.  

Mr Chairman, the committee observed that there is lack of transmission and distribution capacity in the country to the extent that Kilembe Mines produces 6 mega watts, utilises 1.5 mega watts, but the 4.5 cannot be delivered to those who would want it because the network is limited.  

The committee further observed that the electricity tariffs continue to be unaffordable by Ugandans. The UEDCL, the distribution company, last year connected only 19,717 new consumers, registered 255,125 disconnections and 152,230 reconnections. This indicates that there are many who are connected and but cannot afford to pay their bills. 

The committee further noted that the electricity sector is crowded with too many companies that make it impossible to realise any cost savings, and as such the tariff has continued to be high.  

The committee further noted that fuel prices have continued to soar with the last increase prompted by the budget speech. Honourable members, petroleum products have a big bearing on each sector of the economy and should be affordable.

Recommendations:

The committee wishes to recommend that Government should be more conscious while seeking new developers for the Bujagali Project.

The committee further recommended that alternative services of energy like geo-thermal should be expedited. 

The Electricity Regulatory Authority should work with stakeholders to ensure affordable tariffs.  

UEDCL should make every effort to gain efficiency especially in the billing sector.  

The Electricity Act 1999 be reviewed to take into consideration the new developments in the mineral sector.

The Mineral Sector:

Mr Chairman, in the mineral sector, Parliament passed the Mining Bill, 2002 into law during the last session giving the sector new legal framework. The ministry continued with the mineral investment programme, which led to the development of five new mines by local and foreign investors. 

The committee was further informed that 103 licenses were granted bringing the total valid number of licenses to 157 by the end of 2002. 

Kasese Cobalt Company Limited: 

The company closed operations due to local cobalt prices on the world market. This had serious consequences amounting to a loss of Shs 31.2 billion of revenue in the year 2002. KCCL is currently under care and maintenance through continued provision of hydroelectric power to the national grid. 

Kilembe Mines:

Kilembe Mines continues to be under care and maintenance with a skeleton staff awaiting privatisation. 

Observations:

Mr Chairman, the committee observed that the private developers have made significant contributions in this sector. However, their efforts are hampered by the lack of power and road infrastructure. For example, at Nyamuliro wolfram mine, in Kabale District, the investor M/S Krone (U) Ltd completed the construction of the access road to the mine but the access bridge to the mine remains a big problem, thereby reducing these mine activities to non-commercial.  

Mr Chairman, the ministry has been slow to take a decision on the future of Kilembe Mines. Valuable property remains unused as the mines continue to be under care and maintenance.

Recommendations:

Government should provide extra funding to provide technical services to the increasing number of artisans and small-scale miners in a bid to have added value to minerals.  

Government should provide infrastructure to motivate private developers. Mineral commodities should be considered under the strategic exports initiative in order to stimulate growth in the mineral sector hence enhancing revenue collection.

The Petroleum Exploration Sector:
The policy objectives of Government in the petroleum exploration production sector are: To build requisite local capacity for petroleum exploration, development and production, and to carry out geological and geophysical surveys to assess the hydrocarbon potential in the country.  

Activities in the Sector:

Mr chairman and honourable members, during the last financial year, a private company, Heritage Oil and Gas Company Semiliki Basin, maintained a depth of 2487 metres in their drilling and discovered a mixture of hydrocarbons. The potential oil field will be appraised this financial year. Hardman Resources and Energy Africa also are continuing with the preparations for seismic data acquisition over Lake Albert.

Observations:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, with improved security situation in Albertine area, Government shall be able to attract investments in the petroleum sector.

The committee wishes to recommend for this sector as follows: 

• Government should avail funds for geological and geophysical surveys.  

• Production sharing agreements between Government and investors should be thoroughly scrutinised by relevant committees of Parliament.  

• Government should provide funds for inspection and monitoring of field activities for private sector operations/mineral rights holders.

The committee recommends the following amount for approval for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the financial year 2003/2004:  
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 3,292,449,000  
Development expenditure- Shs 52,193,260,000 
Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Proceed with the other one.

MR KAWEESI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Vote 012: Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.

The ministry is led by the minister, who has the overall political responsibility, supported by three ministers of state: 

• Minister of State, Lands, 
• Minister of State, Water and 
• Minister of State, Environment.  

It has got two directorates: 

• Directorate of Water Development and
• Directorate of Lands and Environment.

This ministry directly supervises the autonomous bodies, which are: 

• National Water and Sewerage Corporation and 
• Uganda Land Commission and 
• The National Environment Management Authority.

The mandate of the ministry:

The mandate of the ministry is to promote and ensure the rational and sustainable utilisation, development, effective management, safeguard water resources, land and the environment for social welfare and economic development.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee made the following observations on the policy statement:

• The format used by the ministry to present this policy statement left a lot to be desired. The policy statement was poorly written. It contained repetitions and issues were scattered all over. Performance of each department should have been adequately explained before jumping to another. It took the committee an extra mile to make sense out of their statement. Major improvements are required next financial year.

• There were discrepancies between figures provided by the Ministry of Finance in the draft estimates book and those in the ministerial policy statement. The ministry could not provide satisfactory explanation on this. These discrepancies are presented in the table below. The planned activities of the ministry are in column two. What the Ministry of Finance has offered is in column three and variation is in column four.
 
Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee recommended that Shs 247,970,000 should be allocated through supplementary to the Department of meteorology.

Water and Sanitation:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, in the rural water sub-sector, service coverage increased from 54.8 to 58.8 percent and a number of water supply sources were constructed. The committee was informed that 18,935 boreholes are available nationwide out of which 15,148 are functional and 3,887 non functional.  

The committee made the following observations:

•  The committee noted that Government spent Shs 5.3 billion on sinking boreholes and another Shs 256 million for rehabilitation.  Unfortunately, they remain unreliable to communities. 

• There is a difficulty in the operation and maintenance of boreholes using the Community Based Maintenance System.

• Some districts have inadequate capacity to plan and implement water sector activities. These include: Kitgum, Pader, Gulu, Soroti, Bundibugyo, Iganga and Apac. This has led to poor and delayed work plans for those districts. It should be noted however that it is the responsibility of the district local government to recruit and retain competent staff for the water sector.

• District leaders have continued to divert water sector facilities to other purpose. The ministry has notified the district leaders, RDCs, LCVs and CAOs. But the districts of Kasese, Ntungamo and Mayuge have refused to comply.

Recommendations:

• The committee wishes to recommend that community based maintenance system for water supply should be reviewed and adjusted to suit local conditions.

• Government should provide training to districts to improve their capacity to implement water sector activities.

• Punitive action should be taken by the Ministry of Local Government against district leaders who continue to divert district funds meant for water supply.

Urban water:

Mr Chairman, the committee was informed that 21 town piped water systems were constructed, 45 boreholes drilled and 40 springs protected to serve a combined population of 152,000 living in the core and big areas.

24 urban water supply authorities have contracted the running of their system to private operators on commercialised and cost recovery principles.

Observations:

The committee observed that a provision of water services has been commercialised. Water is a necessary utility and need not be exposed to profiteers. Its provision should be the responsibility of Government.

Recommendations:

The involvement of the private sector in the provision of water service should be well spelt out and their activities closely monitored.  

Sewerage Coverage:

The committee was informed that the sector is governed by the National Water Policy 1999, which covers both water and sanitation. Currently, only 12 towns out of the 15 towns under National Water and Sewerage Corporation have sewerage systems.  This serves only eight percent of the urban population.  

The sewerage sector has been constrained by high installation costs, poor urban planning and existence of alternative sanitation facilities such as septic tanks.

Observations:

Mr Chairman, honourable members, sewerage services are of a great national concern and should be heavily budgeted for since they pause a big health threat to the communities. A survey revealed that out of the 803 springs in Kampala, only one delivers safe water.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation attempted to sewer Muyenga but failed due to heavy compensation that would arise due to poor planning.  

The committee wishes to recommend as follows:

•  Upcoming towns/centres should be well planned to avoid complications in provision of sewerage services.

• Respective authorities should supervise construction of septic tanks, ecological toilets and pit latrines.

• Government should avail more funds to the sewerage sector. It is illogical to increase water coverage without a corresponding amount for sewerage disposal.

Water for Production:

Mr Chairman, honourable members, though water for production entails the development of water sources to make available water for irrigation, livestock watering, fish farming and rural industry, emphasis has been put on the construction of dams and valley tanks. Government has no specific irrigation policy. 

Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture has imposed a major constraint to irrigation. It discourages the use of public resources on the construction of large irrigation infrastructure under the guise of private sector participation. It is unfortunate to note that infrastructure of some of the valley dams constructed in Karamoja have been vandalised.

The committee wishes to recommend as follows:

• Irrigation should be emphasised under water for production to promote food security and export.

• The ministry should technically supervise contractors when valley tanks and dams are being constructed to avoid sub-standard works.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the corporation intends to install only three kilometres of sewerage network this year. 

Observation:

• The corporation’s concentration is on water and not sewerage coverage. Concerns on sewerage coverage have already been expressed in this report.

• The committee considers unaccounted for water of 39 percent to be too high and unacceptable.  The internationally accepted levels of unaccounted for water is 15 to 20 percent for the utilities in Sub-Sahara Africa.

• The corporation’s arrears increased from Shs 24,217,000 in July 2002 to Shs 24,605,000 in June 2003. The corporation has introduced the pre-payment system and Government ministries are taking the lead. There is a table on the next page to indicate the big defaulters of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation bills.

The committee wishes to recommend the following:

• The corporation should take provision of sewerage as a matter of urgency. 

• The Kampala Network Rehabilitation project should be expedited to reduce unaccounted for water in Kampala. 

• Pre-payment meters should be encouraged as much as possible to avoid accumulation of arrears.

• The unrecoverable accounts receivables should be written off.

Environment Sector:  

Wetlands division:

The ministry continued with the implementation of the Wetland Sub-sector Strategic Plan (WSSP). A five-year project with four million Euros funding from the Royal Belgian Government has been formulated and will commence this financial year.

Observations:

• The committee observed that wetlands remain un-gazetted. It is therefore difficult to manage them, as they remain undefined.

• Landless and displaced people have continued to settle on wetlands partly due to lack of a resettlement policy and possibly because of encroachment.

• Enforcement of laws on abuse of wetlands has been weak. Buildings continue to be constructed on wetlands in Kampala with clear approval of Kampala City Council. Makindye, Bwaise, Kawempe, Kalerwe and Wankulukuku are vivid examples.  

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee wishes to recommend as follows:

• Regulations on sustainable management of wetlands should be disseminated to the masses, both in urban and rural areas.

• Wetlands should be gazetted to reduce encroachment.  

• Formulation and publication of the resettlement policy must be expedited.

The Land Sector:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the Land (Amendment) Act, 2002 was passed by Parliament last session and has been sent to the President for assent.  

Observations:

• The committee observed in this sector that land management and administration continue to be a problem countrywide since the interventions envisaged cannot be operationalised under the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2002. The Land (Amendment) Bill is still undergoing the legislative process.

• There is difficulty in conforming to sound land use principles without a land use policy.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee wishes to recommend as follows:

• The process of the land use policy should be expedited to guide land use in the country.

• The Land (Amendment) Act, 2002 should be implemented as soon as it is assented to by the President.

• The Town and Country Planning Act should be revised with minimum delay.

• The principles for the national physical planning should be presented and expeditiously considered and passed by the Cabinet in order to have a national physical planning bill to set up a formidable legal framework for the sector.

The Forest Sector:

Mr Chairman, the National Forest and Tree Planting Act was passed last session and the ministry is in the process of implementing it.

Observations:

• There is rampant depletion of forests due to uncertainty by staff. Harvesting of trees has soared more than ever before. This is especially the case in Bunyoro and Toro.

• Criteria for allocation of land for tree planting remain unclear to stakeholders, nationwide. The committee was informed that the Mukono case was revisited to ensure that local people benefit from the scheme. The officers of the Forest Department and Chairman LC V in Mukono have worked closely to ensure that the policy is implemented.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee noted that there was an anomaly in the issuance of permits and licenses for timber business. The Minister was directed to carry out investigations and report to the committee.

Recommendations:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee wishes to recommend that the ministry should ensure that the Forestry and Tree Planting Act is implemented with minimum delay.  

Meteorology Department:

The committee has for several years made pleas to Government to increase budgetary allocations to the Meteorology Department without much success. This financial year, the department has been provided with Shs 360 million for recurrent expenditure and Shs 270 million for development budget. The committee considers this inadequate for a non-decentralised department like meteorology.

Observations:

The department is totally under-funded, it has an approved staff establishment of 351 and only 143 positions are filled leaving 208 vacant positions, this converts to 59.3 percent of the establishment.  The commissioner is forced to hire temporary staff who are paid Shs 60,000 per month out of the Department’s meagre resources. There has been no recruitment, no promotions in the department since 1994! However, the Ministry of Public Service has directed the Public Service Commission to recruit 114 staff for the department.

Facilitation and remuneration of staff is extremely poor. Staff, work extremely long hours since the two forecast offices and the 14 synoptic stations operate on 24-hour basis daily including public holidays. These staff however cannot access meals and transport, which are vital for their livelihood. As a result of the above, staff morale is extremely low.

The International Civil Aviation Organisation has recommended that all meteorological offices issuing aeronautical meteorological information should receive ISO 9000 series by the year 2005. Major carriers will not use airports without this certification.

The Civil Aviation Statute 1994, stripped Meteorology of all office accommodation at airports. The department is now required to pay rent to CAA for what was originally theirs. 

Civil Aviation Authority is expected to pay Shs 48 million per month for services provided by the department in a decision taken in 1992 by the World Meteorological Organization, Uganda Civil Aviation Authority and the Department of Meteorology. They however pay only Shs 22 million per month to the Consolidated Fund for aviation services.

The committee found it imperative to meet the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public Service to address the above problems. Below are the committee’s recommendations after meeting with the respective ministers:

A Cabinet paper be written by the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment to enable Cabinet to appreciate the urgency and consequences of the problems being faced by the department. This will enable the Minister of Finance to request Parliament for a supplementary budget to fund the critical areas of the department, which require un irreducible minimum of Shs 2.6 billion yet the budget has provided only shs 680 million. In the meantime, Shs 247,970,000 be reallocated from the water sector to department of meteorology.

Civil Aviation Statute of 1994 should be revisited to make available to Meteorology Department property that used to belong to it.

Government should conduct immediate negotiations between Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and the department regarding amounts to be paid by CAA. CAA has been paying Shs 22 million per month instead Shs 48 million. The accrued arrears should be paid immediately.

All monies paid to the Consolidated Fund for services rendered by the department must be appropriated to the development budget of the department.

Government should immediately consider turning the department into an agency. This would give the department autonomy in utilisation of funds and eliminate bureaucratic delays.

National Environment Management Authority (NEMA):

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee was informed that Green Watch had sued NEMA and the Attorney General with an intention to ban use of Kavera under civil suit No.140 of 2002 in the High Court of Uganda.

Cabinet is still considering the various control options for the polythene carrier bags. The options include:

- Incentives and disincentive measures, including taxation for the producers and importers of the carrier bags.

- Promoting production and use of bio-degradable carrier bags.

The committee was informed that during the budgeting process for the financial 1999/2000, Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to create a separate Vote for NEMA.  Reminders have been made since then, but no action has been taken.

Observations:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, NEMA is heavily donor funded. Government has not handled the problem of Kavera effectively.

The committee wishes to recommend as follows:

• Government should provide NEMA with a Vote to ensure its sustainability.

• Production of polythene carrier bags should be banned and replaced with de-gradable paper bags.

Uganda Land Commission:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the commission is to effectively manage land and any development thereon, held or acquired by Government in Uganda or abroad, as well as the land fund in a sustainable manner as stipulated in the Constitution of 1995 and the Land Act 1998.

The commission has commenced the process of purchasing registered land in Kibaale using the land fund.

Observations:

The committee observed that section 42 (4) (b) of the Land Act 1998, which stipulates that the land fund shall be utilised by Government to purchase or acquire registered land to enable tenants by occupancy acquire registrable interest should be adhered to. The current purchase of land in Kibaale should be extended to other parts of the country.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the Government should come up with a clear resettlement policy as a matter of urgency.

Budgetary Proposals:

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the Ministry of Water, lands and Environment is a key ministry whose activities directly impact on the livelihood of the people. I beg to move that the following amounts be approved for its recurrent and development budget for financial year 2003/04.

• Recurrent expenditure – Shs 8,941,057,000.

•Development expenditure - Shs 170,265,868,000.

Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much for the good presentation. I want to thank you and the committee for the report. Honourable members, before we proceed with the assessment, in the Strangers’ Gallery this morning are 20 students from Emmanuel Primary School in Eldoret, Kenya, who are in Kampala for a visit. You are welcome. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Any observations? Of course brief ones.

MRS MINDRA JOYO (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Chairman. My observations are concerning rural electricity in Moyo. I have always been crying for electricity and the situation in Moyo is like this. We have a generator, which does not really operate very well.  It operates starting from 7 p.m. up to about 11.00 only. It is not efficient; it keeps breaking down very often. I understand they have given us a very old generator from another town. Are we second hand citizens? What I beg for is at least an efficient generator. 

In the previous sitting, I presented this issue to the Minister for Energy. They said they would provide an alternative method of electrification because running a generator using fuel is very expensive. When is that alternative being brought to us?  We need it because we have there schools, hospitals and even the people within the town area very much need this electricity.  

Now, if a tourist goes to Moyo, we will be unable to provide cold soda because even if we have the fridges during the day they are not operational. Even in the evening when people want to relax, those soft drinks will not be really tasteful because they will be very hot. So, I would like to find out and be clarified from the Minister concerned, when is she providing the alternative method that she had promised? We need it very much. I really pleaded that it must be brought to us within the shortest possible period because it is over two years now since they have said they would provide alternative method and they haven’t yet. 

Secondly, water. Our district has varying terrain ranging from the mountains to the low area along the Nile. In the upper hills of Moyo District, we have at least the benefit of gravity water. But in the lower part, along the Nile, there are a lot of boreholes but these boreholes are very inefficient because most of the time they break down and since it is the community to maintain it, they find some difficulty in raising the money to get the spare parts to put right the boreholes.

Secondly, in the dry season, all these boreholes dry up. There is hardly any water in any of them. You can find in one parish out of ten, only two would be working and the people would have to walk, sometime for 8 kilometres to get water. Now, is there no alternative method, if we cannot maintain these boreholes, can’t the Government assist these poor rural people in the maintenance of these boreholes? Could they not look for an alternative, say tapping the water from the Nile, processing it and providing it for use? Have they done a feasibility study which one is more efficient and which one is cheaper? I think we have the Nile, which is a big resource. Apart from using it for fishing, it could also be used for providing drinking water. So, I cry very much that my people of Moyo need these services. 

Then electricity in Kampala, we are using it but sometimes we suffer a lot of load shedding. Even if you put your foodstuff in the fridge you find it has rotten because of unreliable electricity. Could that not be improved, are there no methods of improving it? 

They privatise Uganda Electricity Distribution Company and others. Then those who bring you the bills are ruffians. I call them ruffians because of the way they behave. They do not bring you the bill, then suddenly you find the whole area has been disconnected. They just decide to go to your whole area whether you are in Kitintale or Luzira they disconnect everybody regardless of whether you have paid your bills or not. That is a very inefficient and a very unkind method of running that service. And when you are disconnected, you have to pay some money to have it reconnected. Could they improve on that? Could the Minister concerned try to advise those people to provide a better service for us?  Thank you.

MR MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have two concerns.  One is about forests and another one is about wetlands. Do we have a policy on forests? If it is there, why do we not enforce it? I am concerned about two forests in this country. One is in Kapchorwa called Kapkwata Forest. It was cleared but nothing was replaced. What is the ministry doing? Another is Muko Forest in Kabale. I went to Kabale and found the forest cleared, but nothing is being done to replace it.  

Another thing is wetlands. I do not know whether we are aware of what we are doing when we are destroying our wetlands. Mr Chairman, Uganda is still lucky that we have a lot of water, but I read a document, which said that in 70 to 100 years from now, water will be the commodity on highest demand by human beings. It was appealing to those countries, which have a lot of water to protect their water, because the level of water is decreasing from time to time. 

What I am asking the ministry concerned is that they should try very much to protect our water. It is an investment for our future generations. Israel is right now fighting with its neighbors because of water. They even fight because of clouds. You find that a country like Uganda, which has got a lot of water, is destroying the water tables; you are destroying the water sources. I kindly request you, I am on my knees, protect the wetlands, protect our water for future generations. I thank you.

MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to join the rest of the members to thank the committee for the well-written report. I have a few observations to make about page 6, which talk of “other institutions created”. 

Mr Chairman - I will not read out everything because of time – but we are aware that in the Ministry of Finance the National Planning Authority (NPA) was created and a substantive Chairman to head the NPA was put in place. I am just seeking clarification. Under the Ministry of Energy the Rural Electrification Board is being chaired by the Permanent Secretary, who is the accounting officer of the ministry. I wonder; to whom does he account when it comes to the issues of rural electrification?

Another point I want to raise is on page 10 and 11. This is regarding rural electrification continuing to be a myth, with only one percent coverage. The committee went ahead to say that they were not satisfied. I thank them for that. However, Mr Chairman, I want you to remember that last year we were here seriously supporting the increment of the tariffs. The intention was that the urban areas had been connected before and had benefited from the taxpayers of the rural areas and out of that increment nothing had been invested in rural electrification. If I could refer to this document here, the appendix on the distribution of electricity in the rural areas show that the country is failing to achieve its objectives.  

Mr Chairman, refer to page 22, on boreholes. The problem with boreholes is that there is no linkage between the mineral industry and the Ministry of Water. I want to specifically point out places that are being affected because of the mineral component, specifically in Bugiri, Budde area in Budaya sub-county. This is a gold belt connected to Karagwe. The waters there cannot be used for bathing, drinking or even washing. It is very pathetic. They are seeking boreholes, without coordinating with the ministries that could really advise on the type of water that is underneath, and so the goals of the country will not be realised.

Lastly, I want to turn to page 29. This is the issue of the department’s activities, specifically the wetlands, and Busoga is mentioned. Busoga is benefiting from rice growing. So, as we have to improve on the use of wetlands, the issue would not be refusing people to attain income through growing rice. The issue should be improved application of rice growing so that things like silting are not encouraged. Because even the categories of roads that we have in the area promote silting in the rainy season. 

So, I request that the ministry looks into this matter, and specifically the Ministry of Energy should put more emphasis on this. 

I therefore seek clarification on all those points raised, and I beg that this House gives the contribution in terms of revenue, as per the districts, from rural electrification. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank the Chairman and his committee for the report, which is articulate. 

I want to make my observation specifically about page 13, point No.10, where they gave an example of Nyamuliro Wolfram Mine in Kabale District where the investor M/S Krone (U) Ltd completed the construction of an access road to the mine, but the access bridge to the mine remains a big problem. Not only does this investor face a problem of the road but electricity also. So, when we are talking of rural electrification, I submit that even such investments within the rural area should be given priority. And this factor should be looked into very urgently.

Mr Chairman, it took a Vice President to commission a container that was going into the American markets through AGOA. His Excellency the Vice President was there, but if you notice, the committee has observed that it was M/S Krone, which did the construction of the road itself. Yet as a government we cannot provide services to these local investors! What is our role as a government?

On page 22, there is a recommendation by the committee that the community based maintenance for water supply should be reviewed and adjusted to suit the local communities. Mr Chairman, these local communities pay for the water per jerrican, which is almost three times the cost of water in urban areas. In the urban areas people have the money. In rural areas, the people are poverty stricken and you find that they are paying for the water four times and sometimes ten times more than those in the towns. 

So, the issue of price should be looked into such that if the rural communities are to pay for that water, let the price be uniform. It should be the same across the country.  

My colleague, hon. Kibanzanga, talked about the forest that had been depleted, and it happened to be in my constituency. It is not only Muko forest that has been depleted in the area, but also other forests, which had been planted. These include Mafuga and others in the area, but I am reliably informed that the re-planting procedures are very difficult. When you harvest these forests, the re-planting procedures are made so difficult that at the end of the day people leave hills bare.

My last observation is on rain water harvesting systems. I think the Ministry should look into this factor such that it is given priority. In Rwanda, before I was a Member of Parliament, I was personally – no, I am not a Rwandese, but I was doing okulembeka there. Mr Chairman, there are good projects of rain water harvesting systems there. Each house is given a tank, which holds about 1,500 litres, and that source of water is cheap and affordable. And besides providing such tanks to our communities and our rural people, we could use our artisans, like those who are in Ndeeba, and give them jobs. 

And that system of water harvesting is good. Once the water is harvested, it is forever, it is cost free, and the only thing that we need to do is to provide tanks. It could even be done the way they used to do it in Rwanda: the wanainchi could bring materials like stones and sand. It would be cost contribution, and the government would provide materials like the tanks, and the scheme works very well. That is my submission, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much.

MR ALEX NDEEZI (Persons with Disabilities, Central): I thank you, Mr Chairman. First, my salutations to the chairperson of the committee and the members of the committee for the job well done. I have two concerns. 

The first one pertains to the continued exploitation of the workers of this country mainly in favour of foreign workers or expatriates. This is on page 4. If you look at the second paragraph, the emoluments paid to the expatriates far exceed those paid to the local experts. There is a Jinja project where one expatriate is to receive a total package of Shs 144 million compared to 15 local experts who are to receive Shs 155 million. 

Mr Chairman, if you go by simple mathematics, the value of one foreign expatriate is equal to the value for 15 local experts. It is mal-approximation. Why is my heart bleeding? My heart is bleeding because we are taking out the dignity and self-esteem of our workers. This is a form of exploitation. What I want to learn from the Minister and the chairperson of the committee is: how exactly can this one expatriate be an equivalent of 15 locals? Are they super human? Is this expatriate unique? 

This man is not a citizen of this country. We say we are getting loans but this money we must pay back, our children must pay, and our grandchildren must pay. But we are now borrowing, only to give back the money to the people who pretend to be lending it to us. Mr Chairman, I wish to emphasise that we should know exactly how one foreigner compares to 15 locals of this country. How is the Minister going to fight this form of exploitation of our workers?

Last, Mr Chairman, is about UEB. Of recent there have been reckless power cuts and disconnections by UEB. UEB people are moving up and down. When they do not find you at home they simple disconnect power, even without finding out whether or not you have paid. The same day you go to UEB and pay. Then they will tell you, “Okay, we understand you have paid but you will come back after four days”. If you are not given four days they say, “You give us facilitation, give us transport”. 

I want to know how the Minister is going to fight this form of recklessness on the part of UEB. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we are constrained with time because we have got another report to consider in the afternoon. So, I am inclined to grant two contributions from either side.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report, which is so thick and detailed, despite his difficulty in reading through the policy statements.

My observations first go to this rural electrification. One percent coverage is what we had the other year, but we still have one percent this year. I do not know whether it will increase from one percent, but from the figures of disconnections that I see, it appears we might go beyond one percent next financial year. Perhaps the Minister could explain why we have remained constant despite the borrowing and the much money we are voting for, for this purpose.

Secondly, I appreciate the Government’s efforts to connect districts to districts with power, but it would be more appropriate to also connect countries to countries. Here in particular, when people are demanding for federal government, we want places like Bugisu to have a border, which is lit. A border like Lwakaka is a big entry point. You have put up nice and fantastic buildings but they are in the dark. Sometimes you wonder - if things continue to happen the way they are doing - where we shall get our revenue from for that big point of entry. 

I now jump on to the Ministry of Water -(Interruption)

MR APUUN: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the honourable member that in the energy sector, Karamoja is badly affected. There was a letter, which was written by His Excellency the President to hon. Minister Syda Bbumba, that electricity should be extended to Karamoja. She has defied the contents of that letter. She has kept quiet about it and we have not seen light since the creation of this land. 

I would like to know, Mr Chairman, whether the honourable minister is in position to extend electricity to Karamoja. Thank you very much. (Laughter).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Apuun, you have turned information into a question. 

MR WAKIKONA: I thank the member, but he has robbed me of a moment and put across his situation. 

I was on the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. I thank them for sinking boreholes. It is reported on page 21 that they have spent Shs 5.3 billion on sinking boreholes and carrying out rehabilitation. But I wonder whether the gravity schemes had been costed side by side with the sinking. Because in some of the areas where boreholes are sunk, you may find that they could have got a cheaper deal from gravity water. 

I am taking a particular example, say, if you tapped water from Kapchorwa and Mount Elgon, it would serve parts of Tororo, Mbale, Kamuli and even come up to Kampala. So this is an area that the ministry should look at very carefully and perhaps save on the money, which – boreholes sometimes dry and people do not get water. 

Lastly, this Kampala issue -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But honourable member, let us be fair. If we said three minutes, then let it be three so that many more can contribute. You are turning this into a fully-fledged debate, when it was not supposed to be that. We are in  the Committee of Supply just to consider a few things and then supplement. 

We shall have an opportunity to deal with policy matters, of this I assure you. Any committee can requisition time and then we concentrate on the debate on policy matters, but this is the Committee of Supply. We are just dealing with the budget estimates of the ministry.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Lastly, out of 803, I would have liked the committee to recommend the closure of at least 802 water centres in Kampala. These are the ones serving water, which is contaminated. Thank you very much.

MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Erute North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Chairman. My concern is about the quality and quantity of water and electricity in this country. At this material time people in Uganda should not be complaining about the quality and quantity of water and electricity. For example, when you go to Lira Municipality where there are four divisions: Obwojwina, Lira Central and then Railways; you find that the number of houses, which do not have electricity are more than the houses that are supplied with it.

People are demanding for electricity services but they do not get it. When you go to Lira you find these lorries moving up and down. I wonder what these lorries are doing in Lira. You go to Lira Hospital and find that the budget for the hospital is almost consumed by the water bill. That is almost one-third of the total budget of Lira Hospital. This has made implementing the Lira Hospital budget very difficult. 

I want to hear from the honourable minister about where the problem is. Is it the Ministry or the four corporate bodies or institutions that are not performing? What has caused inequality in supply of power and the inefficient supply of power and even water? Everybody is complaining about the cost of water and electricity. I have failed to understand this. When you go to pay for water and electricity in Lira, they do not explain to you exactly why you are paying that amount of money. And everybody in Lira is complaining about the operations of the electricity managing body there. 

What is the ministry doing about this? We have never heard of the ministry going to find out the facts about these issues in Lira. Maybe they went there and we have not noticed it, but our cry is: let us get these services because we deserve them and we should not just demand for them. In the case of Erute North, surveys have been done for Aleg, Ogul, Alwala, Ayami and Agweng trading centres. I am pleased because some lists have been appended here of areas that have been served. I hope we are going to be served this financial year. Thank you very much.

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In the interest of time, I have only three observations to make. The first one is about the quality of the reports. The reports we have seen are very well prepared and I want to recommend that we put up a study to find out the extent to which these recommendations are implemented. Otherwise, it becomes a ritual. We make recommendations in the House and you never know whether the ministries and the Government respond to them. That is observation number one. 

Observation two is on page 10, relating to rural electrification. Mr Chairman, I want the House to understand the implication of rural electrification being a myth, with only one percent rural coverage, and what it means to the whole economic transformation, which is the hallmark of Government’s policy. Transformation will never take place when only one percent of the rural population has electricity; mark you, ninety percent of Ugandans stay in rural areas.  

Therefore, what this means is that an overwhelming majority of the workforce of this country has no access to electricity. How can you transform an economy when your workforce rises with the sun and goes to bed with the sunset? It can never happen.  

Mr Chairman, regarding the rural agro-based industrialisation strategy, when it comes to pumping water, hotels, even end-users in schools, and training colleges need electricity. You can never have vocational training unless you have electricity for running the machinery. Even in hospitals, to test blood or to keep drugs at a required temperature, or for operations in a theatre, you need electricity. All this can never happen when you have no electricity.  

Much worse, Mr Chairman, when the rest of the world is working in shifts and your people are going to bed with the sunset, does it surprise you that we have the highest population growth rate in this country? (Laughter). 

I have a third case, Mr Chairman –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are suggesting that birth control methods should be substituted by providing electricity to rural areas. (Laughter).

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, as a matter of fact, it is a more civilized, more orderly approach than birth control and condoms. This is the best way to have planned parenthood in this land.  

Mr Chairman, the point I wanted to bring to the attention of the Minister is about the rural electricity project in my own constituency. Poles were put up, angle bars were brought but half way through, the project stalled. The reason for this was the cash flow from the Ministry of Finance could not come to the aid of the project.  

I have talked with the ministers, I have talked with the directors and I can say this. I have talked with the ministers, particularly David Migereko, and I think he means well, he talks well.  But when it comes to matching the minister’s words with deeds, there is a huge gap. I plead with Government to try to narrow this gap because it is a crisis of confidence in leadership when you say something and nothing is done.  

Finally, on this point, Mr Chairman, if it means increasing the vote on this budget for implementation of the rural electrification programme, let it be, because the return is much better than our hesitation.  

My second observation is on page 21, Mr Chairman –(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Honestly, honourable member, I gave you just three minutes and now you are going into the sixth. We have to complete this because we have other business at 2.00 p.m. We need a break. We have to complete this by 1.00 p.m. so that we have a break and then at 2.00 p.m. we deal with the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee report.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I will be really very brief.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Those who will not have an opportunity to contribute on this, I will give you an opportunity to contribute on the other one.

PROF. KAMUNTU: May I conclude now by making an observation from page 21. 

The rain-harvesting programme, Mr Chairman, would improve the quality of life of our people. It would also have an impact on children who have pulled out of school in order to fetch water. It would impact on children being defiled because of walking long distances looking for water. And the country has a lot of rain, which can be harvested and we would save the population from this odious task.

Finally, Mr Chairman, this is a very serious matter. When you look at page 6, we are told AES was cleared of all allegations of corruption. It was part of this allegation that cost one of our colleagues, hon. Richard Kaijuka, to lose his job as an Executive Director at the World Bank and IMF. Can the Minister tell us, now that these allegations have been cleared, what correction he is going to make to a wrong that was committed to one of our colleagues, to his reputation, to his standing, to his character? 

If these allegations have been cleared, the Minister should come on record publicly to tell us how he is going to correct this wrong and the injustice that was committed to this individual.  Thank you very much.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for the good job done. The withdrawing of AES is a blessing in disguise. If this thing had gone on, all Ugandans would have been sold. The cost of thermal power, which should be cheap, was going to be at about US$3000 per kilowatt as opposed to geothermal, which would go at US$2000. 

We need the ministry to give us the loss we have incurred as a result of AES, because we have been budgeting and the ministers and her colleagues have been travelling to USA to negotiate. As government, we must know what we have lost.  

Kaijuka was sacrificed; even Jesus was crucified when he had done nothing. We believe if we do our research well, there are others who committed offences and they have been left out and Kaijuka is “dead”. We need to carry out research and a detailed investigation and you will discover that they are here.  

On the issue of power at Bujagali, the spirits did well to refuse. If we wanted a dam, the River Nile flows downwards and we would have dammed in any place for power. And the cost of a dam on the Nile would not be more than US $ 150 million. But this one, we are talking of over US $ 500 million! Why? Because the IFC lending side of the World Bank had lent AES over US$800 million, which if they went past, they would lose. Therefore, they were forcing this deal on us Ugandans and we continued with it. It is a shame for those who were fronting it. 

The Uganda Electricity Board has properties in Jinja. Colleagues, I hope the committee went there.  There are very good houses at Mpumudde, maybe built at a very high cost, I do not know, but there is now a bush. Is it being allocated to some persons or they were just put there as part of the scenery? 

We have privatised UEB, we have more authorities and we are talking of costs going down. The more authorities you have, the more costs. Now the cost has moved to the last consumer. Is this fair? You can imagine, the meter boxes are not there and they cost us an estimated half a million per month. It is illegal. In fact, we could do without UEB, we could do without the ministry and we would move on with our candles.  

I would have been happy to see the committee presenting to us the plan for rural electrification so that we would know the areas going to be electrified. But here, we have no plan and we are going to pass money. Is it for you to enjoy with your vehicles! It is unfair. We need a plan so that we are able to know where we are going. (Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I would like to thank the Member holding the Floor for giving way. The matter hon. Mafabi is articulating is so great that it requires some scientific reference. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let our contributions relate to the estimates, which we are supposed to deal with today. As I have said, I will definitely provide time for us to have extensive debates on policies of ministries. I expect the committees, even after passing the estimates, to continue to monitor the activities of their respective sectors. I assure you of that; it is up to you to requisition time and we shall really give you time.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Hon. Lukyamuzi, I will give you another chance later. On environment, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, the information I am giving  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, hon. Lukyamuzi, you are a member of the committee and all your views are in this report. Let the member who is not a member of the committee continue with the debate.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I hope you add me a few minutes because I have been interrupted. 

Mr Chairman, on rural electrification, Kakira has been given money to develop. The Bible says, “to him who has, more will be added.” We want to know how far the money we have given Kakira has gone.

On NEMA, I do not see any reason why the committee should deny that NEMA has not been given money. In the Sixth Parliament, money was passed for NEMA, and in fact NEMA is not doing its work. Recently, we were in Luzira and there was a big factory there, which was discharging all its waste in the lake. 

What is the connection between NEMA and Lake Victoria Management Project? It was Lake Victoria Management Project trying to save the situation while NEMA exists! They made policies, which are conflicting. Today they refuse to give somebody a certificate to do something like constructing a petrol station, for example, and then tomorrow they give it. Why? There must be a problem with NEMA.  

Mr Chairman, I am about to finish but you know they interrupted me. There are the swamps, which colleagues have talked about. They are saying right now all cocoa yams grown around the lake are very dangerous for our lives because of the waste. They say this makes those yams grow fat and when you eat them, you are eating disease. What has NEMA done?  You want all Ugandans to get extinct before you come in! 

Recently, there was an investor in Kamwokya down there whom they had refused to construct on a wetland. When you pass there during the day, they are not constructing, at night they are building.  What do we do with these conflicting policies?  

Lastly, Mr Chairman, we have units. I like talking about monies but we should have units. How many boreholes have you built? How many are you going to build? You might be telling us about boreholes when you do not have even one. You have built boreholes in Bugisu but there is no water because you never reached down, and you are saying that is a borehole. So, what is the purpose of putting up a structure? Is it for people to see and be happy when they are not being served? 

I think, as the Chairman said, at a later time we shall discuss this. I would request the committee to come and visit those places. I want to thank my brother, who is the chairperson, and his committee for the good job done. 

The water for small towns was not mentioned. In 2001 we approved US $ 10 million from WBDP to deal with small towns and Sironko is one of them. It is now two and half years and where is the water? Are you going to bring it in 2008 or 2006 so that we use it as a weapon? I thank you, Mr Chairman, for the good chance you offered me. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very, Mr Chairman. My comment goes to – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, with humility, I am standing on a point of procedure. Is there any rule in our Rules of Procedure, which stops a member of a committee on the Floor from giving a point of information or raising a point of procedure? Are we not going wrong? 

This is a very serious matter because someone could stand up and give a point of procedure on a level of science, which the entire House requires, and if you stop him from giving that information because he is a member, then you are doing a disservice to the debate.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have three brief comments to make. One is to do with the meteorology department. I am really concerned about how this department was robbed of its properties and they were given to CAA by an Act of Parliament. I do not know what it takes to reverse this. If it is not against any law, I want to suggest, in line with a recommendation of this committee, that a private members bill be accepted so that the meteorology department be given its assets. They are with CAA.  

Two, Mr Chairman, a lot has been mentioned about boreholes. Recently I was in my constituency and I can confirm that many of the boreholes are dry and are in a state of disrepair. They were actually asking me if I could help them buy some spare parts. When I put it to them that there were some people who are trained to maintain these boreholes, I was informed that the tools they were given and the skills they have are irrelevant so they cannot open and close these boreholes. Maybe there is a need to retrain them, so that this community-based maintenance system really becomes relevant.  

Lastly, Mr Chairman, the previous speaker talked about NEMA.  I want to talk about the wetlands and this is especially that one Member of this august House has consistently been accused that he built a house in a wetland.  (Interjection)- that one you know, if you will not know I will tell you later.  But I want to ask the concerned Ministry – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Point of order –(Laughter).  Mr. Chairman, I am standing on a point of order.  When an hon. Member makes sweeping statements of the kind which could implicate so many of us without specification it is bad –(Laughter).  Is he in order to make sweeping statements without substantiating, because we are ready to counteract whatever statement.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I think the hon. Member is saying Members are uneasy, can you substantiate?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO:  Yes hon. Chairman.  I will name that person, the real person who raised this point or order is the one under question, hon. ken Lukyamuzi and he is been accused that his house is in a wetland and I was coming to that point, he says that land is not gazetted; and I was going to ask the responsible Ministry, why can we not gazette these wetlands?  Is it so costly?  So that really our name as an individual and as a House is really cleared.  If we are found to be in a wetland, we do the needful.  I do not have much time, Mr. Chairman, and I am going to say –(Interruption) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of order.  Again, Mr Chairman, very humbly I am standing on a point of order.  We have a Constitution in front of us here, Article 237 sub-section 2(b) speaks about the need to protect wetlands.  The Environment Statute, which is also a sister document to the Constitution on the environment talks about the need to protect the wetland without specification. 

Noting that apart from science, which talks about specifications of wetlands in the form of river lines and those areas also related to lakes, in science a wetland is based on the river line and anything which is never the lake. Is the hon. member holding the Floor in order to imply that I live in a wetland and yet the specifics of the zoning of the area where I stay in Wankulukuku is known as a settlement area and has been known so for 30 years? That kind of statement is defamatory and I cannot let it go without substantiation. Is she in order to make such statement?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, my following her submission, actually it seems she is in your favour, because she said one hon. Member Ken Lukyamuzi is accused and then I think – and you said no, I think what she was saying; why do not the authority concerned gazette this?  So, that is what she said and this is really in your favour; and you are saying it has not been gazetted and they are saying I think NEMA or whoever authority is concerned should tell us whether this is a gazetted wetland, then we shall know. Actually she was in your favour.  Actually she was in your favour.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Point of order, point of order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I am not accepting it.  This is not going to be a ping-pong game. She has said let the people gazette it and then – Apparently, it is not gazetted according to our knowledge. So let this be. Otherwise it cannot be a ping-pong game.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO:  Thank you Chairman, for the wise ruling and that is exactly what I meant.  

Lastly, Mr. Chairman, I want to talk about this strategy and policy of providing safe water.  Unfortunately in Kampala, the ministry has ended up providing unsafe water. If you look on page 24 where out of the 803 springs in Kampala only one delivers safe water.  I think we are in trouble and somebody should show cause why the technical people should not –(Interruption)

MRS. ZZIWA:  Point of information. Thank you hon. Member for accepting the information.  It is true that out of – in fact here there are 24 springs, but they are more than that.  There are others which are not even gazetted as wells but people draw water from there.  But all these are unsafe.  I want to add that despite the fact that in as way back as 1999/2000, there was a commitment by the ministry and the Minister on the Floor of the House to provide safe water in many suburbs of Kampala.  All the pipes, which have been laid still are empty, they are not bringing water.  That is the information I wanted to add.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.,  I think the point has been made.  There should be effort by the concerned departments; the one of water and the other of Sewerage Corporation to really ensure that our people get safe water.  Thank you very much.

MRS RAINER KAFIRE (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek some clarification from the Minister of Energy regarding the following:

One, the Bujagali Project. How much did you spend in the preparation of the programme? Also how much was spent on the day the ground was broken?

Two, His Excellency pledged to the rural people that he would supply electricity. In my constituency, a lot of poles were placed for several miles for example one from Kibuku Trading Centre to Buseta. But the poles are just there, wasted. When do you plan to finish that line?

Another line is from Kadama to Tirinyi and another is from Bulangila Trading Centre up to Goligoli. We are waiting. My constituency actually gave a lot of votes to His Excellency. (Laughter). 

The next issue is about the Ministry of Water. We have a lot of dry spells in my constituency. The problem Uganda has, presently, is that we are still keeping the old colonial agreement between Egypt and Uganda. We would do well with some form of irrigation. We have plenty of water, but the government does not look at irrigation as a very important factor.  

Lastly, I would like to thank the committee for the good report they have made. Thank you very much.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will not comment much on the energy sector. I only want the Minister to tell us when he is providing meters to people. Uganda Electricity Distribution Company has been using estimations in people’s residences because they do not have meters. Are they available now? When are you providing them?  

Mr Chairman, my concern with the Ministry of Water is that the mother of all sectors, which is the heart of this country, has been neglected, and that is the Meteorology Department. 

Mr Chairman, this country is at danger when this department is not catered for. Out of Shs 2.6 billion they need, only Shs 680 million is provided. The department is understaffed, and yet this is a department that affects aviation services, water resources - which the Minister wants to provide - the environment and the defence of this country. 

Any time, the country can be under attack, even when we are seated here allocating Shs 680 million to the Meteorological Department. And the Ministry of Finance is happy distributing the resources in his ministry – Shs 9 billion for stationery, when the country can be attacked and Parliament besieged! The construction industry is affected.  

Members of Parliament, time and again, every year, have been asking, “What is happening to this meteorological department? What has happened to meteorological school?” I think we should put our foot down because all of us are in danger, anyway. 

We might lack water and we might be besieged when we are here re-allocating funds to unviable things and the meteorological department is not catered for. I think we should be serious in what we are doing. The Ministry of Water is not there without the Meteorology Department. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as you realise it is now a quarter to one. We have to finish, have a break, then deal with other business at 2.00 p.m.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bumba): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First and foremost, I would like to express my ministry’s gratitude to the chairperson, the vice chairperson and all members of the Committee on Natural Resources for the cordial discussions we have had while going through the Ministry’s Policy Statement on the Budget. 

Mr Chairman, when we started, the committee raised 122 issues. By the time we finished, most of these had been addressed and resolved. I also want to thank the honourable members of this august House for your comments, observations and concerns. We take them in good faith, and to us they are guiding tools.  

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I wish to clarify on a few residue issues, which have been carried forward from the committee’s report. The first one is the method of presentation. I think this has been clarified by a letter from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to all ministers and the chairmen of the committees regarding a new format, which has got to comply with the Budget Act. My ministry has already moved ahead and we have submitted our figures in the new format, and as I speak now, the chairperson has got them.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, there was an issue raised by hon. Ndeezi regarding the payment of Shs 144 million to an expatriate, which according to the committee is equivalent to the pay of 15 local staff. Mr Chairman, when we convert this amount to US dollars - because these payments are denominated in US dollars - it translates to 75,000 dollars per annum, which is about 6,200 dollars per month. 

Mr Chairman, I want to say that this money is paid as technical assistance by the Commonwealth Secretariat to one expatriate on oil exploration.  It took them two years to identify that person, and because of that scarcity a payment of 6,200 dollars was found to be reasonable. There are quite a number of local expatriates working in this country who are getting more than 6,000 dollars per month. 

Mr Chairman, the figure may have been exaggerated by the inflation on the Uganda shilling. Otherwise, if you break it down, he gets a salary of 4,500 dollars per month, housing allowance of 1,000 dollars per month, an airfare ticket every year of 3,000 dollars, and there is a one-time payment for equipment of 5,000 dollars. That is all. So, it is not outrageous. 

Mr Chairman, there was an issue raised on lack of distribution of transmission lines to evacuate power generated. I want to admit that we have got a shortage of distribution wires. That is why honourable Members of Parliament are here crying everyday, and coming to the ministry everyday asking for extension of wires to their constituencies, but we have not done it. The obvious answer is because of lack of resources. 

On evacuating power from the generation stations, Mr Chairman, I want to say that we have not failed to evacuate power from any generation station. The problem has been to include or to accommodate what we call “embedded generators” in the system. 

Mr Chairman, our nature of consumption here is domestic. We need power most between 6.00 p.m. and 11.00 p.m. At that time we experience a shortage and embedded generators have been supplying power without a problem. Our problem has been during the day when we need a surplus but the industries are inefficient. Now with the limited intervention we have made, I think we have sufficient wires to distribute all the little power being generated in this country. As we speak now, the Electricity Regulatory Authority is running adverts for the small generators to apply for inclusion on the grid. So that will cease to be a problem.

I agree with the honourable members that UDCL is providing a poor service. It is because of this inefficiency and ineffectiveness that Government was forced to allow the private sector to bring competition, efficiency and effectiveness.  Honourable members, UDCL is still supplying power, which is not accounted for. Unless we get an efficient operator, some of these problems will not be cured. We hope that within the next three months this inefficient team will be out of business and we shall have an efficient system operating. 

We have already tested the efficiency of the private sector. You may be experiencing load-shedding now, but I want to say that it is not out of inefficiency or ineffectiveness at the station, it is because of the dilapidated system which are under continuous repairs.  However, when you compare the efficiency now at Jinja Generation Plant with the type of production we had several months ago before we got a private investor, the difference is enormous and we hope to achieve this when UDCL goes into private hands.  

Mr Chairman, the regular disconnections in Kampala area and some parts of Jinja, Mbale and Tororo, is because of a rehabilitation programme called “Urban Power Rehabilitation. I am sure some areas like Ntinda, Kisasi, Kyaliwajala and others have already seen the difference arising out of this programme.

Mr Chairman, if you compare the tariff with people’s income, they are apparently high. We have identified the cause of the high tariffs and we are discussing it. The biggest problem is the small grid of 200,000 consumers compared to the investment in the system. The number works out to be high because the state of the system is dilapidated beyond the acceptable range. We are addressing this by rehabilitating the system.

The illegal disconnection was another burden affecting the consumers and we are addressing it.  So, we hope that when we provided a cure to all these problems, we shall end up with a comfortable and affordable tariff to our consumers.

Mr Chairman, crowding the sector with many companies is not cost effective, because there are costs, which are going to arise out of that.  As you know energy projects have a long gestation period and they are capital intensive- (Interruption)- yes these are facts. So, really now where we are, it is very difficult to quantify the benefits out of this. The few I can point out is that we have signed agreements with four private companies who are going to generate and distribute power in this country. Previously with vertically integrated monopoly of UEB, this was not possible.  Today we have a regulator whom dissatisfied consumers can complain to and they take their matters seriously. The tariffs are no longer politically derived because there is an independent regulator who determines the tariffs based on economics.  

Mr Chairman, we hope to achieve enhanced power generation and supply through the opening up of the sector and creation of some of these companies.  I also want to say that some of these companies are transitory like the successor companies. So once the business is given to the private sector, these successor companies are going to be amalgamated into one company. Some of these companies appear to be institutions when they are not really institutions, like the Rural Electrification Fund and the Rural Electrification Agency; these are implementing arms of the Rural Electrification Board.  However, some of them are there to stay, like the electricity tribunal. We need them as we go towards an independent sector.

Mr Chairman, rural electrification is no longer one per cent we talked of four years ago. We have reached two percent –(Interjection)- yes our target, as I said when we were approving the loan for rural transformation, is to achieve 10 per cent in the next 10 years. This looks low but if you consider where we started, this will be 1000 percent increase. We are moving systematically towards that.

We appeared to have been rather static because we are still going through the planning stage. We have now started moving because the West Nile Rural Electrification Company is going to connect 1,000 customers. Three weeks ago, we initiated agreements for Bushenyi, Kanungu, Rukungiri and Kakira Rural Electrification, which are going to enhance supply of electricity in that area.  However, they are still finalising the arrangements for them to start procurements. These are private operators entering a system arising out of the policies on Rural Electrification, which we have put in place.

Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, can the minister explain why consumers cannot get electricity when the project started with installing poles and angle bars? How can a project remain incomplete when it is almost 90 per cent funded? How can you explain this?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my good friend, hon. Prof. Kamuntu, for raising that question because that is where I was really going.  His constituency is one of the many constituencies in this country where we have uncompleted schemes.  We were anticipating that we would be able to collect money from the generation tariff to complete these schemes. We are also anticipating budgetary allocations to complete them. 

As for now, we have realised only Shs 700 million from the generation tariff, and this is already being applied in some parts of Masaka, Sembabule and Lyantonde. We are working with the Ministry of Finance to identify monies to complete these schemes, including giving out some of these schemes to the private operators to complete them. The Bushenyi Rural Electrification Company has now taken over those lines in hon. Kamuntu’s constituency, and they are the ones who are going to complete them.  

One honourable Member raised the issue of connecting border areas from the neighbouring countries. This is in line with the East African Power Master Programme. We are already doing it and in fact we are planning to electrify parts of Karamoja by pulling wires from Kitale instead of getting it from Jinja where the system’s losses will be high. So, really this is something in our plan and we are already implementing it in Mbale, Lwakaka and Karamoja  

On geothermal electricity, hon. Nabwiso, this is a matter, which we have been studying for the last four years. We are even borrowing experts from Kenya. Under our recent bilateral agreement with Kenya, there is a provision for that. We are already talking to people in Australia who are experts on geothermal to come and assist us. We are interested in this and we know that depending on the exploration findings, this is going to be a good source for supplying electricity to some of the areas.   

Mr Chairman, the criteria for rural electrification was properly elucidated in the report of the committee, which is rehabilitation of the vandalised lines, connection of administrative centres, connection of economic areas with high economic potential like the Nyamuliro mining area, areas where there is coffee processing, fish processing and connecting socially desirable centres like health centres, schools, and water resources. 

We are also paying special attention to the pledges by His Excellency, the President. Most of the pledges His Excellency made fall within this criteria and funds permitting, we shall do them.  Our intention is to have universal electrification in this country in 50 years.  The Chinese said that even somebody who is going to walk a thousand miles starts with one step. We have passed one step, we are now on to next step, and we are moving steadily through the various interventions, which we have put under the electrification.

Mr Chairman, allow me to inform honourable members the few interventions on rural electrification because this is what touches everybody’s heart.  We are looking at extending the existing grid.  We are looking at exploiting the various hydro resources in the various parts of the country and we have started with Nyagak. We are looking at the river between Adjumani and Moyo. We want to put a mini-hydro there. I think that will solve the concerns of my sister, hon. Mindra.  

We are also looking at River Sipi; we are already talking to companies to evaluate the potential on this river. We are evaluating geothermal potential. Solar power is quite advanced; it is now available in all shops. We are looking at other sources like gasification. How can we use coffee husks to generate power? So, the recipe is available and we are committed, but these projects take a long time and they need a lot of money. What I can promise here is that we shall do our best.

On the Bujagali, Mr Chairman, I am going to specifically respond to two issues. Clearance of AES by the Department of Justice: It is true the company was cleared but it was not the only company, which was being investigated. What is going to be done to hon. Kaijuka? I think that is not within my competence to comment on. Government of Uganda commissioned IGG to investigate the matter, his report is still awaited.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Chairman, I need some clarification.  The clearance of AES International by the Department of Justice is a United States affair. We all know that AES had financial problems. How relevant is the international inquiry when we all know that the matter went to court, and one secretary admitted openly that she was paying out bribes on a weekly basis? In Uganda, we are waiting for the IGG to issue a report. How can we be contented with what the honourable minister is articulating? 

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am just wondering why my good friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, did not raise this in the committee when he is a member of the committee. I think the Government of Uganda is entitled to get its own point of view. I really would not like to go into details of this, because I do not want to prejudice the investigations by the IGG.  

There was a question about how much has been spent. Most of the money, which has been spent, like ground breaking, that was the affair of AES Nile Power; it was not part of the Government budget.  Even if one went and audited the book, we did not spend a shilling on that.  

Mr Chairman on the – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Minister for giving way. The clarification I want to seek is, even you as a minister, you had to travel from Kampala to Jinja for ground breaking. Did you use fuel for AES or you used fuel from the ministry? You have travelled from here to Washington, those are so many costs; you cannot say there is no money involved in this deal. What Parliament is requesting is, how much have we spent as Government on AES?

THE CHAIRMAN: This question cannot be answered just now? It is a question where somebody has to look in the books and give an answer. This is a question that should be a formal question for an effective real answer.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have appointed an international firm to go and study this project in details. What has been spent, what have we lost, how are we going to handle this transition, how do we move to the next step? With that, I would like to thank the honourable members of the committee – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have really a problem. You have another business to handle and you need a break. You have heard from the Minister for Energy, there is a Minister for Lands and Water, please.

MRS SYDA BBUMBA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your guidance. As I conclude, I will invite my colleagues who feel that I have not sufficiently responded to their concerns to come to the ministry. Honourable Members of Parliament do not need appointments to see me. You can just walk in as long as I am in, I will see you. I want to thank the honourable members and especially our committee for a job well done. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I too wish to record the gratitude of my Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment for the tolerance they have exhibited to my technical team because of what is reported about the way I presented the policy statement.  

Sir, on that matter, this remark features in many committee reports and something has to be done across the board to come up with a new format under which ministries will be reporting and making policy statements. All the information is available; it is only the form of presentation that is misleading in some cases.

Having said that, Mr Chairman, I wish to straight away go to a matter raised in the report by the chairperson regarding discrepancies in budgetary figures. In particular, page 22 of the report says, “There is an allocation of Shs 247,770,000 to water but whose activities are not indicated.” 

Yesterday, at 9 o’clock, we had a meeting with the committee in which I indicated that the Ministry of Public Service together with the Ministry of Finance, allowed me to spend Shs 238,145,946 to employ water engineers and officers in the Directorate of Water Development. 
 
Mr Chairman, this money should not be allocated by the committee to meteorology irrespective of the need to give more funds to meteorology because water development has already activities targeting this money.

I wish to explain that the only discrepancy in the figures is in the arithmetic that the Ministry of Finance allocated Shs 9,000,000 more than what was recommended in the tripartite meeting of Public Service, Finance and Ministry of Water. It is therefore the Shs 9,825,000 that the committee should recommend to the plenary to be reallocated from the development budget of water to the activities of meteorology.  

Specifically, I will start with meteorology. There has been a very strong advocacy for meteorology and Mr Chairman, all that has been said about meteorology is correct. The committee took time to visit the various installations of this department and saw for itself. That is why it is looking for money from my budget and elsewhere in the national budget to fund the activities of this very vital service.

The Ministry of Public Service has already communicated to us giving us permission to recruit 53 staff of various categories to man the gaps that are in the meteorology department. We also go by the recommendation of the committee that the under funding of this department be handled by Cabinet at the earliest. Steps have already been taken to take this matter to Cabinet so that the department is well provided for in form of equipment, personnel and welfare of the staff.

Mr Chairman, it is only Water and Environment that were commented on. I am surprised that land did not attract any comments. Maybe the land sector is invisible or it is doing very well – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you provoking comments when there are no comments? If there are no comments just comment on what was commented on.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: On water, Mr Chairman, Members raised concerns on the safety of protected springs in Kampala. In order to provide safe water to peri-urban Kampala and the urban poor, last year National Water provided 223 standpipes (kiosks) to target this group that is otherwise using unprotected springs. This year within the funds allocated to me by the Ministry of Finance, National Water will make 6,960 connections in Kampala and also for the urban poor provide 247 standpipes.  

On boreholes –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much. I am seeking clarification. When the honourable Minister brings in the aspect of the urban poor and says 223 kiosks were installed, does this mean that these urban poor will have a different rate in payment? Because what is evident is that in most of those so-called urban poor areas, just a jerrican of water goes for Shs 100 and evidently many people cannot afford. We want to know, for instance, are the meters different from those for the rich so that we are able to sensitise the people? I would like that clarification.

And really like I said, most of these taps you have mentioned do not bring water yet. We do not know where the problem is. Most of them, the works have been done but the water is not there.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Chairman, for Kampala, there are distortions. Some standpipes belong to individual property owners and those ones charge their own fee unknown to National Water authorities. But there are kiosks like in Kampala East and Makindye, marked clearly National Water and well built with a user committee. The cost per jerrican is Shs 40.  

Now, the non-functionality of boreholes: Like a car, moving parts wear out and tear out, repairs must be regular. Every borehole has got a user committee and the borehole strategy targets isolated communities. Our policy covers supply of water in form of boreholes, gravity flow schemes, valley tanks, valley dams, piped water and also rainwater harvesting. The boreholes are for communities who cannot get water by any of these other means and, therefore, we cannot, for example, propose gravity flow for Madi-Okolo or Obongi in a situation where we do not have a river flowing covering a large area 365 days. The strategy for West Nile is ideal for West Nile. But all those strategies are inter-linked in order to reach all our people in the country. 

Sir, there are user committees; there is also a mechanic who is trained and equipped with a bicycle and a toolbox. There are certain repairs that can be done by that mechanic. That mechanic is assigned a number of boreholes in the area, and he informs the water officer if the repair work is beyond what he can do. In a case where there are major repairs works, we have got regional technical support units with a service rig that moves around to repair the boreholes. Sir, my colleagues should appreciate that last year I reported that the unserviceable boreholes were 37 percent and this year I am reporting 20 percent. This number is going down because of increased capacity of the communities to maintain their utilities.

On environment, the wetlands are being codified and an inventory is being drawn out by the wetlands division; mapping is going on. After mapping, we are going to gazette the wetlands and categorise them. There are wetlands, which are of international nature; there are those, which are of national and those of community nature. Community wetlands will be used by the communities according to the specifications given by the scientists in the wetland division. 

Kampala is a controversial area in that much of the city is built on a wetland. But we are very much interested in the Nakivubo channel because this is the cleaning agent of the water, which we consume down from Gaba. This wetland has got to be protected at all costs including its tributaries.  

Mr Chairman, after gazetting the wetlands, we are going to put in place an enforcement mechanism so that anyone growing sugarcane or cocoa yam is given a summary notice to quit the wetlands and to ensure that no new cultivations take place in those wetlands, and we allow the wetlands to regenerate in the Kampala. 

We are also conscious, Sir, that certain developments took place in the wetlands before the NEMA law was enacted in 1995. Now we are moving cautiously on such establishments. It is our considered view that those who settled, who built in wetlands before the law was put in place, will be treated differently from those who have done so after the enactment of the National Environment Statute, 1995. So, that statement covers Members of the committee that may have certain developments in the city depending on when the developments were done.

There has been a strong advocacy for gravity flow, especially from the Mt. Elgon area. Hon. Nandala Mafabi who raised this issue at length should be informed that Sironko town is going to be covered by gravity flow scheme that now has reached Budadiri town uphill. The same system is going to be connected downhill to supply Sironko and the neighbouring peri-urban areas. Sir, it is all done.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. It is not up to me but to the person on the Floor to allow other members to give the information. Those are the rules. For information and clarification, it is up to the person holding the Floor.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Natural Resources Committee’s report on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2003/2004 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,292,449,000 under Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 52,193,260,000 under Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 012:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,941,057,000 under Vote 012, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 102:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 170,265,868,000 under Vote 012, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the Committee on Natural Resources and passed Vote 017 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Vote 012 for the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, and passed them with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. That completes the Votes for the two ministries. We are expected to deal with another committee’s report in the afternoon but I do not know whether it is ready or not. Any member of that committee could advise us on whether it is ready or not. That is the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs.

Otherwise, I do not know what to do because if copies are not available, what do we do? Is there any member of that committee here? 

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, our chairperson has been working around the clock and we are certain that we shall be able to present. Yesterday we were able to brush through the corrections and I think we are ready for the presentation. We knew that we were scheduled to present this afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: Well, should we suspend the proceedings until tomorrow? What do we do, honourable members? Okay, proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m. then we shall assess the situation.

(Proceedings were suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 2.59 p.m.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know the position because I have not received a copy of the report either. In that case I do not think we can proceed with the business. So, since tomorrow we have only one Committee of Defence due to present, we have this tomorrow also. I do not know what you say. In the circumstances, could - yes?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, we accept your advice to meet tomorrow. But allow me to also take this opportunity and say this: Cabinet was due to meet at 7.00 p.m. today, but now I ask Cabinet to come for a meeting right away. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Salaamu Musumba, since you are here, do you have any comment?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Salaamu Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to apologise to the House because copies of the report have not been available to you. This is because of the work stress that the entire system is feeling, with making copies of all the relevant reports. But I want to tell you that we are ready to present our report. 

I also think that it would be in the best interests of a good debate that you get copies. We should be able to follow, and it is a big document that requires members to look at and be comfortable with the content, because the committee deals with really sensitive matters. So, I have no problem with adjourning the House until tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How soon do you think members will be able to get these copies? Will they be available this evening?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the document is 54 pages and I would also be comfortable if members read it first. They would be happier to follow when I deliver it to the House. So, by 6 o’clock, if members could come back, they would pick their copies from the pigeonholes. Members always come back here for their mail and that is why I am giving a timeframe of 6 o’clock. If you went and did other things first, you would pick it up at 6 o’clock and be able to read it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then we adjourn to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. I think things will be in order by then, and we shall proceed. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 3.02 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 August 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)












