Monday, 25 August 2003

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished Visitors’ Gallery we have hon. M.D. Lungu, Deputy Chairman of the Committee of the Whole House of Parliament of Zambia and Mrs Doris Mwinga, Clerk to the National Assembly of Zambia. They are here for a one-week’s visit. You are most welcome. 

You might have heard, over the weekend, of the death of hon. Michael Wamalwa, Vice President of Kenya, which occurred on Saturday morning in a London hospital. The late hon. Michael Wamalwa was a Member of the National Assembly of Kenya, representing Sabot constituency. On your behalf, I have sent a message of condolence to my counterpart, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya, hon. Francis Kaparo, upon the loss of a senior Parliamentarian, hon. Wamalwa.  

Honourable members, you may have noted that in less than eight months of its lifetime, the Kenyan Parliament has lost a fifth Member of Parliament. We need to join our colleagues in thoughts and prayers to the Almighty so as to help them bear the loss of a colleague and Vice-President. Let us stand up to observe a minute’s silence in memory of the honourable.

Members stood and observed a minute’s silence.

THE SPEAKER: Again, honourable members, I have just received a message from the Speaker of the transitional National Assembly of Rwanda, Dr Biruta Vincent. I think I should read the message, which I have received, from him. It is as follows:

“Information and acknowledgement: 

I am writing to inform you that as provided for by Article 195 of the Constitution of June 4th, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Rwanda is proceeding today – that was on 22 August 2003 – to dissolve the transitional National Assembly, which was established on 25 November 1994. 

The Parliament dissolution is leading to the forthcoming legislative elections due for 29th September to 2nd October this year.

I take this opportunity to also express our appreciation for your efforts to strength the co-operation between our two countries in general and between our two Parliaments in particular. I wish the existing good relation would be maintained and reinforced in the forthcoming legislature. 

Please accept, Your Excellency, the assurance of my highest consideration.

Sincerely,
Dr Biruta.” 
 
This is the message I received on your behalf, from Rwanda. (Applause). But as you know, they are also proceeding with the presidential elections and we wish them the best.

Honourable members, I also want to inform you that there were two vacancies on the Committee of Economy and the Committee on Rules. I have been advised that the positions have been taken by those who were interested, and two candidates have emerged, one for the Rules Committee and another one for the Committee on Economy. 

The one for the Rules Committee is hon. Miria Matembe, who got the necessary support, and I think it is proper that I put the question to her name, for your approval.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

On the Committee on National Economy we have hon. Salaamu Musumba. She also got the necessary support, but there was no other candidate. I want to therefore put the name forward for your necessary action.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I should have adjusted the Order Paper to include a personal statement by hon. Mike Ocula. He has a brief statement; please, listen to it before we proceed to the other items.
 
PERSONAL STATEMENT

MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to make this statement. I have been prompted to make this personal statement following a story, which appeared in the Monitor newspaper of 20 August 2003: “MP arrested for defilement.” Later on it was echoed by the Red Pepper newspaper of 22 Friday August 2003. 

I would like to state categorically that I have never been arrested or even held by police for defilement. Sometime last year, a fabricated defilement case was reported to Gulu Police Station and since then I have not made a statement. 

Sometime during July this year, I received a call from the regional CID Gulu, requesting that I should make a statement so that a decision can be made about that case. On Friday 1 August 2003, I went to Gulu purposely to make a statement but the CID officer had not assigned any person to take my statement, and he was leaving for Kampala.

After finishing my consultations with my electorate on the 12 August 2003, I returned to Gulu town. The following day the CID officer assigned me a police officer to take my statement, which he did. There was no arrest. As a law-abiding citizen, I had to make a statement as requested by police. 

It should also be noted that there was not even a written summon requiring me to go to the Police. I was just communicating with a CID officer on phone. I could even have opted that the normal procedure usually followed when summoning Members of Parliament, be used.  

I am restraining myself from commenting about this alleged defilement case reported against to Gulu Police principally because I know it is a fabrication by my political detractors and the truth shall finally prevail. The matter is under investigation and it would be inappropriate for me to begin giving detailed comments now. I shall make another statement in this august House after the report has been made. 

The story that appeared in the Monitor and later the Red Pepper newspapers, is absolutely not true. I never defiled or even had a love affair with the said girl and I was not even arrested by police. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03.

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/04

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): Mr Chairman, pursuant to Article 155 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and in accordance with rules 124 and 154 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda; in light of this mandate, therefore, I beg to present for the House’s consideration and adoption, the report of the sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the financial year 2003/04 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I do not want to interrupt you but I have seen the size of the report and the number of votes that we have to deal with. As I did with other reports, without you reading from page to page, this report can be part of the Hansard. So, just summarise the report, as members have read it already, and we proceed. (Applause).

MR YIGA: Mr Chairman, the report covers the following votes: Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Local Government, Local Government Finance Commission, the Public Service Commission, and the local governments of Uganda.  

Appreciation: 

We are very grateful, Mr Chairman, for all those who contributed in one way or another during the debate of this sessional committee.

On page 2 we have highlighted our method of work and we interacted with all those, who are indicated on page 2.

Page 3 has the consideration of the respective policy statements. We are beginning with Vote 005 and Head 105, Ministry of Public Service.

I will go to the observations, which were made. 

One, value for money. Examination of the Ministry’s policy statement revealed that it did not meet the requirements of section 6(2) of the Budget Act, since it did not disaggregate data on the value for money.

Page 4 has outstanding budget matters in the last financial year. The Ministry addressed some of the recommendations raised by the committee last financial year. The committee shall, however, make further follow-up to ensure that all the recommendations are effectively implemented.

The coordination role of the Ministry:

The coordination role of the Ministry over other ministries and departments is not respected. Examples include the standing instruction on standardisation of ministry vehicles, which should not exceed the capacity of 3,000cc and also instruction on vehicle use, which are being flouted by ministries and public officers.  

Payment of salaries:

Many public servants receive salary by the 28th day of every month. It was, however, reported that breach of this policy still exists especially in districts as result of the following problems, which I numerated in the report.  

Decentralised payroll:

The policy of decentralisation of the payroll to districts was embarked on in the 2000/01 financial year beginning with the pilot districts of Rakai and Tororo.
  
However, we noted the following:
  
• The Ministry was not adequately assisting the above districts in the operation of the payroll yet it is supposed to give guidance and monitor their progress.

• It is taking too long to be extended to other districts. As a result, districts have continued to spend a lot of money on monthly travels to Kampala to update and collect their payrolls. 

• Many districts operate fragmented payrolls to facilitate payment of their employees. 

• The unconditional grants component to some districts would be drastically reduced during this financial year. This shall render problems in payment of wages for the decentralised services.  

The pay reform strategy:

It was noted that although the Government has been trying to progressively increase the pay of public servants, it is yet to reach levels of a living wage. Notably, the salary increments do not match the rate of inflation and the increasing cost of living.  

Vehicles for political leaders and entitled officers:

The policy of procuring vehicles for political leaders and entitled officers has been decentralised to ministries. The Ministries and departments should be discouraged from procuring vehicles that do not comply with the specifications issued by the Ministry of Public Service.

Pensions reforms: 

Matters to do with compensation and payment of terminal benefits to retired civil servants are not adequately addressed by the Government, since it continues to under-fund this area. In effect, budgeting for pensions and gratuity has been on a steady decline from figures provided in financial year 200/01. No provision has been made in the financial year 2003/04 budget to clear arrears standing at Shs 265 billion. The breakdown is as follows:
 
• Defence pension arrears, Shs 113 billion.
• Traditional civil service and teachers’ pensions arrears, Shs 83 billion.
• Local governments pensions arrears, Shs 17 billion.
• Unpaid gratuities, Shs 11 billion. 
• Benefits to former employees of the East African Community, Shs 41 billion.

The committee further noted that:

• Much as the Ministry assumed responsibilities in respect of the defence pensions in 2002, no progress has yet been made to manage the Survivors’ Benefits Scheme because of legal impediments.

•  Whereas districts are required to meet pension obligations of local governments staff, they are unable to pay the pensions because of the declining levels of locally created revenues.

• There is a lot of delay in handing applications for gratuity and payment of pensions by the Ministry of Public Service.

Public Service Commission Bill:

Whereas the Public Service Commission has been in existence for eight years since the inception of the 1995 Constitution, it has no enabling Act. If it were not for the provisions of the Constitution, the Public Service Act, the Local Government Act and scattered provisions in other laws, the justification of the commission would be in question and, therefore, its expenditure.

In the interaction with the responsible minister, he promised to present the Bill to Cabinet within six weeks.  

His Excellency, the Vice-President’s housing complex:

Despite the appointment of an interim-ministerial taskforce that was constituted in 2003, the committee was disappointed to note that there is no serious effort to conclude the procurement of a residence for His Excellency, the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.

It is of the view that the process be expedited and any attempts to procure the residence should be reasonable to the nation, although not compromising on security, strategic location, accessibility and suitability factors.

Establishment of a national records and archives center:

Much as the National Records and Archives Act was passed in 2001, the center it sought to create has neither been formed nor funded. The importance of managing records is therefore, not being emphasised yet they are an essential part on the functioning of any government.

The committee urges Parliament to compel the Ministry of Finance to provide supplementary funding to operationalise the Act.

General recommendations:

The committee recommends that:

• The Government should use part of the Shs 45 billion, budgeted to offset arrears in this financial year to clear the outstanding arrears due to former workers of the East African Community because unlike other pension arrears, it attracts interest and was pegged on the obtaining dollar rate. So far the interest that has accrued is Shs 7 billion and will continue rising if not urgently addressed.

• The Government should borrow money to pay all the pension arrears within this financial year.

•The Ministry should expedite the implementation of the contributory pensions scheme within this financial year.

• The Ministry should comply with section 6(2) of the Budget Act 2001, to avail data on value for money.

• The Ministry, together with other stakeholders should step up their inspectorate roles to ensure that public servants in a district receive their salaries on time.

• The Ministry should review the salary levels of the teaching profession with a view to reducing the gap between a classroom teacher and a head teacher.

• The Ministry should create promotional posts within the teaching profession, to provide for upward mobility of teachers as it is with staff in other cadres. 

Mr Chairman, maybe we need to elaborate further on this: when you look at other cadres, for example, look at the clerical officers. One begins as a clerical officer, after one, two or three years he can be promoted to become a senior clerical officer. After two or three more years he becomes an executive officer, until he perhaps becomes a commissioner. 

But we found out that for the primary teachers, a teacher who graduated 10 years back gets the same salary as a teacher who graduated last year, which is indeed very unfortunate.

• The Ministry should liaise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to supplement the wage component of the unconditional grant from the rest of the grant.

• The Ministry should enforce provision of Circular Standing Instruction No. 1 of 1999, requiring the standardisation of vehicles for ministers and entitled officers, not to exceed the capacity of 3,000cc. 

Mr Chairman, here the concern of the committee was that despite this circular, which is in existence, ministries have bought vehicles whose capacities are over 4,000cc. It raises concern about whether the Ministry is actually coordinating and supervising other ministries in relation to the procurement of vehicles.

• The Ministry should enforce provision of Circular Standing Instruction No. 1 of 2003, on the care and utilisation of government vehicles.

• The Ministry should expedite the drafting of the Public Service Commission Bill and forward it for consideration of Parliament within this financial year.

• The Ministry should expedite a decision on the procurement of the Vice-President’s housing/office complex, in any case not later than December 2003.

• The Ministry should liaise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to initiate the establishment of a fully-fledged National Records and Archives Center.

• The Pensions Act should be amended to incorporate provisions of the Defence pensions.

• The Government should take over payment of pensions and gratuities for local governments.

• Gratuities for public servants should be processed and paid to beneficiaries a month before one retires and is removed from the pay roll.  This will assist the Government to avoid the creation of arrears of gratuities.

Vote 027 and Head 146: Public Service Commission:

Observations:

The Commission also never complied with section 6(2) of the Budget Act, so we urge them to comply. 

Implementation of outstanding budgetary matters: 

They tried their best to address the recommendations of the committee.

Legal framework for the Commission: 
Being the oldest Commission, it is absurd to note that the Public Service Commission has not yet been legalized through an Act of Parliament. Its independence and operations have therefore not yet been streamlined. It appears that some policies and activities of the Ministry of Public Service and the Public Service Commission are inter-related.  An Act of Parliament would assist to demarcate the roles between the two.  

Relationship with District Service Commissions:

According to Article 198(2), the Public Service Commission is supposed to approve the appointment of members of District Service Commissions; while Article 166 (1) compels the commission to guide and coordinate the work of District Service Commissions. It was, however, noted that some District Service Commissions violate the set standards on rules, procedure and regulations developed by Public Service Commission to guide their work.  

The Commission should, therefore, intensify inspection and guidance so that the commissions conform to set standards in their operations.

Rationalisation of Recruiting Commissions: 

Having noted the high cost of Public Administration in Uganda and the inadequate funding to the Public Service Commission, the committee concurred with proposals from the Public Service Commission to merge all recruiting commissions under one entity. It is believed that this move shall reduce: duplication of roles/services; the costs of running the commissions; wastage of funds, and the number of commissioners.  

Capacity building programmes:

There are a number of uncoordinated capacity building programmes conducted by the Commission and other government bodies in the districts. If these are not harmonized it is possible that they shall lead to wastage of funds.  

Employment Policy:

The Commission fills vacant posts by recruiting Ugandans, with all the citizens given equal opportunity to compete for jobs for which they have the necessary qualifications. However, the committee noted the following:

1. There are many vacancies in ministries and departments, which have not been filled, hence denying employment opportunities to qualified Ugandans.

2.  Disciplinary cases take longer than necessary to be disposed of, causing anxiety to the affected as well as wastage of time and money. Districts are worse off in this aspect. 

3. Many staff in the Public Service are in an acting capacity.

Advertising Policy:

All jobs that fall vacant in ministries and government departments and brought to the notice of the Commission are made public through advertisements in the press, notice boards in districts, ministries and departments, and Uganda’s Missions and Embassies abroad.  

The committee noted with concern that this area is greatly marginalized in funding, which has greatly impacted on domestic arrears. Moreover, this is contrary to the Commitment Control System.

Funding Levels:

Some of the major activities of the Commission did not attract sufficient funding such as:

1. The establishment of a human resource data bank. 
2. Advertising charges.
3. Facilitation of the resource centre.
4. Operations and maintenance of the vehicles.

General Recommendations:

The committee recommends that:

1. The Public Service Commission should comply with Section 6(2) of the Budget Act, 2001. 

2. The Public Service Commission should intensify inspection and guidance to District Service Commissions so that they conform to set the rules and regulations.  

3. The Cabinet should consider the rationalization of the recruiting commissions so that they are strengthened and adequately facilitated.  

4. The Public Service Commission should harmonize and coordinate capacity building programmes with the relevant ministries.

5. The Ministry of Finance should consider a supplementary to address serious budget short falls under paragraph 3.2.9.

6. The Public Service Commission should liase with all ministries to ensure that existing vacancies are filled.

7. The Public Service Commission should ensure timely disposal of disciplinary cases.  It should also assist District Service Commissions to expedite their disciplinary cases.

Vote 011 & Head 125: Ministry of Local Government

Observations:

Similarly, this ministry never complied with the requirements of Section 6(2) of the Budget Act, so we urge them to comply next time.

Outstanding Budget Matters in the last financial year: 

The Ministry addressed the recommendations raised by the committee in the last financial year. The committee shall, however, make further follow-up to ensure that the recommendations are effectively implemented.

Operationalization of new town councils: 

Six new town councils began operations on 1 July 2003. It was noted that funds had already been budgeted for their development to meet the demands of the growing populations. 

The committee noted that the leadership of some of the town councils lacked the requisite skills to enable them manage, which is likely to cause financial loss and mismanagement. The Ministries of Local Government and that of Finance are, therefore, urged to move in and build capacities of the new leaders within the new town councils.

Capacity Building in Local Governments:

Various stakeholders have committed a lot of funds for capacity building programmes in local governments. It is worthwhile to note that local government officials are pre-occupied with workshops and seminars all year round and left with limited time to inspect and follow up activities implemented. 

It was also noted that the net worth of the seminars/workshops is not being realized since they are haphazardly organized. It is, therefore, necessary to streamline capacity building for local governments by establishing a national capacity building strategy to harmonize and coordinate capacity building.

The Local Governments Rating Bill:

The bill is intended to repeal and replace the Local Government (Rating) Decree, 1979 with a view to enhancing the collection of property rates by local governments. If enacted, the law is expected to improve the local revenue base of local governments.  

The Ministry should, therefore, expedite the consultative process to enable Parliament formally consider the Bill, and this should be this financial year. Mr Chairman, on this issue, the Ministry of Local Government circulated a Bill to Parliament but it was never formally presented. We are told that they are taking it back for consultations. So, we urge them to expedite the process so that Parliament is able to handle this matter fast.

Mentoring and Inspection of local governments:
 
The committee noted that there is the problem of inadequate inspection by the inspectorate department of the Ministry as it is weak and mainly responds to crises brought to its attention. In some cases local governments continue to flout the advice and guidance given to them.  

Restructuring of local governments:

In order to enable local governments have structures, which conform to the services and activities decentralized in accordance with the Local Government Act, 1997 and the Constitution, the Ministry of Public Service undertook the responsibility to assist local governments to restructure. The consultants produced three models from which each local government is expected to adopt one.  

The committee noted with concern that the adoption of the new structures by the local governments has been delayed basically because the Government has not concluded arrangements for funding the retrenchment costs. Local governments, therefore, continue to be understaffed yet the responsibilities involved are enormous.

Grants to local governments:

Grants are transferred to local governments on the advice of the Local Government Finance Commission, to run the cost of decentralized services. There are of three types:

1. Conditional grants
2. Unconditional grants 
3. Equalization grants

We noted that unconditional grants have declined in respect of some districts, which raised concern whether the Minister of Finance took into account the formula provided by the Constitution, in particular Article 193(2). The reasons given are not convincing and we think an explanation should be given to the nation to justify the decrease.

Equalization Grants:

In the last financial year, the budget for the grants was greatly reduced, recording a 38 percent performance. So, such actions defeat the whole purpose of the grant.

Fiscal decentralization, financial management and accountability in local governments:

In a bid to enhance transparency and accountability in the management of fiscal decentralization, the Ministry of Local Government continues to publicise monthly cash releases from the Central Government to local governments. Efforts were also made to streamline and strengthen financial management and the accountability process and procedures. This was realized through training of accountants and audit staff in local governments and through assistance to update books of accounts and production of final accounts.

During the tour of the districts by the committee, it was revealed that accountability is now an underlying principle in financial management in districts, as accounting officers had stepped up their level of vigilance.

Interaction with local governments:

The committee interacted with some local governments to:

(i) Assess development projects being implemented by them.

(ii) Interact with district officials and capture possible areas for reviewing in the decentralization process.

The interactions exposed a number of salient issues, which include the following:

• Poor planning in districts especially at sub-county level and yet a lot of financial resources target sub-counties.

•  Low qualifications for parish chiefs and LC III Chairpersons, who have failed to lead in the planning process. Most district officials request that ‘O’ Level be set as the minimum education standard for chairpersons and councillors at LC III.
 
• The performance of statutory bodies and commissions was greatly affected by undue political interference.

• Delay in release of final indicative planning figures and late releases of funds by the Ministry of Finance affected budgeting and implementation of planned activities.

•  The numerous number of uncoordinated Central Government workshops affect district operations.

• The subjection of staff, particularly accounting officers, to local political control in many cases leads to compromised decision making.

• The interference in the work of CAOs created by electoral processes. All those who interacted with the committee requested that this function be removed from them and be vested in District Registrars who are employees of the Electoral Commission.

•  The locally generated revenue is fast declining as a result of many factors including political interference, low tax bases, poor assessment and the deliberate refusal by taxpayers to pay tax.

• Councillors were not happy about their emoluments limited to 20 percent of the previous years’ local revenue collected. They want a revision.

•  The low salaries of district chairpersons in most local governments: Those who met the committee requested that the Central Government should make a contribution towards their remuneration.

• The inability of local governments to pay pensions was noted. All local governments, which interacted with the committee, indicated that the Central Government should take over this responsibility.

• The existence of RDCs is important in many districts, as they are the President’s representatives. However, district officials in most of the districts called for the abolition of the posts of Assistant RDCs and mobilizers.

Anxieties arising from delays in implementing the recommendation of restructuring report were noted.                 

GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS

The committee recommends as follows:

1. The Ministry of Local Government should comply with section 6(2) of the Budget Act.

2. The Ministries of Local Government and that of Finance should as soon as possible build capacities of official managing new town councils in areas of managerial competence, planning and financial management.

3. The Ministry of Local Government should formulate a national policy on capacity building in local governments.

4. The Local Government Rating Bill be formally presented to Parliament this financial year.

5.The Ministry of Local Government should intensify inspections and guidance so that local governments comply to set rules, regulations and statutory obligations.

6. The Government should facilitate local governments to restructure so that they have qualified staff in the right positions.

7. The Government should make timely releases of all budgeted funds to respective local governments.

8. The Ministry should liase with the Local Government and Ministry of Finance to revisit adjustments to the unconditional Grants in accordance with Article 193(2) of the Constitution.

9. The unconditional and conditional grants need continuous review to ensure that they are distributed equitably.

Vote 033 and Head 133: Local Government Finance Commission:

Article 194 of the Constitution set up this Local Government Finance Commission. I will not enumerate its functions as contained in the Constitution.

Observation:

They never complied with section 6(2) of the Budget Act.

Performance of grants:

It was observed that:

1. The performance of the Central Government grants leaves a lot to be desired as they are continuously affected by:

a) Too many conditionalities
b) Late releases of funds, which affects project implementation
c) Budget cuts.

2. All local governments are faced with the problem of declining locally collected revenues.

3. Unconditional grants for this financial year have been cut for a number of districts - in fact they are 28 districts - thereby raising doubt whether Article 193 of the Constitution was followed. 

Mr Chairman, on this issue maybe we need to make an elaboration. The formula, which they used to calculate the grants, involves looking at the population and the area. Some districts with little population have got more area in terms of square kilometres and they are also getting more. So, there was a lot of confusion on this issue so the Ministry should harmonize and give an explanation.

General recommendations:

1. The Local Government Finance Commission should comply with sections of the Budget Act, 2001 to avail data on value for money.

2. The Commission should make regular studies on the tax levels of local governments with a view to widening the tax base.

3. The Commission should, in conjunction with the Ministry of Local Government, carry out appropriate studies on the graduated tax system so that problems surrounding this tax are adequately addressed.

4. The Commission should design the local government database reflecting levels of service performance for each of them.

5. The unconditional and conditional grants need continuous review to ensure that they are distributed equitably.

Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House considers and approves the committee’s report together with the budgets for the financial year 2003/2004. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I thank you very much for the clear presentation, which will enable us to make a discussion and later take a decision on the budget.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee and its chairperson. I have two comments. One is on the misuse of government vehicles and the second one is on the National Records and Archives Act. 

Mr Chairman, this issue of abuse of government vehicles was the topic of newspaper headlines this morning, and of course people have contributed to it, including ministers who said, “How can we obey this when they are called to see the President at odd hours?” I think this idea of misusing government vehicles is a cost that we can avoid, because the vehicles are given for official use.  

It is amazing that in this country vehicles can be seen at all sorts of places where they have no business at all. When you go to a private funeral you would wonder whether it is a government function, or whether there is a seminar for government officials! In such places you see UG and UC number plates; and not only ministry vehicles but also vehicles for NGOs, parastatals et cetera. So, we should really do something because other countries have done something about it. Our neighbours Kenya and Tanzania have got regulations for the use of government vehicles.

I have seen a circular in this report of 2003 saying nobody should misuse a government vehicle. In my view that act is probably toothless because how many people have been prosecuted for that? I would suggest a two phased-approach of a carrot and a stick. First of all, let us establish the nature of the abuse. You could ask five questions: Who is abusing this law? Why are they doing it? When are they doing it? 

Once we establish that it is the junior people who are doing it then we start with that category. If we establish it is the seniors, we could design measures to handle them. Obviously there are people who use their vehicles very well and those people could be rewarded so that it is not seen as a blank circular. We should handle both the use and abuse of government vehicles.

I remember this morning I wrote a letter in response to one that appeared in the newspapers. Somebody was – I think it was Kevin O’Connor and Richard Kavuma – they wrote long articles about abuse of vehicles. My suggestion to them was that there is the Parliamentary Centre concerning APNAC (African Parliamentary Network Against Corruption and Transparency International). Is it possible for people to volunteer and carry out research? We can work with the Government if they are interested but we can also do it on our own. Because if we could save this money, the Government could use it for some other useful service.  

In many countries like Botswana, for instance, you park the car on Friday afternoon, and if you are going to go for an upcountry trip you use fuel that has a different colour and those laws are obeyed. Why can they not be obeyed here if they can work elsewhere? These are African countries, what is so special about Uganda?  

Finally, about the National Records and Archives Act, the committee is recommending that the Act should be implemented. This Act was passed in 2001. I have my concerns because the Act that we are implementing was already irrelevant at the time we were implementing it. We were assuming that the records we are going to have are these big records, which are typed or even handwritten. My suggestion is that this Act should actually be revised to take care of modern changes that are taking place. 

Therefore, when you think of building a big repository for these records and archives, then you must adjust accordingly. Because if the records are decentralized on the servers, you can conserve them so that you just keep them on soft copies. 

Therefore, the proposed structure that you want to build will not be big. It could be a small one with all these records, because on a compact disk you can put 21 books of the encyclopaedia. This means we can save a lot of money if we build a modern archive. We need to keep records on servers, which are on computers. What we need to do is to find a way of modernising them so that we can reach them as quickly as possible. If we are to continue doing business, there is no way we can run this country by doing business as usual. We have to modernise. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will be very brief. Actually, I rise to duplicate an anomalous situation pertaining to the office of the Vice President. This is item 2.3.1 on page 8.

As a member of the Committee on Foreign and Presidential Affairs, this office of the Vice President came up. I am surprised to note that it keeps re-appearing under the Public Service Commission. If –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the Public Service is supposed to find accommodation and government buildings are being handled by the Ministry.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My biggest concern is that the matter has not been properly handled under Public Service. I noted this to his senior colleague the President, and the matter is separately handled under State House. We have separate votes, so really to bring down the office of the Vice President to be considered like a ministry; notwithstanding the explanation, I say no.

As the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Presidential Affairs, we have actually looked into the matter. On Thursday we had the opportunity of meeting with the head of state. We told him that the Vice Presidency is being marginalized in terms of resources, powers and eventually in terms of performance. Why are we taking that position? 

Mr Chairman, for four years we have not been able to find suitable accommodation for the No. 2 person in the country. That is why I am saying we should not really take it as part of this particular commission. We should take it where it really belongs, that is State House. State House should be the one to look for accommodation for the No. 2 person in the country.  

On several occasions proposals have come up. At one time we came up with a proposal on Mbuya and Shs 0.9 billion was proposed; it fell apart. On another occasion, Nakasero, again Shs 1.2 billion was proposed; it fell apart. At the moment we are considering putting up a State House at the cost of Shs 48 billion. Really, prior to spending Shs 48 billion, can we not consider just Shs 1 billion to acquire an existing property for proper residence for the No. 2 person in the country? (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But then there is a contradiction, honourable member. If you think this is misplaced and it is in the wrong ministry, why do you not wait to discuss it under the proper Vote of State House? If you think it is misplaced here, ignore it.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was just bringing it to the attention of my colleagues that this matter has been discussed by the appropriate committee. I think it is superfluous for us to look at it in this particular domicile where it is now, which cannot handle the matter. 

Mr Chairman, without jumping the queue, I would suggest that this matter be considered under this particular committee. It should go where it belongs, that is State House. I am saying this again and I am yet to –(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. I think there is a misunderstanding about the roles of the Ministries. Each ministry has a mandate, and this is the mandate for the Ministry of Public Service. Even if the matter concerns the President, that ministry handles that matter. 

Let me give you an example. I clear people who are traveling, but I also clear the travel of His Excellency the President, yet he is my boss. The point of having one location, which handles all the issues, is that it is neater and it is one center where all those related activities take place. So, I do not appreciate the point the honourable member is making. It is not the location, which has caused the problem, but it must be another problem.  

With regard to his other statements, they will be answered elsewhere because they do not belong in today’s discussion. 

I thank him, and I would like to remind him of Article 108 of the Constitution where the functions of the Vice President are clearly stated. I also refer him to Article 112 where it says that the Vice President chairs meetings when the President is not there.  

I refer him to Article 108 where it says that the Vice President is given assignments by His Excellency the President. And also, he or she can take over – the Lord forbid - should the President be impeached or should the President die. All those are clearly stated in our Constitution. This is much ado about little. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. You have introduced a topic, which I was really hesitant to touch. You have mentioned statements made elsewhere, which you will answer at an appropriate time. Now that you have pre-empted a situation, why don’t I come out in the open and say exactly what I tried to say elsewhere? 

It is true, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, that on Thursday we met with the Head of State in Soroti State House Lodge. I asked him, “Mr President, why are you marginalizing the Office of the Vice Presidency in performance, in duties, in resources and even in matters of protocol? For instance, in the august House the Leader of Government Business is a Prime Minister and yet the Vice President, who is senior to him, is also a member of the august House. Now, who takes precedence in the august House? 

Mr President, why don’t you re-adjust their duties so that the Vice President is the Leader of Government Business? For day-to-day issues, the Prime Minister shall remain the Leader of Government Business but substantively it shall be the Vice President who will be the Leader of Government Business in the House. For day-to-day administration or management of Parliamentary Affairs, the Prime Minister shall act on his behalf.” 

That is the statement my senior colleague was referring to. I know it was reflected in the media, but now you have given me the opportunity to explain. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. I would like to be clarified about whether or not hon. Aggrey Awori is trying to take over the functions of the President of assigning duties to ministers?

MR AWORI: At the moment I am not, but I have every intention -(Laughter). For the information of my honourable colleague, definitely I have tried it before and I am still trying to be head of state, so that I can do carry out these functions the way they are supposed to be done: correctly! On that note, Mr Chairman, I leave the Floor.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort-Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work they have done. 

I would like to comment on pensions. It is alarming that there is lack of Shs 265 billion, which is due to the pensioners. These people are soon dying, why should they be neglected? I can see the people sitting on the front bench there, a good number of them are grey-haired and I think it is important that they consider the pensioners.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Pensions. She is doing a good job, but I feel that she is being neglected; she cannot get what she wants. She cannot get the money to pay the pensioners. That is terrible! Pensioners suffer a lot. Pensioners come from upcountry, they come and stay in Kampala and spend a lot of money, and some of them get sick here. I do not know whether there is a proper policy for pensioners. 

I would like to suggest that there should be a mobile group to go and look into the matters of pensioners in the whole of Uganda, instead of them coming to Kampala here and spending a lot of money. (Applause)

Mr Chairman, another issue I want to raise is about teachers. Yes, teachers are many, and if you look at the total amount of money that they get from the resource envelope, it is a lot of money. But individually the money they get is little.  

The nurses get a lunch allowance, why can the teachers also not get lunch allowance? They work from morning until evening. I want to suggest that this question of the resource envelope be looked into. It should not be used as an excuse not to give these teachers lunch allowances. If salaries cannot be increased, let them get something to cover their lunch.

Mr Chairman, there is the issue of brain drain. There are many qualified people here in Uganda and they are needed here, for example, doctors. You find that people go to South Africa to be treated by our own doctors who have gone there to seek greener pastures. 

I would like to suggest that means and ways be found of retaining those doctors in our country. It is the duty of Public Service to see to it that people who are highly qualified are retained in Uganda. Now we are training for other countries, instead of training for our country. In fact, those who should go abroad should be the surplus of the manpower we have here. Only those we do not need should go. Why should our qualified manpower go to do kyeyo outside? They should be retained here.

Mr Chairman, I would like to talk about another issue, that is seminars. I have said it time and again that seminars are not well coordinated here in Uganda, and this has been mentioned in this report. It has been mentioned clearly that seminars are taking a lot of the time of our people and instead of concentrating on their duties, they are concentrating on seminars.  

I suggest that the seminars be consolidated and carried out within a given time, rather than being spread throughout the year and in the end the performance of these officers is not good at all.  

I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity and I would like to appeal to the Minister concerned to do the needful. Thank you.

MR LOKERIS APARITE (Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Chairman. My contribution is about page 9 of the report where the committee talked about teachers’ salaries. It so happens that when you go to the field, all grades of teachers earn the same salary. When you ask from the Ministry of Education, most times they say it is Public Service that does not assist them in scaling the salaries of these fellows. So, I really appeal that these people be assisted so that there is a difference in their salaries.

On holding posts, you find that a Grade III teacher is the headmaster of a school and a Grade V holder is a teacher. At the end of a number of years, this Grade III teacher does not even go for upgrading and he or she continues heading the school when others who are more qualified are teaching. So, I think that should also be looked into.

My friend from Fort-Portal Municipality mentioned something about workshops. I have seen officials from districts come to Kampala here to attend workshops. A person attends five workshops without even delegating some of them. At the end of the day, he has not even attended any workshop, but he goes in the evening to collect all the allowances, on top of what he has got from the district. So, it is very unfair. If we could try to harmonize and plan for these workshops, I think it would be better.

On unconditional grants, the committee mentions on page 18 that some 18 districts will face a reduction in the grants. I do not know which districts these are and why they have to face the reduction.  

Going to page 28, it is really a common complaint from the local councils in the district that payments for councilors are different from district to district. Why can government not find a way of standardizing the salaries of these councilors or their executives?

On Page 21, there is a point raised about the removal of Assistant RDCs. To me, the problem is between the RDCs and their deputies. Deputies tend to collide with their big men because they stay in the same office. So, you find a deputy may want to take the post of the RDC and vice versa. So, I think both the RDCs and their assistants can go. Thank you very much.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like also to say bravo to the committee, but I would also like to give some comments about value for money.  

Much as we want value for money, we also need a value chain analysis. This value chain analysis gives light on how much we have sunk in and how much we are going to yield. You find that on the Millennium Challenge Account they need the results of what was put in, but all the ministries do not care about this. 

Consider monitoring, for instance. On projects in districts, instead of spending money on Assistant RDCs we could strengthen the Inspectorate of Government, the Inspectors of Schools, as it used to be originally. We should strengthen them so that the people who will do the job will be very knowledgeable, so that we can get very good results. As we know, all the money in the local governments comes from the center, actually 90 percent, but the utilization and output are not clear.

I would like to concur with the committee about the qualification of LC chairmen. Today we need to have knowledge as a base to give very good accountability of what we are doing. We know that the level of education has increased in percentage and because of lack of employment, some people are joining these LCs. But when these councils are headed by chairpersons who have not gone to school and do not have good qualifications, they tend to be manipulated by these people who have knowledge, and performance becomes poor.

On the monitoring section of local governments and capacity building, I think we need to have a situation analysis. In most cases, after doing all these activities the reports have not been coming out. So, we cannot make a situation analysis of separate activities and give the results. If we did that, it would give us a way of strategically planning what we are going to do next. But this has not been done in the budgets, and analysis of the performance of the last budget is still wanting.  

I would also like to get clarification, maybe from the Minister of Local Government, on the decline of grants. You find that non-governmental organizations are phasing out in some districts, like Rakai District. These people have put up very good structures, which need to be sustained for some time, but there is no provision because those structures are very expensive to maintain.  

As for collection of revenue from the local people, the income is still down. I would like to know whether there is a provision for this. For instance, in the LGDP you find that the component of road structures is within that and you find -(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I want clarification from hon. Kakooza. Is it not true that Rakai got a lot of help from DANIDA to put up a lot of infrastructure? And is it not also true that the accountability in Rakai District was less than wanting and therefore DANIDA withdrew a lot of that help?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. I would like to inform the honourable member that those are mere allegations. If they were true, the non-governmental organization would not be in the district now. I will inform you that right now, DANIDA has given Shs 400 million to the district for some HIV activities. If there were no accountability, then they would not come back. I think those are allegations.  

What I am trying to put across is that these people sponsor structures for a certain period. Now they are leaving and the local revenue performance is poor, how are these structures going to be sustained? With that, I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The points articulated by hon. Basaliza, about pensions, are very important and we should not take them lightly. There are situations where a person travels from Kaberamaido to Kampala, when the amount of money he is going to spend on transport far exceeds what he is going to collect when he reaches Kampala. 

The end result is the need to think about an appropriate system of government, namely, a federal arrangement. Under a federal arrangement, the given area where that person comes from will have the capacity, autonomy and powers to administer payment to the appropriate person demanding for the money. We should not zigzag into administrative orders, which have no capacity to lead us to anything concrete.  

Mr Chairman, on page 19 the report mentions equalization grants. They say that the allocation criteria for the award of equalization grants are based on two basic parameters, namely: local revenue potential and expenditure needs.  

I would like to challenge the committee to give us an example of an equalization grant, which has been administered. All this we are talking about is a nightmare! In a situation where you have 56 districts, with a good number of them lacking economic viability, how do you administer the equalization grants?  I think one of these days I should become a lecturer on the district arrangement commission, so that I throw light on the phenomenon of decentralization of powers.  

Mr Chairman, the present decentralization order is still miles away from reaching a level of autonomy. Therefore, the best advice I can give the districts right now is that when the time comes, please support a federal arrangement. Within the federal arrangement, you will achieve most of your target demands.  

As we speak now, in a situation where you have 56 districts, with about 20 of them not viable at all under any dimension, how do you administer the equalization grant? The equalization grant phenomenon was engineered for the federal arrangement. In the federal arrangement, assuming you have 15 states and about three are not viable economically, the equalization grant can easily come in to meet the demand. 

In Uganda, we should all support a federal arrangement when the time comes, so that we empower the administrative units accordingly. By the way, when the federal arrangement comes, it does not mean that the districts will die away. The districts, divisions and municipalities would still be required to act as administrative wings, hence enriching the morale of the regions. 

Mr Chairman, right now I will give you a challenge from my own area, Lubaga. Lubaga, which is a division up to now, has no guaranteed capacity to repair roads. Whenever there is an emergency, we all run to the center. This means the center is the source of power. So, no matter how much we sing about decentralization, the present decentralization order still lacks certain ingredients capable of enabling those in power to administer the real power. Only a federal arrangement can do that.  

On Wankulukuku road, where I live - and I want to conclude with this example - one would assume that I live on an island. Within the Wankulukuku area you have about 15 very big industries like Kobil, Petro, Sembule and the World Food Programme. That road is impassable and yet it is supposed to serve industries, which create an impact on the Consolidated Fund. What sort of arrangement is that, which does not know that the taxpayers in Wankulukuku area should be catered for because they have something economically viable? Only the federal phenomenon could ensure that areas in Wankulukuku can benefit -(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Chairman, is hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in order to derail this House from the accepted laws of this country? This country is being governed under the current decentralized situation, but he is now telling us that we should ignore all those and start clamouring for something, which will come tomorrow or the other day? I think the people of Bulamogi voted for me to come here and make sure that we partake of the current fruits available at the Central Government.

That is why, Mr Chairman, everyday I stand up here and say the way forward is logical decentralisation; other things will come. Let them come, but it is not quite correct for somebody who is getting a highway road – the Japanese grant is now doing a road in Lubaga North - but he is now telling the people of Bulamogi to hang! That we should just keep quiet and pray for no district? That we wait for Busoga to be reinstated! Yes, we can clamour for that but what is available now is a system of logical decentralisation. 

Logical decentralisation is actually making sure everybody partakes of what is available. Is he in order to stop us from asking for what is our right and to tell us, “You shut up, go and starve!” Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, as you may remember, I have already made an appeal on your behalf that the issue of Bulamogi be considered and a special district be granted. (Applause). I think the front bench took it up and they are dealing with it. As for the hon. Member for Lubaga South, I think he is rehearsing for the speech he will make when we are reviewing the Constitution. (Laughter).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. In conclusion – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think you have finished.

MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie county, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like also to thank the committee for this precise report. 

Briefly, when we come to page 3 of this report, a lot is mentioned about value for money and that the Ministry seems to have ignored the need for accountability and respect for section 6(2) of the Budget Act. I would like to ask the chairperson and the committee: having found this and yet there were guidelines, which were given by the Ministry of Finance on how policy statements should be developed for this financial year, why did the committee not stay the report or else subject the Ministry of Public Service to penalties? 

Even in this report the Ministry of Local Government is mentioned for having not respected that. There was enough cause for the committee to stay this report. Why did you not do that? Now you are putting Parliament into a situation where you cannot know whether you did what we delegated you as a committee to do for us. I would go ahead to say that Parliament has all the reasons to stay this report until this is fulfilled. If there is need to sympathize, honourable members, then we must put it very strongly that the next financial year, 2004/2005, there will not be passing of any budget of these ministries.

Two, when you look at page 4, payment of salaries: The first statement says clearly that salaries are paid by the 28th day of every month. Yet it is also mentioned here that it is one of the setbacks of this exercise. Could I be clarified, Mr Chairman, whether it is true that these people get money on the 28th and yet at the same time you say there are these bottlenecks? 

I also want the chairperson or the Minister to give me information: what are the districts, which have performed badly in implementing this policy, and which ones are doing something? Because if we took all the districts as having this problem, I do not think the problems faced by Kampala are those we face in Kotido.

Mr Chairman, page 6, paragraph two, the last sentence, talks of Shs 15 million budgeted to improve salaries of public officers. I see this is quite amorphous. I would have liked a situation where the categories of the public officers who are supposed to benefit is spelt out clearly in this report so as to give me and Parliament the true picture of how this is going to improve the salaries of public officers. And, for which scales is this going to be implemented?

Mr Chairman, page 8, on the Vice-President’s housing complex. This has been handled for many years. I have been a Member of the Public Service and Local Governments Committee in the financial years in the first and second sessions. This topic has always been here and we all know the financial implications of this kind of delay. A lot of money and time are being wasted. I am of the opinion that Parliament, in its wisdom of performing its oversight role, should institute a Parliamentary sub-committee to look at this issue critically, so that time is not wasted. 

We could say that the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee should handle it, or that of Public Service should handle it, but all these committees are not producing tangible results.

On page 12, Mr Chairman, in the first paragraph there is a statement, which reads that; “it appears that some polices and activities of the Ministry of Public Service and those of the Public Service Commission are interrelated”. “It appears”; that alone does not give me the full picture. It appears as if the committee wants to report that they are operating on hearsay, and yet it must clearly state the facts. Is it true that the Ministry of Public Service is doing the same thing as Public Service Commission? If so, Parliament should have been very clearly given the facts along that line.

Lastly, Mr Chairman, on page 19, is the equalization grants. The purpose of putting equalization up grants was to bring the low performing districts or the least performing districts to the national standards. I want the Minister to clarify to me: what is the measurable performance of these grants? What is the level of the districts, which have been receiving the grants since the time we implemented the granting of equalization grants? Which districts are tending towards the national level and which ones are not? Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MRS LUMUMBA KASULE (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. I want to turn to page 9, No. 4. The Committee is telling us of a problem between a classroom teacher and a head teacher. There is still a problem of the heads of departments in the districts who are supposed to supervise staff who get their salaries direct from the center. You find the head teacher is getting about Shs 800,000 but he is being supervised by the DEO who gets Shs 500,000! So the boss gets less money. There is a problem; so I suggest that instead of looking at the classroom teacher and the head teacher, let us look at the Civil Service.  

Number 7 still on the same page, Mr Chairman; they are talking about the issue of –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But didn’t you take note of the point - I think we heard it also in the other committee when you we were submitting for the Ministry of Education - the problem that primary teachers have no promotional ladders, they just stay teachers for years whereas in the Civil Service one moves from Executive, Principal and so forth; from Constable to Sergeant. That is also a point you have to take into account.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. According to this report, they have brought it out again in No. 7. 

I want to give an example. You find in the Civil Service that teachers constitute a big number of the servants but we have been marginalised for that long. I want to inform members that I am also a teacher – somebody is saying “former”, but I teach every weekend. So -(Interjections)- the Minister is here; I can clarify, if there is a pay roll for those who teach only on weekends. 

The point I want to bring out is that we have been marginalized for long. When you look at nursing assistants, nursing aides, medical assistants, and doctors, you can compare. You find that a licensed teacher carries the title of “teacher”, and the graduate teachers are also “teachers”. Please, I request the Ministry of Public Service to look into it. It is an urgent issue; it may sound small to those who are not teachers, but to us who are teachers; it is a big issue.  

Mr Chairman, on the same page 9, when we are talking of the maximum capacity of vehicles for entitled officers being 3,000cc, let us also have a minimum because sometimes you find some small vehicles with very small capacities also carrying ministry registration numbers. I would suggest that we do not go for these cheap vehicles - the reconditioned vehicles. Let us leave those to individuals but not ministries.

I want to inform the Ministry of Public Service that there is a problem in the districts. You find the district has employed an officer, who is given an appointment letter specifying the kind of duties he/she is supposed to do. But because there are some ministries or statutory bodies in the center that do not have structures that go down to the districts; they end up giving additional work to people who have been employed by the districts, without the consent of the employer in the district. So when things go wrong, if the officer does not do the work that he has been assigned by some statutory body or ministry at the center properly, it ends up being a problem. The center demands interdiction or expulsion of that person, yet that person’s appointment letter did not specify such duty.  

Let me give an example, this issue where the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity has been descending on the districts to expel the Chief Administrative Officers or their Deputies who did not handle well the money from the Electoral Commission, is a problem. These people were employed by the district and given appointment letters by the districts specifying what they are supposed to do, minus the issue of elections. The Electoral Commission went and looked for people in the district who could do that work and they identified say the Deputy CAO. Then you find that the Deputy CAO misappropriated funds from the Electoral Commission. When the IGG went down to do his work, they recommended that these people should be interdicted or expelled. 

But how can the district do that yet when they were appointing these people, that was not part of the work they were supposed to do? So, Public Service, I would request, please, step in, because the center, the Ministry of Finance is punishing the district yet it is not the district that appointed that person to do that work. Assuming the district interdicted or expelled that person and this person is smart in court and says this is my letter the work of the Electoral Commission was not contained there? I request the Ministry of Finance; before you look into that, do not punish any district.

Somebody says money belongs to the Government, but that is not part of the duty the officer was appointed to do. In fact for us in Bugiri, we are saying, what you should do since you are bigger than the districts is; why do you not come and arrest that person at the center, not at the district? Because if the district does it, it will be the burden of the district.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way.  To the best of my understanding, if one is interviewed by the District Service Commission and appointed, in the appointment letter, or the responsibilities that person will have to carry out, are outlined. They also state that “any other duties that you may be requested to do”. So, that falls in the same category. Thank you.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Chairman, that phrase “any other duty as assigned by whoever” applies to either the center or the district that has employed you. And if you are signing it and this - Mr Chairman, I beg to be understood. 

The Electoral Commission gave this additional role to the officers without informing the District Service Commission. So, there is no written document between the District Service Commission and the officer. We should understand law and be very smart, so that people do not outsmart us. My suggestion is, let the center, which gave those people the additional role, the statutory body that signed the agreement with that officer, go and arrest that person. Do not let the district do it because when that person takes the district to court, it will not be the center to pay, it will be the district, and districts have had such problems.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is time honourable member.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much.

PROF. LATIGO OGENGA (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for their good work. I will have one point on Public Service and two on Local Government. The one on Public Service is just to illustrate the point about the situation of pensioners.  

Mr Chairman, my old man retired from teaching in 1961 and then some time in the mid 1990s there was a re-organization of the pension files in the Ministry of Education. They looked at his pension number. His name is Cecilio Latigo, Pension number 167 and they said; “with a number like 167, he must be dead”. So they retired his file. When they retired his file, he has never received pension, since 1993.

I have, in my capacity as somebody who is fairly big in the Education Ministry, been pursuing the question of restoring him on the pensions payroll but up to now he has not been restored. Now you can imagine: if in my capacity as Member of Parliament, it is that difficult to put my father back on the pension payroll, what about the so many people who do not have anybody to support them?  

It is a terrible problem because when retrenchment came, there were many teachers who had attained the pension age but because they did not have people within their families to guide them, many of them just sat back and said, “I am waiting for my pension”, and the pension never came. They have no way of claiming –(Interjection)- Many of them are still alive. There must be some way of helping these people so that they really enjoy the little money that is due to them. And we must remember that they are really the foundation of what we are now. If there was any way, they should be paid even a lot more pension, or a fresh gratuity, to recognize the good work they did.

When we were discussing the policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the issue of capacity came in, in respect to fiscal decentralization. The matter was referred to the time when we would be debating the issue of Local Government.  

There is a big problem in Local Government, particularly in those districts like Mbarara where the leaders are powerful, well educated and rich. They are not fighting to create a niche for themselves. They have used the opportunity of decentralisation to build their districts but there are many districts out there, which because of the kind of academic qualification we have attached to such a big responsibility, have leaders who are lowly qualified and have very limited exposure outside of their districts. Therefore, their value judgment is quite low. 

Like in my district of Pader, you will find that we have big problems. If you go to the districts and you look at the appointments to those district bodies like the District Tender Board, the District Public Accounts Committee, you will find – because those ones are not as well regulated as the District Service Commission whose qualifications are very clear and the Public Service Commission follows on the people who should be on it.

On those bodies like the District Tender Board, in some of these districts you find people who are primary seven leavers et cetera, and many of them think being a member of the Tender Board is an opportunity “to eat”. You will find that tenders are negotiated in bars. You can now imagine if tenders are to be handled like that and you impose on those districts a situation where they decide what to do with their budgets - it will be an absolute crisis! Therefore, it would be very important that in considering fiscal decentralisation, the qualifications of the district leaders should be a priority.

Secondly, it is important that districts come out with clearly defined development plans that you can use to weigh the performance against what was expected. I think since that there are many others who want to contribute, I would like to thank you for the opportunity.

THE CHAIRMAN: But honourable members, really you saw the Votes. They are 72 and you need the Minister to reply. But let us get hon. Nyendwoha, then the Youth Representative, Northern and we see how to proceed. Maybe I would pick on two more because the Ministers are two, they have to reply and we have 74 Votes to consider.

MR NYENDWOHA MUTITI (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report. My concern is No. 7. It is not true that there are no promotional posts within the teaching profession. There is some amount of promotion in the teaching profession. It is quite unfortunate that the committee is not aware of this.

In teacher education schools we have senior tutors, deputy principals and then principal tutors. The senior tutors and principal tutors, those are the classroom teachers. Then when we go to National Teachers’ Colleges, we also hear –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think they are asking about primary schools.

MR NYENDWOHA MUTITI: It does not say primary here, it says, teaching profession. So, in National Teachers’ Colleges we have those promotions in the teaching profession because we have senior lecturers and principal lectures -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nyendwoha, to be fair –(Interruption)

MR NYENDWOHA: Mr Chairman, what I am saying -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, to be fair I think these people were concerned mainly with the majority of the teachers in primary schools. Do we have these promotional ladders there?

MR NYENDWOHA: Mr Chairman, I was coming to that point. What I should say is that these professional ladders should be uniform. They should be spread to secondary schools and primary schools. It is not proper only to have them in teacher education schools.  

Secondly, point No. 6 is that the salary scale for the entire Public Service should be reviewed. The salary scale we have today was adopted in 1976 by the then Amin Government. The subsequent Governments have not reviewed this, -(Interjection)- I will come to that, excuse me. Other Governments have not reviewed this salary scale. What has been done is a percentage increment every year – of 10 percent. It does not change the scale; that is why you see a headmaster Grade I, in primary school, gets a scale of U3 - more than even a District Education Officer. A head master Grade II in the primary school gets U4 - more than Assistant Inspector of schools.

So, these anomalies can only be corrected if there is an overhaul of an entire salary structure of Public Service. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  (Applause).

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I would like to join the rest to thank the committee for the very good work. I have about three issues to address.  

The first one is that recently I was very perturbed by my constituency on the issues of unemployment. So, I took the advantage to go through the opportunities that exist in government departments, to find where young people could be advised to look for jobs. I was perplexed to find out that the Public Service Commission and the Ministry are among the agencies that are promoting unemployment in this country. Mr Chairman, I will only deal with one thing I found out in the Ministry of Gender. I found 36 vacant posts, which have existed in the Ministry for over two years. 

There are several other ministries in which I also found vacancies. I will mention them. The post for Commissioner for Youth is vacant, Principal Youth Officer I is vacant, Principal Economist is vacant, Principal Industrial Relations Officer I is vacant, Principal Women Development Officer is vacant, Principal Gender Officer is vacant, Principal Personal Secretary II is vacant, Senior General Prosecution Officer I is vacant, Senior Personal Secretary V is vacant, Personal Secretary IX is vacant, Stenography Secretary X is vacant, and Office Typist III is vacant. These are about 36 jobs in one ministry. I have just mentioned one Ministry. I have other ministries as well.

Mr Chairman, what is the implication of these vacancies in terms of the performance of these ministries, leave alone the unemployment matter? So, the Ministry of Public Service must wake up and speed up the process of recruitment. They should really tell us what the problem is such that if there is a legal lacuna we help them to punch this problem out and we get –(Interruption)

MR MADADA: The information I would like to give to my colleague is that the Ministry of Public Service is interested in filling a number of these posts but the Ministry of Finance is really tightfisted. I want to note here that in this budget, 28 districts have lost part of the unconditional grant from which they are supposed to pay workers. That means that much as they would have loved to have people employed, the Ministry of Finance has not rated the Ministry of Public Service as important enough; although we know that in implementing the Government plans, the Ministry of Public Service is very important.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you for that information. Mr Chairman, then we should stop this habit of chasing rainbows. If we cannot put people in these vacant posts, let us dissolve these structures and come out with a concise structure, which we can implement and put people to work there.

The other aspect, which I mentioned last year when we were considering the policy statement of the Ministry of Public Service, is this question of experience and age. I would like to know whether it is a provision of law or a policy where for one to get certain jobs in this country, he/she must be of a certain age or must have certain experience. 

We have people who have got lots of experience in running down government departments. You might find a person who has just finished running down, for example the Railways Corporation, but because he has a huge curriculum vitae (CV) and there is a job in the Ministry of Public Service; he will present his CV and his experience and he will scoop up the job. There are young men who have gone to school and qualified but because they lack the experience, they would not get that job. 

So, it is my humble prayer to the Public Service that really, there must be certain positions where experience should be waived. We have tried to even go slightly beyond what we are doing normally, to beat the requirements of the Ministry of Public Service. We get youths and place them to do some volunteer work in government departments and NGOs, but we have met stiff resistance in government departments! And this is just to place young people to do volunteer work so that they can acquire experience. What is this, really? 

Mr Chairman, the ground is not leveled. As a Member of the Standing Committee in charge of Equal Opportunities, this is a serious matter. And we are considering what legal action to take as young people, because our rights are being infringed upon.  

Finally, to allude to the point, which was raised by Dr Nkuuhe, the issue of utilising Information Communication Technology (ICT) is very important. Five years from now, when I leave this House, I must build another room for storing policy statements and documents from Parliament. There are too many books that we receive and we would not even need them in our houses. Why can the Government departments, starting with even Parliament, not have these websites for the Ministries? Some of these policy statements, which take a lot of money to print and bind, could be deposited on the websites of the Ministry. The Member of Parliament would go and access them from the website. We would have saved a lot of resources.

So, I think we should try to exploit the available opportunities to save resources. The world is now speaking the digital language and those who cannot afford to speak the digital language must give way to those who can speak it. I thank you so much. But before I sit down I would like to give my –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. While I appreciate his advice for having most of these government documents meant for us posted on the website, I would like to remind him that not everyone has a computer in his bedroom like him and maybe some of the people here. So, until all the offices here have computers and the skills, it may be very difficult.

MR KIDEGA: Mr Chairman, I had not yet sat down actually. The thing is, all Members of Parliament were given an opportunity to become computer-friendly. We were even availed e-mail addresses.  We have a library, which is very computerised. This is a question of saving resources. I thank you so much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us end with hon. Sebalu, then the Ministers can reply.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the good work. I am just putting my emphasis on one point on page 16, where we talk of “Operationalisation of the new town councils.” 

I would like to find out from the committee - because sometime back 11 districts were created, that includes Wakiso District - as per the arrangement for them. Those town councils that are at the headquarters of the district are supposed to automatically assume a town council status. Despite the fact that they assumed town council status, they have not held elections in these town councils. It is creating a lot of problems because other town councils that were created, for instance Kiira in Wakiso District, which already had their leaders, they only transformed. And they are now benefiting from all that goes on. 

But you find that councils like Wakiso Town Council, which automatically became one when the district assumed that status, has not had any election and they do not have any leaders. So, what is the fate of those town councils? -(Interruption) (Mr Gagawala rose_) Is Bulamogi a town council? You have relegated it to a town council now? (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I would like to give some information to hon. Mike Sebalu, that actually Kaliro Town Council was supposed to be inaugurated but up to now not a single shilling has arrived there, and yet we never clamored for it. We already knew that automatically when you become a district this would be just common sense. But even that one is not there. 

Mr Chairman, I have got a letter, which I will ask the person holding the Floor to surrender. This is a petition from Kamuli District, that the SFG account, local government development project’s account, and the PHC account, have been defiled by the district leadership. These are some of the reasons. This is a councilor from Kamuli in Namasagali sub-county, who is complaining of total irregularity of operating the accounts of Kamuli District, contrary to the laws of this Republic. 

I would like this to be surrendered so that at least there is some evidence that there is something going wrong in Kamuli. That is one of the reasons why I am clamoring here for this issue, Mr Chairman.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, for that information. Mr Chairman, I would like to request the Ministry of Local Government to come out clearly and state the position of these towns, which were supposed to assume a town council status when the new districts were created. They want to know the fate of their leadership because it is creating a lot of anxiety. So, a timetable should be given so that the Electoral Commission can come out and organise elections for these town councils.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Okumu-Ringa): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On behalf of my senior colleague the Third Deputy Prime Minister, my colleague the Minister responsible for Pensions, and the entire staff of the Ministry of Public Service, allow me to thank the committee for the work well done, and my colleagues for their contributions during this debate. I appreciate the concerns expressed and I will touch on some of the major issues.  

Indeed the report highlighted the issue of the co-ordination role of the Ministry of Public Service, and I would like to assure honourable members that that role will continue to be strengthened, recognised and respected by the respective ministries. 

The appointment of the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Chairman, I think is a recognition of the importance of the Ministry of Public Service and we have a Third Deputy Prime Minister and a Minister responsible for Public Service. We in the Ministry of Public Service have noted the important role of the Ministry in the area of service delivery and we shall continue to work at inter-ministerial level to ensure that this role is strengthened. 

The committee raised the issue of payment of salaries and indeed some of you raised this issue again. I would like to conform that it has been the wish of my ministry and indeed of government to ensure that salaries are paid within the stipulated timeframe of the 28th of every month. In certain ministries, this has been respected, and even at district level this is being respected.

The problem we have experienced is the transfer of funds to the various district headquarters. For example, my ministry ensures that pay change reports are received from the districts by the 15th of every month. Pay change reports ensure that payrolls are made on time to enable salaries to be paid on time. But we have had problems of transferability of funds from the banks in Kampala to the districts. Some of these problems are also exaggerated at the district level, particularly by the CAOs. This could be looked into. 

The committee and my colleagues raised the issue of decentralisation of the payroll. Indeed, payroll has been decentralized, particularly with Rakai District. Rakai District has been a district, which we use as a model and we have learnt some lessons from impediments we experience there. We are using those impediments to streamline areas where we can have smooth decentralisation of the payroll. As you recall, we have also tried our best to ensure that all the districts have their financial officers relating well with the personnel officers to ensure that there are no discrepancies. 

You have also raised the issue of pay reform as a means to enhance payments of civil servants. Indeed, some members have raised the issue that as a ministry we have not come up with a new salary structure. It was hon. Nyendwoha who stated that the last salary structure review was during Amin’s time. I would like to inform you, Mr Chairman and the House that my ministry has worked consistently with the relevant ministries at inter-ministerial level, and we have produced what we call a single spine pay structure.

A new structure means that all civil servants will have their salaries and pay structures within a single spine. This is as opposed to the multiple structures where the teachers had their own pay structures, and the medical staff had their own pay structures, for example. This has been harmonised and Cabinet approved this single spine pay structure. It is being implemented with effect from the 1st of this financial year. Circular instructions from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry to all accounting officers, including those at the district level, were issued to implement the single spine pay structure.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like the Minister to clarify because according to that circular it happens that a primary school teacher has had his/her salary increased and then the secondary teacher had some of his salary removed. So, I would like him to clarify because the primary teachers have for long been yearning for increment, but the secondary teachers are now complaining. 

For example, when we get U4, that is a graduate teacher’s scale - he has been getting Shs 420,000 per month but now he has been brought down to Shs 398,000. Could he clarify on the discrepancy, because some money has been removed from secondary teachers. Is it to go to primary teachers? Thank you.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank my colleague for raising the issue. That is a misconception in the sense that what we have is Circular Standing Instruction No. 2 of 2003. It clearly stipulates that salaries, which have been verified and re-aligned to be on a single spine structure, will take care of all interests. 

In other words, even the constitutional provision is such that if you are having your pay of for example Shs 200,000, if there is any change, you are not supposed to be denied your pay. So, all those who are having their current salaries, even if the salaries are re-aligned into the single spine, they will not be disadvantaged. But a person who is being recruited afresh into the service will also fit within the single spine salary structure by taking into account either the entry point or the middle point, depending on the qualification and the various jobs, which have been evaluated. 

So, realising that we may have some of these anomalies, my ministry has instituted what we call the review committee, headed by the Director HRM and together with competent staff, this more or less inter-ministerial structure will take into account all complaints. Be they from the Health Service Commission or the Local Government, they will be explored so that where there are anomalies these should be addressed without giving undue problems to the office holders.

In this aspect, Mr Chairman, we have continued to interface with the Ministry of Finance to ensure that every financial year we have additional financial allocations to improve our pay structure. We still believe that the Public Service is not well remunerated, but we are working towards that level and the Minister of Finance - I am happy - has taken note of that.

Members have also raised the issue of vehicles for political leaders and entitled officers. Indeed, the chairman of the committee on page 6 raised this issue. My ministry has come up with a new circular –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, the mention of vehicles for political leaders gives me an opportunity to seek clarification from the Minister. Why do all the Ministers in Government have government vehicles, except the Minister of State for Disability? I wrote to the Minister last year and he promised that by November 2002, the Minister of State for Disability would have an official vehicle. But up to now there is no official vehicle for the Minister of State for Disability. 

Indeed the vehicle the Minister is using is a project vehicle. It is one intended for community-based rehabilitation and the funders of that project are in Kampala. They asked me “Honourable, what are we going to do? The vehicle is already getting very old. We want to replace the vehicle. But how can we replace a vehicle if the new vehicle is going to be given to the Minister of State for Disability?” Why can the Government not give a vehicle to the Minister of State for Disability? Could the Minister tell the House whether the intention of government is to marginalise disabled people? Thank you.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to recognise the concern of my colleague hon. Mwandha. Indeed, in the last financial year hon. Mwandha raised the issue of vehicles for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. And within the resource constraint we managed to provide one vehicle. We promised that additional vehicles would be provided when funds become available. 

It is still the commitment of government that all ministers will be provided with appropriate means of transport so that they may discharge their duties. Your concerns have been noted. We shall consult and see what should be done. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I think the honourable minister should treat this matter as a serious one. The donor will not provide new vehicles for the project, unless and until government has taken that vehicle away from the Minister of State for Disability and passed it over to the project so that we get newer vehicles for the CBR programme. 

The Minister seems to say, “Well, when we get money we shall…” And after all, why should government provide an old vehicle, which breaks down from time to time to a person who is disabled and give brand new Intercoolers to ministers, who if they had problems could find alternative ways from trouble? Is this fair? (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: But, honourable members, has the point not been made? The seriousness of the matter - has it not been noted? Therefore, we shall consistently follow it up rather than generate another debate. Maybe in a fortnight’s time we shall check on it. Let us proceed.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Once again allow me to reassure my colleague hon. Mwandha that his concern is noted and we shall try our best to consult with the Ministry –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have said we shall check on this fortnightly. So, let us proceed to another subject.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My ministry has decentralised the procurement of vehicles. I think this should be noted. For us as a ministry we shall always co-ordinate with the responsible ministries to ensure that such are provided. So, this is additional assurance to my colleague.

Since we are dealing with this ministry, my colleague the Member of Parliament for Youths raised broad issues regarding vacancies available in the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development. As a principle, we do not object to filling of existing posts because my ministry, within the financial framework in a budget, takes care of all organisational structures within a ministry. So, it is incumbent upon the Ministry responsible to declare vacant posts. Consequently, such posts would be advertised by the Public Service Commission for filling. 

The Ministry of Finance, every financial year, provides funds for existing posts. But if there are new posts to be created, then my ministry takes it up with the relevant ministries or departments. When such posts are created we discuss with the Ministry of Finance to provide funds.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and the honourable minister for giving way. Is the Minister not aware that those posts or vacancies exist in that ministry, or is the Ministry not aware that in teaching service, especially in secondary schools, we are lacking teachers and yet teachers are floating on the streets of Kampala? I am informed that there are 7,000 vacancies in the teaching profession. 

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Byabagambi for that concern. It is true that there are teaching vacancies in primary and secondary schools. In this financial year, the Ministry of Public service, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education discussed and agreed on a way forward. In the last discussions of the budget of Social Services, these issues were exhaustively discussed. We have harmonized the position that 627 teachers in secondary or tertiary institutions be recruited this financial year, and the Ministry of Finance has conceded it.  

We have agreed that the upper ceiling for primary teachers will be 132,000; now we have about 124,000. So, a gap of about 7,000 or 8,000 will be filled. It is, therefore, incumbent upon all of us here at our constituency levels to ensure that when advertisements are put we encourage our brothers and sisters who are staying in towns to take advantage of these positions. 

Mr Chairman, there are vacant posts in ministries, but it is those ministries to ensure that they are advertised and filled. 

Members raised the issue as to why we always insist on experience. The Public Service Commission does not insist on experience. That is why when vacancies are declared you find many people applying. But at the middle level, indeed experience is sometimes required in order to fill a skill gap. Experience means you are looking for a specific skill to perform a management function. 

Mr Chairman, I have a couple of more points. On pensions, indeed there have been general complaints on pensions. We are interfacing with the Ministry of Finance to try to resolve this problem. We appreciate the suffering of our senior citizens but we are trying our best to bridge this gap. The amount is colossal but we are working to reduce that gap.

There are issues that have been raised with regard to the Public Service Commission Bill. Indeed this is not a new Bill but an amendment Bill. 

There is a misconception that the Public Service Commission exists without a legal framework. That is not correct. The Public Service Commission was there when the 1995 Constitution was promulgated. There is a provision in the Constitution, which preserved existing laws. One of those is the Public Service Act of 1964. So, I would like to assure you that the Public Service (Amendment) Bill is being worked on and assurance has been given. We shall bring it to this House within a period of 90 days.

The issue of the residence for the Vice-President was raised. We in the Ministry believe that when we talk about the residence for the Vice-President we are not attaching it to any division. We are saying we need a residence for a Vice-Presidency and we are working at that. We have had an inter-ministerial committee comprised of my ministry, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, the Office of the President, and Office of the Prime Minister - under the chairpersonship of Prof. Mondo Kagonyera. We hope that within this financial year we shall be able to resolve the issue of an official residence for the Vice-President.  

You have also raised issues about the national records and archives. I agree with you that the National Records and Archives Act was passed in 2000. It was meant to ensure that all our records are kept properly. 

This brings me to the point raised by hon. Johnson Nkuuhe about ICT. The hon. Member of Parliament for Youths also said that our records must be kept properly. We are working closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and our development partners to put up a National Records and Archives Centre. We need it urgently because some of our records are indeed in danger.  So, the Minister of Finance and my ministry we are interfacing on that. 

On ICT and E–governance, indeed I cannot agree with you more, because this Parliament has been modernised. All Members of Parliament have been given an opportunity to train and we are computer literate. I am sure all of us have access to our personal computers. So, we are looking at E-governance in broad terms. My ministry, in conjunction with the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, which is the co-ordinating ministry, are working on the issue of E-governance in order to reduce on the pile of documents - as it has been well articulated by members. 

With that, Mr Chairman, unless I have missed some of the points, I would like to assure my colleagues and indeed the House that my ministry, which is responsible for human resource management and efficient governance, are working hard to ensure that the reform programme in the Public Service is in consonance with the overall aspirations of the Government.  

On behalf of my senior colleague and the entire staff, I would like to assure you that we shall keep updating you on issues relating to E-governance, the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) and the millennium development goals. You are aware that Vision 2025 is going to be implemented by the National Planning Authority. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Would the Minister of Local Government briefly answer the queries raised?

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done and also recognize the contribution made by my team in the Ministry. They have made a recommendable contribution, according to my understanding of what is going on. It is only two months and five days since I went in -(Applause)- I can only depend on the knowledge I have acquired in that period.  

Mr Chairman, there were not too many issues raised on the Floor of the House, which is good. On the other hand, many issues were raised in the text, which I feel should be clarified.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but briefly.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I will be brief, Sir. There are a number of things, which need to be pointed out. The first one is the question of new towns, which have been allowed to operate. Only two towns have been inaugurated, that is Kiira and Hima town councils. Wakiso is part of the problem but it is not really in our hands. It is more in the hands of the Electoral Commission, who must organize elections for the councils. 

We cannot do anything much for the council in place. So, if you send money, the money will go into the parent districts and that could easily be a problem. I would also like to recognise the point raised in the text that we need to equip these councils. Yes, but we also need to do so when they have been elected. At the moment they are not in place because we have nobody to equip them. 

The issue of value for money has been raised both in the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service. I think we should recognise that this is not a failure on our part at the moment. This whole question of value for money, for example, is not in the running of this government, and the Prime Minister has called us to look into this very urgently. So, it is not a weakness so far that is peculiar to the ministries in this report. The peculiar problem is that we have not been able to address it as a government. You would for example be able to say that what Parliament has done is equal to the value of the money that has been spent on it. That means what Parliament has done is more than what we have in place.

Mr Chairman, there was an issue of establishing a national policy on building capacity. This simplifies the matter because all the ministries in the districts have individual problems and mandate. There is no way the Local Government could sit here and do capacity building for all the local governments - that would be assuming too much. For example, the kind of capacity that is required for the medical staff, agricultural staff, public administrators and so forth has to be known. So, there is no way we can have one common policy on capacity building. 

However, as a co-ordinating ministry, certainly we have the responsibility of making sure that we do not duplicate. There are certain skills that can be built across board. That we can do.

The Local Governments Rating Bill, yes, it is certainly coming. There was one little problem about the threshold, which both government and our donors must agree on. I am still consulting with the relevant authorities.

Monitoring and inspection of local governments: This is very crucial. I would like to appeal to members that this inspection should not be restricted to the Government. We, in our own responsibility as Members of Parliament, must be part of the inspection. If we do not do it then we have a problem. 

Mr Chairman, the issue of what is being done in the sub-counties in our constituencies is a matter for all of us. So, the Inspectorate in the Ministry of Local Government is simply an overseer of Inspectorates, because they are individual ones. We want to encourage districts and sub-counties to have their own inspectorates. This is to make sure that value for money is actually achieved.  Otherwise, the job of inspecting cannot be done if it is left only to the Local Government Ministry. I have proved that in the two months I have been in this ministry.

Too many conditionalities, on page 18. Yes, Mr Chairman, some of these conditionalities are actually solicited by Members of Parliament. They go to our donors to demand for certain punishments to be imposed on us because we are not behaving rightly. So when we talk of too many conditionalities, we should know that some of them we solicit for ourselves. I know some of us believe that outsiders can help us do better, especially in governance.

Equalization grant –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I would like the Minister really to substantiate that allegation. It is a very serious allegation. He has said that some Members of this House go to - are they development partners - to say “Look, cut the aid”. The Minister should give us more elaboration on this.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, I would not like to spend too much time substantiating. Hon. Nkuuhe knows that there are people who have actually gone out of this country to argue that we are not practising enough democracy and we should be handled in one way or the other. I do not have names here, and I do not have to substantiate beyond that.

Mr Chairman, on poor planning in the districts, let us all agree here that there is still a problem of planning at the district level. Many of us tend to think of the districts headquarters, but when we are talking of local governments, please, do not forget sub-counties. This is where a lot of activity is taking place. 

How equipped are our sub-counties in planning their activities of the area? How much is being done to transform the economy at that level? The challenge now, as I have seen in this short time. I have been in the Ministry, is not that we do not have money. We have money pouring into the districts but the issue is how that money can transform the village economy. This is what we need to address when we talk of poor planning in districts, especially at the sub-county level. 

We need to have the districts, for example, to see how they could utilise the agricultural and the veterinary officers. The experience I have is that you go to the districts and find there is no programme for these people at the sub-county level. They are there earning money but they are not instruments of transformation. So, that is there - (Interruption)

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, is the honourable minister aware that in many sub-counties and districts there is a problem of under staffing? If he says they are so many people, the committee here has also noted the issue of under-staffing. 

Page 18, the second last sentence says that it was noted after interaction with various districts that this financial year over 28 districts should have their grants reduced. This is likely to have a negative impact on service delivery and payment of wages.  

Could I get a second clarification on whether this reduction of the grant does not contradict Article 193(2) of the Constitution, Schedule 7, which says: “Unconditional grant is the minimum grant to be paid to local governments to run decentralized services, and shall be calculated in the manner specified in the Seventh Schedule to this Constitution”. 

In this financial year this amount is equal to the amount paid to local governments in the preceding year for the same items adjusted. I am also aware that prices have gone up, but we have noted that 28 of these districts have been cut off from their unconditional grant. Did we follow this formula?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, I am ready to grant the honourable colleagues points about unfilled posts. I am talking of the people who are there like veterinary and agricultural officers. I am not talking about empty seats; I am talking of people whom I have found on the ground but not being fully utilized for the transformation of the economies of the rural areas.

Secondly, the grants that are based on the population size: I have been told in my ministry that the population increased. So, if you offer that population the same amount of money as last year, they will have less. It means the budget we are discussing has not offered more money to meet the deficit; so there is a shortage. It is accepted but it cannot be handled administratively. More money must be made available. This is a matter that is being looked into seriously. Otherwise, we are not planning to meet the Constitution but the Constitution is operating in the constraints that we have.  

There is talk that the local governments’ sources of funding are declining. I want that erased. Politics interfered and collection of taxes went down. There is no doubt about that. However, with the political temperature going down, the graduated tax collections are rising. I have here 22 districts, which have shown dramatic raises. In Adjumani in 2000-2001 for example, Shs 47 million was raised, and in 2001-2002 it was Shs 325 million. This is a big rise. The figures are here for Adjumani up to Yumbe. 

So, let us not take it generally. In fact if we had the figures we would see that the situation is changing very fast. Let us not deceive our public by saying that if we do not pay tax all is well because we are dependant on monies from outside. In the short time I have been in the Ministry I have been told if you do not do this, we are not going to do that. There is going to be a period when they will say, “We cannot do it”. If we do not encourage our people to participate in paying taxes, we could get stuck. I find that a very obvious and realistic situation. I hope we do not, as leaders, discourage our people from contributing to their governance in terms of graduated tax payment.  

Finally, let me appeal to leaders in the country and Members of Parliament in particular, that there is so much money that is going to the districts, as the hon. Member for Kamuli was saying. I cannot give a conclusive picture yet but there are some cases where the political barometer is too high in the management of the districts. So money is wasted because some people use their political positions to get officers of a certain kind who may help them, or who may help certain categories of people to access some of these resources. I am being vague deliberately because I need more time. However, I can assure you that political intervention of Members of Parliament in their districts in some cases causes problems. 

I appeal that we share some of these discussions quietly before they become very live political issues. Otherwise, the challenge is very big for our –(member timed out)

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, we are in the Committee of Supply and you have heard the report. First of all I put the question to the motion that we adopt the committee’s report on the policy statements for the Ministry of Public Service and that of Local Government and the related commissions, on the national budget. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Thank you very much the chairperson and members of the committee for the good report. 

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,324,135,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,352,398,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,384,385,000 under Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 62,646,878,000 under Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,503,000,000 under Vote 146 - Public Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a sum of Shs 333,000,000 under Vote 146 - Public Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,327,839,000 under Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,000,000 under Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 542,687,200,000 under Votes 501 to 556 for districts be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004 as presented in the committee report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 178,930,922,000 under Votes 501 to 556 for the districts be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004 as presented in the committee’s report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 25,666,715,000 under votes 751 to 764 for municipal councils be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004 as presented in the committee’s report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,947,819,000 under Votes 751 to 764 for municipal councils be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004 as presented in the committee’s report.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and greed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and passed the following Votes without amendment: 

• Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service 
• Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government 
• Vote 146, Public Service Commission 
• Vote 147, Local Government Service Commission 
• Votes 501 to 556, all the districts of Uganda 
• Votes 571 to 764, all the municipal councils of Uganda.  

I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have been able to supply money to local governments and Public Service and other related commissions expeditiously. Thank you very much. This brings us to end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m. prompt, so that we can deal with other reports. Please, be punctual.

(The House rose 5.32 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 August 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)




