Wednesday, 24 August 2011

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting. I have a few adjustments to make on the Order Paper. After the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has made his presentation, the youth MPs have requested to make a joint presentation. We shall permit them to speak just before the Chairperson of the Committee on ICT comes in to report.

I have a received a petition from civil servants appealing to Parliament to ensure that their salaries are paid before Eid-al-Fitr. I understand Eid will be probably Monday or Tuesday. They have written to me saying that in the past, before Eid-al-Fitr –  I thought that was an important petition; I want to push it to the Ministry of Finance. I think I have discharged my obligation by informing you that the Muslim civil servants are worried that they will not have money to celebrate Eid. I ask the Clerk to pass it on to the Minister of Finance. 

I have also received a request from the Resident District Commissioner of Otuke, inviting Members of Parliament from Abim, Agago, Alebtong, Pader, Kotido, Kaabong, Moroto, Napak, Katakwi, Amuria and Otuke for a meeting about security issues on 7 September, 2011. The actual letters are coming. I thought I should give you notice that they want to have that meeting with you. It will comprise the district security officers, regional police commanders, division commanders and regional internal security officers. The letters are coming. They want Members from those areas to go and discuss some of the issues disturbing the population.

Sometime before we broke off for the committee work, we had agreed to set up a select committee to look at burning issues in the energy sector. I would like to announce the composition of the committee. The terms of reference will be drafted and handed over by the Clerk.

Hon. Jacob Oboth  - chairperson of the committee
Hon. Simon Mulongo -  member 
Hon. Gabriel Ajedra -  member  
Hon. Medard Sseggona -  member 
Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa- member
Hon. Elijah Okupa  - member 
Hon. Andrew Baryayanga - member 
Hon. Betty Amongi - member 

Work should commence when we finish with the budget so that we do not interfere with the work of the sessional committees. The report will be expected within two months from the time you start.

2.56
MRS THEOPISTA NABULYA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to express an issue of national concern in regard to workers’ unionisation. Yesterday, on invitation by one of the general secretaries of the trade unions in Uganda, which is duly registered by the Commissioner of Labour in the name of National Union of Clerical, Commercial and Technical Employees, invited Members of Parliament representing workers to go and talk to workers in Bank of Baroda at exactly 5.00 p.m. Yesterday, at 5.30, I left this House and joined the group. What we found there as workers’ representatives shocked me. The employer locked us outside the bank. He did not want us to go and talk to the workers; he did not allow the workers to join the union and did not want to see any union leader in his premises. 

We persisted and held a meeting with the few because he even went to the extent of closing the workers inside the bank beyond working hours, up to beyond 7.30 p.m. so that they could not come and meet their leaders where they can express their will to join a union of their choice as per the Constitution of this country. We persisted and they opened for one by one of the workers, forcibly asking them to go home. We at least talked to those few who managed to meet us. Others remained upstairs, peeping through the windows with fear. They were not allowed to come out to talk to the workers and the leaders where they, themselves the workers expressed their wish to join the union.

I am so concerned about this because we spend tax payers’ money in this august House. The Constitution of Uganda is very explicit, specifically articles 29 and 40, which give the right to people, especially workers, to join or form unions of their choice. I want to inform this august House and the employers that workers’ rights are human rights. Therefore, no one should impede anyone if one chose to join a union. 

I call upon the employers to adhere to the laws that are made by this august House. Uganda is a member of the United Nations. We all belong to one mother; the United Nations and International Labour Organisation. If an employer comes here and says he does not allow the workers to join a union, it is very absurd. That is what I want to express. We call upon the employers to adhere to the laws of this country. 

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Labour. Is it under labour or finance? 

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Hon. Ssentongo for raising this issue. We are taking it on. We are going to discuss it and at an appropriate time, we shall be informing her.

THE SPEAKER: Informing her or informing the House?

MR MADADA: Informing the House. We are taking it on. We are going to discuss it and at an appropriate time -(Interjections)- we will inform the House. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the minister and Government should take the matter raised by hon. Ssentongo as a very serious one. Informally, we also receive reports from workers, especially from these institutions run by investors, not that we are against investors, but I think there is a lot of mistreatment of workers in these institutions, including sexual harassment. All these claims have been made. Therefore, the Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations should take it as a serious matter and we should give him a timeframe as to when the response should come. 

In the response, the minister should also tell us about the Industrial Court. We used to have an industrial court with a judge, which handled issues of workers. But when the judge, I think Justice Magezi, retired, Government has not appointed a judge to head this court and the court has sort of died. 

Therefore, in the response by the minister, he should tell us whether you think the Industrial Court is a priority and whether you think the welfare of workers is actually a priority. 

I suggest that the minister be given up to next week on Tuesday, to come with the report because as a ministry, this should be on your finger tips. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Justice or the Attorney-General wish to say something about the Industrial Court? 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, Justice Tabaro is the acting Judge of the Industrial Court. That was done by the Chief Justice but his appointment is pending formalisation. So, as I speak, we have a Judge of the Industrial Court.

MS NABULYA: I would like to seek clarification from the minister. When he talks of formalisation of the appointment of the judge of the Industrial Court, it does not auger as ethical at all. This has taken over 15 years. How long does it take to formalise someone to start acting? There must be something funny happening. 

So, can I get clarification on this? How long does it take? What is the timeframe?

3.04
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support my colleague who has raised this issue. The issue of workers in this country is worsening every day. Investors and employers abuse our citizens as if they do not have any value. 

We have many cases which show that our workers are abused left and right. They cannot even survive on their monthly salary for 15 days. Employers have denied workers the opportunity to unionise and discuss their rights. So, this is a serious case and Ugandans need to take it on and solve this problem. I thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I know it is important but I did not want to interrupt the Budget process. I do not know whether we can allow the minister to respond after we have completed the Budget. 

3.05
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With regard to exploitation and mistreatment of workers, I have got verbal complaints and phone calls from Buhweju. Teachers were contacted by an organisation called Big Blue. They gave teachers loans, but did not give them loan agreements. So, teachers are also being exploited by Big Blue. When they are investigating about exploitation, harassment and mistreatment of workers, the teachers’ case, with regard to Big Blue financial institution, should as well be investigated and brought before the House. Thank you.

MS VICTORIA BUSINGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this problem, emanating from the severe unemployment, is very serious. These workers are appointed by word of mouth and when they claim their rights, they are fired. 

The labour law is very clear. It stipulates that these people should be appointed with a contract agreement. They do not sign such contracts and when problems come, they have nowhere to refer to. 

So, we should task the minister to also come with something with regard to appointments of these workers. 

On teachers, teaching in private schools has its own challenges. Because of lack of employment, even someone who does not qualify to teach sciences is just pushed into a classroom to teach because private school owners do not want to spend a lot of money on quality by appointing qualified teachers. And due to the meager salaries, these people borrow from many banks. They end up being laid off, humiliated and arrested. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister has taken note. That ends the issue of the workers. (Ms Betty Aol rose_) On workers? Okay.

3.08
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On workers, since the minister is coming to give the House a brief next week, it is also important for us to know the minimum wage. It is important that when he talks, he should also give us something linked to liberalisation and privatisation because that is where we have these investors exploiting people a lot. It is almost the same case in all sectors. It is so in education, health, transport, name them. Therefore, it is important that the minister does his groundwork and comes up with something which will satisfy us. Thank you.

3.09
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, we have one party here represented, the workers; but the employers are not represented in this Parliament. 

I would like to appeal to the minister to also come with a report about the attitude and productivity of Ugandan workers. (Laughter) This is a very serious matter because if we are to debate it effectively, even the employers must be represented here so that they give their point of view. Right now we are in a crisis. The attitude of our people will bury this country. People do not want to work but want to be paid. (Interjection) I am telling you the truth. 

MS NABULYA: Is the Member of Parliament in order to tell this country that workers are not performing and that they are –(Laughter)- it is unethical. He should give this with substantive information because if workers were not performing, Uganda would not be where it is today. Every financial year we have been reading that we have our economic growth at some point of 7 percent, whatever it could be. How could that come about if the workers were not performing? I seek clarification. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know that the workers’ representatives are representing the interest of the workers, but it is also important to hear the views of the other side. There are always two sides to a story. (Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I once worked in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as a minister. I was the acting minister for four months. There is a research that was done comparing the productivity of workers within the region, but it is very disheartening that Ugandan workers were producing at 33 percent, Tanzania at 65 percent while Kenya was producing at 44 percent. Ours was the lowest and there are a number of studies that have been done. 

There are a number of things that this country needs to do. We should not only look at one side. Let us compare everything. There is already a tripartite arrangement which is in place in the ministry - the workers, the employers and Government. There is already that arrangement for them to discuss. So, I think -(Interruption) 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, we have agreed that the minister comes on Tuesday with a report and something to explain to this House. Is it procedurally correct, therefore, for hon. Okot to start giving and pre-empting the minister’s report?

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Okot is merely exciting the Members about the other side of the story. (Laughter) But I think this information is important to inform our debate when the minister comes to bring the paper. 

3.14
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure. I am presenting before you and this august House the petition of the people of Katakwi District, Ongongoja sub-county, on the land conflict which I have called land grabbing by the Karimojong of Napak District. In this petition, there are 524 signatures and these are only a few of the people who are displeased. 

The background to this land conflict 

By 1910 the Iteso were living on this land under contest and in 1962 when the borders of Uganda were demarcated, this formed part of Usuk County, Teso District then. In 1971, when Amin’s regime was overthrown, the Karimojong acquired automatic rifles and terrorised the people of Katakwi and the neighbouring districts. As such, our people were displaced from Ongongoja in Katakwi District. Now they have occupied that land. This is the petition they have brought here.

On 25 February 2008, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development launched a survey of the Moroto-Katakwi border. The report has not yet come. During the launch of the survey, there was a resolution, which document I am going to lay on Table. The resolution was that no person should go and live in that contested area until the border issue is resolved. The MP of Usuk, Oromait Michael, is also displaced. I am also an IDP. Actually, tomorrow, when you come for my thanksgiving, you will be in a camp. 

Madam Speaker, the prayers of the petitioners, briefly. 

The people of Ongongoja sub-county in Katakwi District are asking Government to get the Karimojong to leave that land under contest. They are requesting the administration of Napak District, the Members of Parliament, the LC V and the LC III chairpersons to stop ferrying their people with their animals to the Katakwi land under contest. 

Secondly, the people of Katakwi are requesting that the movement of cows between Karamoja and especially Katakwi now, because of the quarantine, be stopped because there is no way Foot and Mouth Disease will be minimised if the movement is not stopped. Does this quarantine only affect Teso or is it also for Karamoja? 

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, you are arguing and raising arguments for or against. You wanted to raise an issue so that Government can respond. Just raise your concern and hand over the petition to the Minister for the Presidency.

MR OROMAIT: The first concern is that they are asking Government to resettle people by helping them to go back to that area that the Karimojong have occupied.

Secondly, they are appealing to Government to continue with the disarmament exercise. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the documents on Table. (Mr Amuriat rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us move on. 

MR OROMAIT: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the petition of the people of Katakwi. I also beg to lay a document on the launch of the survey of the Moroto-Katakwi border, which survey report has not been effected. 

I also beg to lay a letter from the LC III Chairperson of one of the counties of Napak District called Lorenga Ochora, asking the people of Katakwi to move away from Ongongoja sub-county. Thank you very much. 

3.20
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague from Usuk for reviving this very important issue. I am at a loss because this is a matter which is not coming before this House for the first time. Indeed, there have been a lot of protracted negotiations and meetings on this matter. It nearly reached its resolution when the then Minister of Lands was instructed to conduct a survey to resolve the impasse. This is a matter that is already with Government and it has the instructions, including those from this House. Now, this matter is being brought back to Parliament today, but I do not understand what Government needs to do differently in order for the matter to be resolved. It is mere lack of seriousness on the part of Government that we are spending time talking about this very issue in this House. I would like to be guided rather than have this petition referred to a committee of this House. Madam Speaker, you should direct Government to conclude what it initiated.

We went to Moroto as a Teso Parliamentary Group. I was the chairperson of the group at that time. We talked to our brothers and sisters, the Karimojong. We came to the disputed strip of land and stood there in the presence of many Members of Parliament, some of who are still in this House today. We came and held another meeting in Katakwi, spending days on end on this matter. At the end of the day, Government said they would resolve the matter. 

Two years ago, I led a delegation to State House and this was one of our grievances to the President. He said, “Well, that is a resolved matter; we are going to resolve it scientifically.” However, we are still grappling with the same issue even today. When shall the country take the cry of our people seriously? I pray that this House pronounces itself on this because there is nothing more to investigate. These are matters of science – re-establishing the boundaries. This is what we are talking about; what else is there to investigate on this matter? The people of Katakwi are just reiterating what they said several years ago. (Interruption) I will take the information.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, some of us are not privy to what was happening. So, I need some clarification whether this is a regional or district border.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the land in dispute is between Katakwi District and the new district of Napak at the time it was under Moroto district. But what affects any district in Teso affects all the people of Teso and that is why, as a group, we are extremely concerned about the lack of resolution of this simple issue. It would help in resettling the people of Katakwi and also in bringing to an end the conflict between the Iteso and Karimojong. So, I would like, to request for your guidance on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to thank hon. Oromait for informing the House that there is this matter which is still unresolved two years after steps were taken. We then need to ask the Minister for the Presidency to come and give us a response on how far they have gone in implementing the decisions which were made on that matter. I think that is what the people of Usuk and Teso want.

3.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, Government should take this matter more seriously. We do not want a situation where we are going to behave in solving this matter like the way we are dealing with the Migingo issue. The issue of this border is also a political matter and that is why you have seen that whenever there are elections in Usuk, they vote a new MP. People say, “Since you have failed to solve the problem, we are sending so-and-so instead.” That is the level it has reached. So, we shall continue seeing a new MP from Usuk every time there is an election. This is not good because the failure is not on their part; it is from the Frontbench. 

Hon. Omara Atubo kept going there with us, but nothing happened because he claimed the surveyors were being chased away. How can few undisciplined cattle rustlers defeat the mighty UPDF? Government must become serious, and solve this matter once and for all.

Madam Speaker, as you have directed, I think the Minister for the Presidency should come here not later than next week. How can they fail to produce a report for five years? It has not taken only five years because the Members from Usuk who were here during the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliaments used to bring that issue. Now we are in the Ninth Parliament. Government should learn to take this House and the people of Teso seriously.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Leader of Government Business wishes to respond because this matter has stayed on the drawing board for some time.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. First of all, these inter-tribal conflicts over boundaries are getting deeper. I want to bring it to the attention of Government that about three years ago, the people of Madi-Okollo clashed with those of Terego, but that matter has not be resolved. In a place called Ewanga, a sub county was supposed to be created but the people of Yumbe claimed part of the land. As a result, that sub-county was not created. It became a very big election issue and to this day, it is not concluded. There were surveyors from the Ministry of Lands who went there three times, but no report has come out and the districts cannot determine whether administrative units can be created. This has taken over five years.

Between the people of Madi-Okollo and those in Terego, these conflicts are perpetual. It is even worsened due to the fact that Government continues to create districts. So, clans are getting into claiming more land in order to curve out a sizeable piece of land to enable them demand for a district. These are issues which Government needs to take seriously. 

Otherwise, even the information by the Minister of Foreign Affairs about international boundaries - the Ngurdoto Accord was very clear; and to-date this House has not known what is happening with Migingo and Rukwanzi. So, the Minister for Lands and the Minister of Foreign Affairs need to sort out the domestic boundaries, at the same time the international boundaries. I am happy that the Leader of Government Business is here; you need to talk about the Ngurdoto Accord with effect from now.

3.31
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, if you hear about this in Parliament, you may take it –(Interruption) 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The petition has been read to us and according to Rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure, it is supposed to be given to a committee and should only be discussed later.  Do you mean to say that we have to decide upon it now? We are supposed to debate it later on, after the report has been presented and not now. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, of course hon. Baba Diri and a few other Members had the benefit of being here in the Eighth Parliament. So, they know. But we have 60 percent Members who are new and do not know about this conflict. So, let us receive the information before we take a decision. 

MR OMOLO:  Madam Speaker, if you hear about this problem in Parliament, you may imagine it is a light thing. But I was at that site personally when we were trying to sort out the dispute. At some level, hon. Apun told us it was some Acacia tree which formed the boundary; he forgot about the mark stones laid by surveyors and to assure you, our most respected Member, hon. Alupo who is the Minister of Education today checked in her handbag to see what “powers” she had there as hon. Apun also went to check in his vehicle and came back and said, “You are lucky I do not have my gun in the car; you people would not be alive.”  That was at the border point. 

So, Madam Speaker this issue has gone beyond the level of the citizens of Katakwi. It is political now because the political leaders of Karamoja are highly involved in this dispute. They seem to be participating just like it is stated in the petition. I can assure you that these neighbours of ours have caused us untold suffering.  

Before 1986, the Iteso were among the richest tribes in this country; the Iteso were the most educated in this country; the Iteso were the second largest in population in this country. But today, in terms of education, we are No.6 and in terms of population we are No.4.  You may ask yourself, why? It is because the moment our cattle were rustled, we failed to educate our children. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omolo, you have now moved away from the border and you are now dealing with cattle rustling.
 
MR OMOLO: I am trying to justify to you the magnitude of the problem.

THE SPEAKER:  No, hon. Members, can we hear from the government when the minister will come to speak on this issue? Apparently, the work is on your side. 

MR OMOLO: Let me finish, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are divulging into cattle issues.  (Laughter)

3.33
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this petition has even complicated our work because we cannot do anything until we know its fate. So, it is up to the Speaker to guide us.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, I hold the General in high esteem but the way he is proceeding is making my level of respect for him to diminish -(Interjections)- yes, I mean what I say.  This is a very serious matter petitioners have laid in this House right from the Sixth Parliament through the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments. Maybe, because he missed out in the last Parliament, but it was also brought here as a petition. Is it in order for the Leader of Government Business to say that the petition that has been laid before this House is rendering them inactive; is making them to fail and yet this petition has been with Parliament? 

You have guided very well that the ball is in the court of Government, how can this now stop them from laying that report in this House and we continue from that point? So, is he in order to proceed in the manner he is attempting to, without having some sense of responsibility for this country? 

THE SPEAKER:  Well, hon. Members, I am now happy that the Minister for the Presidency has now come. The problem is that there is a matter that has been recurring in every Parliament about the borders in Katakwi. So, I have to brief the minister who is going to respond.  

Minister for the Presidency, it has been said that there was a meeting held in State House of which you are in charge, concerning this border issue.  That is why I am asking you to take interest in this border matter so that you bring a report to this House about when you are going to resolve the issue; that is all.  Who else should I give it to? 

MR OKUPA: Just take it lightly, that is how they behave. 

THE SPEAKER:  Now, I have instructed her. So, you can come in.
 
GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I should always be allowed to finish what I intend to say. But my colleagues appear to have all the power these days to even know what I intend to say before I even say it. (Laughter)  So, what I simply wanted to say, Madam Speaker, is that I am sorry that the petition actually complicates our work since it renders us redundant until we see new guidance from the Speaker. If it is referred to the committee, then it will be the committee to call Government.  

So, that is why I say that it is delaying us.  However, I will wait to hear from the Speaker’s guidance and then see what to do. And by the way, Madam Speaker, whether hon. Members respect me or not, I am not in need of respect. Thank you. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER:  No, hon. Members, there is no need for the petition to go to the committee. It is a matter that is already with Government. All we need is a response from Government what is going to happen. That is all.

3.38
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Ken Lukyamuzi): Madam Speaker, I rise to address a matter of public concern pursuant to Rule 35(1) of our Rules of Procedure.  On the 16th of this month, I raised the matter about the fate of Mabira following a statement that had been made by the President, namely, that he was about to dish away part of Mabira Forest to SCOUL. 

The response of the Rt hon. Prime Minister to my query was not useful. He merely said that Government knows very well the procedure to follow and emphasised that we have to be patient until we reach there. In other words, he was reluctant to tell this House whether His Excellency the President said what he was reported to have said or not. 

It is on record that while addressing the Kwagalana Group, a group of businessmen in Kampala recently, the President repeated the same statement and he was reported by The Monitor newspaper of the 19th which I will lay on Table. He said, whether we like it or not, even if there is to be war, he is going to give away Mabira to the Mehta Group. 

Madam Speaker, under Article 98 of our Constitution, the Executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President. When he issues such a statement, most people are bound to believe what has been reported because he is a fountain of honour and under Article 91 of the Constitution, we all know that Government is exercised on the basis of laws, which are passed by Parliament. Laws are not passed through declarations or decrees. You do not simply say, “Because I have such powers, I am directing that so and so gets this.” There must be a procedure in our Constitution -(Interruption)

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it procedurally correct for a Member to start debating in anticipation? This issue has not been brought to the House.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is inquiring about the status. It came the other week and he wants to know where we are.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Parliament cannot keep quiet when a statement of this kind comes out because under Article 245(a) of the Constitution, Parliament has the duty to protect the environment, fight pollution and environmental degradation.

Under Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution, forests like Mabira are held in public trust by Government and they belong to the population of Uganda. So, in light of that, with humility, I demand that the Leader of Government Business issues a comprehensive statement on the fate of Mabira because it is threatened by the continuous statements the President is making. 

Mabira is a very important component of the existence of this country. It is a water catchment area for Lake Victoria and the Nile, and even the dams from Karuma and Bujagali, we anticipate, may not be sustained in the absence of that water catchment. Thank you very much.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleagues and the House that the issue of Mabira is under review by Government. When Government is ready, we shall let you know. Be patient, we shall let you know the position and decision of the government about Mabira Forest. We are not going to act on speculation; we are not going to run this country on papers. Be patient, we shall inform you accordingly. Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: We need a statement in writing, no matter how short it is. We have a right to demand for that statement because under Article 245 of the Constitution, we have the powers to protect the environment.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I) THE REVISED REVENUE EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATE OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Rule 129(5) of the Rules of Procedure, I wish to respond to the motion on the Floor.

Introduction

On 8 June 2011, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented the National Budget for the Financial Year 2011/2012 to Parliament. The Budget theme, “Promoting Economic Growth, Job Creation and Improving Service Delivery” is in line with the National Development Plan (NDP) theme which is “Growth, Employment and Socio-Economic Transformation for Prosperity.”

Hon. Members, you will note that the aims of the NDP are to create employment, increase per capita income to middle level income, improve sectoral labour force distribution in the economy, improve the human development and gender equality indicators, improve Uganda’s competitiveness and ultimately reduce poverty.

The priority areas in the Budget for financial year 2011/2012 are; infrastructure development of roads, railways and energy, enhancing agricultural production and productivity, employment creation especially for the youth, women and small and medium scale enterprises, human resource development and improving public service delivery.

Madam Speaker, the underlying principles for 2011/2012 budget were contained in the Budget Framework Paper on which Parliament made detailed recommendations in a report to this august House by the Budget Committee in May 2011.

We have emailed copies of this report to all Members of Parliament. It is advisable that the report be used as one of the main resource documents when debating the budget for 2011/2012.

Government intends to address the structural growth constraints in the economy and to invest in programmes that will transform the economy to a sound and sustainable level. Considering the theme of the budget and priority areas for the financial year 2011/2012, Parliament is expected not only to support the efforts of Government in reducing poverty levels but also allocate and work for public resources with the aim of maximising the benefits of growth.

Although the Budget Speech touches many areas including the performance of the national economy, I intend to restrict my response to the budget proposals for financial year 2011 to the following areas; budget resource allocation to priority areas, infrastructure development, agricultural production and productivity, creating jobs and employment strategy, human resource development and improving government effectiveness in service delivery.

I will start with budget resources. The resource envelope for the financial year 2011/2012 amounts to Shs 9,840 billion of which Shs 6,330 billion, which is 71 percent, will be financed from domestic revenues comprising tax revenues, which is Shs 6,170 billion; non-tax revenues of Shs 121 billion and loan repayment from Government parastatals of Shs 39 billion.

External sources will finance Shs 2,900 billion, which is 29 percent of the budget. This is in line with the government objective of gradually reducing the external financing of the budget, which at times proved to be unreliable.

Resource allocation to priority areas

The Minister of Finance highlighted the fundamental challenges, which significantly affect the development of Uganda’s economy. These include inadequate physical infrastructure, limited supply to critical production input, inadequate skills base and social infrastructure, inappropriate mindset, attitude and culture; limited access to financial services; and limited employment opportunities.

The budget strategies and priority areas for 2011 to 2012 indicate that Government is committed to implement budget interventions that will address the above challenges.

Infrastructure development

Government committed itself to further development of road transport, railway and energy infrastructure in order to reduce the high cost of doing business in Uganda. 

Transport development 

Under the road transport sector, priority will be given to complete the tarmacking, rehabilitation and maintaining of critical road links that promote production, marketing, competitiveness and trade. A greater number of road transport projects transverse the rural areas.  Government has allocated Shs 43 billion for the construction and improvement of transport infrastructure in the Kampala City Metropolitan area to ease traffic congestion. The Kampala - Entebbe Highway will be commenced utilising a loan facility of $350 million from the People’s Republic of China. Parliament appreciates the proposals for the rehabilitation of the railway network to ease transport to Mombasa and other parts of the country, and the operationalisation of the southern route through Mwanza. 

Parliament also appreciates efforts being made to revamp the water transport like the repairs on MV Kaawa and rehabilitation of the piers. The budget allocation for the transport infrastructure development is Shs 1,219.41 billion –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I did not want to disrupt hon. Lwanga in any way, but as it is, I would like to assume that this report is a committee report. I am a bit worried by the title of the report and the author therein; and also, when I look at the back of the report, there is no indication whatsoever that it was produced by a committee of this House; in this case the Budget Committee. 

I would like to be guided on whether this is hon. Lwanga’s personal report to this House or the membership of the committee endorsed him to own the report. I think this is an important point, even as we proceed to listen to him. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to draw your attention to rule 129(5) which provides as follows: “Upon the motion that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply and on resumption of debate, …” which was done yesterday by the Minister of Finance, “…the Speaker shall give the first opportunity to the Opposition spokesperson on finance to respond to the motion, followed by the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, before recognising the rest of the Members for this debate.” So, I am just following the rules. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson acts on behalf of the Members. I remember when hon. Akol was the chairperson in the last session, she would present the report with members appending their signatures, but that part of the report is lacking because it is a chairperson’s report, just like hon. Ekanya presented his report yesterday without other signatures. But it should have the consent of the members because we are constrained to debate because they will say, “You are a member of the committee, you are not supposed to debate” yet I have not had an input. I find something lacking. May be the former chair can clarify. 

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, can I now continue?

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament also appreciates efforts being made to revamp the water transport, like the repairs on MV Kaawa and rehabilitation of the piers. The budget allocation for the transport infrastructure development is Shs 1,219.41 billion, which is 12.61 percent of the total budget for financial year 2011/2012.

Previous efforts in the development of Uganda’s physical infrastructure, particularly the roads, have been hampered by lack of implementation capacity. Government is, therefore, advised to emphasise local capacity development and outsourcing, including use of local labour based approaches where possible. For example, in the construction of roads, local labour rather than foreign workers must be employed to handle equipment such as tractors. If I may say, many times when you pass on the road, you find that a tractor is being driven by an expatriate. It is a pity. 

Energy Infrastructure

Government has proposed measures to mitigate the increasing power demand in the country by completing the 250 MW Bujagali Hydropower project, commencing construction of the 600 MW Karuma Hydropower project, completing preliminary feasibility works on Isimbwa project in Kayunga and Ayago power project in Nwoya District. Preliminary work on construction of the Oil Refinery at Hoima and the Petroleum Resources Database at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has commenced.

While the energy and mineral development sector is allocated Shs 1,202.48 billion which is 12.43 percent of the total budget, the additional resources towards the sector amounts to Shs 811.3 billion which is equivalent to 8.34 percent of the total budget for financial year 2011/2012.

Government is continuing to develop the petroleum industry outside the NDP and without a legal framework to regulate the operations of the industry. It is, therefore, prudent that the necessary oil and gas laws be enacted for the effective management of oil and gas transactions, including the environmental and other cross-cutting issues. The Budget Committee of the Eighth Parliament recommended that Government tables before Parliament –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: I am tempted to believe that this report cannot continue to be discussed or read out to this Parliament because even the person who is submitting it to this House has not endorsed it. So, what justification do we have to continue with it? Is this a smuggled report from across Kalangala? In my understanding, he needed to own it up. At least, if the other members did not sign, he should have signed it. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that we shall instruct the rules committee to refine this part of our rules so that it is clear what we should do, but I will allow you to speak against it if you do not agree with it. Please proceed. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Budget Committee of the Eighth Parliament recommended that Government tables before Parliament all the relevant oil and gas Bills before the end of the first quarter of the financial year 2011/2012. We, therefore, expect these Bills in the House as a matter of priority.

The Budget Committee has been informed about an outstanding debt due to the energy power generators - as a subsidy - amounting to Shs 207.532 billion as at the end of financial year 2010/11 and the projected subsidy requirement of Shs 455.96 billion for the financial year 2011/2012. It is recommended that Government fast-tracks to completion of the Bujagali Hydropower project and commences construction of the Karuma hydropower project in the financial year 2011/2012, in order to save the country the escalating and unsustainable costs of power subsidy. The move to privatise the power sector was meant to save Government money. It is now clear that this move may have been ill-conceived and may need to be reconsidered or reviewed. 

Agricultural Production and Productivity

Madam Speaker, Government is continuously prioritising agricultural production and productivity in order to increase household incomes and promote equity. It is envisaged that through this budget, farm incomes and distribution will improve, farm and off-farm employment will be developed, and agricultural education and value addition will be attained.

In order to increase production and productivity, agro-processing and enterprise efficiency through commodity value chains, Government has proposed to undertake the following:

a)	Maintain the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) for farmers by contributing Shs 30 billion at an interest rate of 10 percent per annum for a maximum period of eight years, to be administered by selected commercial banks. Countrywide network coverage should be a factor in the selection of the banks to administer this fund. 

b)	Allocate Shs 133 billion to NAADS to increase the commercialisation of improved seeds and other planting materials.

c)	Allocate Shs 9.5 billion to strengthen disease and pest control.

d)	Allocate Shs 5 billion for the provision of irrigation and water harvesting technologies.

e)	Allocate Shs 200 million to commence preliminary work for the restocking programme in North and North Eastern Uganda.

f)	Allocate Shs 2 billion for the rehabilitation of small-scale agricultural warehouses across the country at sub-county level.

While the agricultural sector is allocated Shs 436.8 billion, which is 4.52 percent of the total budget, the above proposed interventions will receive an allocation of Shs 179.8 billion, which is equivalent of 1.86 percent of the total budget for financial year 2011/2012.

There is a public outcry about the deficiencies in NAADS programme implementation that require urgent attention from Government. There are delays in recruitment, delays in delivery of inputs and generally over pricing in the procurement of inputs. It is recommended that Government addresses the deficiencies of NAADS and rolls out the NAADS programme to the entire country for the benefit of all Ugandans. NAADS as a means of delivering agriculture productivity should be reviewed with the aim of reverting to the traditional agricultural extension system.

Creating jobs and employment strategy 

The Minister allocated Shs 44.5 billion which is 0.46 percent of the total budget towards this strategy to implement the following:

a)	To establish a Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund.

b)	To undertake Youth Entrepreneurship Training programme.

c)	To undertake business development skills clinics with the private sector.

d)	To dedicate work spaces in markets for the youth and small-scale manufacturers to undertake manufacturing and other processing activities.

Unemployment and underemployment has remained high at about 29 percent as the number of jobs generated does not match the rising labour force in the country. These interventions will start a process of addressing the unemployment challenges facing many Ugandans, especially the youth.

Human resource development

In order to attain improved standards of living, Government will continue delivery of social services by investing further in developing the quality of human resources and here we look at:

Education

Under education, focus will be put on consolidating the previous successes in the sector by extending free universal education to A-level and Business, Technical, Vocational and Education Training (BTVET); scaling up the universal education programme; provision of physical infrastructure; and to enhance school inspections. Government will support the private sector vocational schools with equipment and salary for key staff and also develop a pool of national expertise in the oil and gas industry. The budget allocation for the education sector is Shs 1,393 billion, which is about 14.4 percent of the total budget for financial year 2011/2012.

Health

Under health, Government is consolidating achievements of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Government interventions will focus on funding medicines, increased maternal and reproductive health, rehabilitation of Mulago National Referral Hospital and construction of district hospitals in Kawempe and Makindye divisions. The budget provision for health is Shs 995 billion, which is 10.3 percent of the total budget, and the additional funding to the sector amounts to Shs 335 billion accounting for 3.45 percent of the total budget. 

Water and environment

Provision of safe drinking water in the rural areas is vital. Government will invest further in the provision of new water points, rehabilitation of existing ones and provision of small piped schemes for rural growth centres. More emphasis will be placed on monitoring the performance indicators to ensure realisation of set targets. The budget provision for water and environment is Shs 269.9 billion, which is 2.8 percent of the total budget of financial year 2011/2012.

Tourism development

Further efforts need to be invested in this sector as a means of attracting tourists. Uganda has a very rich tourist potential which requires enhancement. There is need to purposely improve the infrastructure in areas with tourism potential including Kalangala District. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage should also be classified as a core sector and accordingly, prioritised.

Improving Government effectiveness in service delivery

In the budget speech, Government is committed to refocus the Public Service efforts for delivery of quality services by reducing wastage, laxity and limited responsiveness. Government has set measures to cut on a number of consumptive items for ministries and agencies in order to save Shs 40 billion and re-allocate it for service delivery infrastructure development. The consumptive items that will be affected include allowances, workshops and seminars, hire of venue, periodicals and newspapers, welfare and entertainment, special meals and drinks, printing, stationery, photocopying and binding, travel inland and travel abroad, fuel, lubricants and oils, transport equipment including cars or motor vehicles, furniture and fixtures. This should be undertaken with care to avoid being counter-productive.

Efforts to increase value addition as a measure for improving food security and increasing exports are welcome. These value addition enterprises will include fish farming, tea processing, fruit processing, coffee, maize, leather, wheat, cocoa, meat and dairy processing. Adequate funding should be provided for supporting these enterprises.

While Government in the budget speech set out priorities such as I have elucidated above, there are potential challenges for the budget and policy implementation.

Although the budget speech was well focused in identifying and facilitating the key priorities, these challenges have got to be faced and we must all work together to see how best to overcome these challenges.

The first levels of challenges are:

Economic Management Challenges

(a)	Maintaining macroeconomic stability in light of the persistent rise in international oil prices, high commodity prices and insufficient production capacity to meet both local and regional demand.  

(b)	Strengthening the fiscal and monetary policies for financial year 2011/2012 in order to support the Central Bank’s efforts to bring down inflation.

(c)	Uganda’s vulnerability to external shocks, including aid flows, justifies this country to maintain a strong external reserve buffer. The large public investment drive also puts pressure on reserve cover, as some of the investments entail a large increase in imports.

Fiscal Management and Service Delivery Challenges

a)	The increasing stock of domestic arrears, which include pensions and gratuity, unpaid wages and salaries of workers, energy power subsidies, unpaid services and supplies, court awards, utilities, rent, compensations, contingent liabilities and interest thereof. It is about time that Government looked at this very seriously. Government must ensure that the public is paid on time. I hope the honourable ministers are listening very attentively.  
b)	The ever-increasing interest payment on domestic and external debt, which currently stands at Shs 502.4 billion, 5.2 percent of the total budget, is a big burden on the budget.  
c)	The carrying forward of unspent balances without approval of Parliament creates serious potential for leakages and ineffective spending. Such expenditure requires appropriation by Parliament.
d)	The excessive supplementary expenditures, some of which are not considered as emergency or unforeseen. Supplementary requests place dual pressure on financing, through drawdown of reserves, or suppression of sectoral budgets, thus hindering timely completion of activities and subsequent service delivery.
e)	Slow pace in implementation of Government programmes that have potential for creating employment and growth.
f)	Disproportionate unit costs due to lack of standardised price lists, manifested in very divergent unit costs within sectors that cannot be justified. Instances of excessive over pricing and ever-increasing unit costs, in light of limited budgets, have led to a diminishing scope of service delivery. 
g)	The high cost of public administration, due to the expansion of local government administration units. 
h)	There is pervasive weakness in public financial administration constraining efforts to raise investment and growth.  Government has not kept its promise to strengthen budget controls, fiscal discipline and enhance capacity to ensure efficiency in spending.
i)	Improving public expenditure effectiveness and efficiency in the implementation of public investment is absolutely necessary if the productive capacity of the economy is to increase. I will now come to the third class of economic challenges;

Economic Infrastructure Challenges

a)	The inadequate, unreliable and intermittent energy power supply. This demoralises investors and raises the cost of doing business by alternative power source through motorised generators.

b)	The absence of functional national fuel reserves. Amidst the volatile international Oil prices, without national fuel reserves, the public is left at the mercy of oil dealers who at times create artificial shortages for selfish gains. As I conclude these challenges, I will go to the last, but not least;

Inadequate Institutional Frameworks and Capabilities

a)	Adverse climate change effects. This negatively affects agricultural production and has led to a rise in the disease burden. Coupled with inadequate and slow response to natural hazards by concerned agencies

b)	The slow pace of preparing, tabling and passing the proposed laws impinges on many potential business opportunities. A good number of laws have been pending for a long time. The following legislations that impact on business remain outstanding and need to be passed to facilitate business transactions. They include: Company (Amendment) Bill, Industrial Property Bill, Insurance (Amendment) Bill, Sale of Goods Bill, Counterfeits Bill, Chattels Securities Bill and Free Trade Zone Bill. 

c)	Diminishing social capital due to corruption; absenteeism of teachers, health workers and other civil servants; there is general lack of order, trust, mutual confidence and honesty. All these are a big challenge to our economy.

d)	General weakness in strategic planning across sectors and local governments that is being manifested in form of delayed activities such as procurement processes, resolution of land ownership and compensation as well as persistent changes in physical designs and scope of work in many infrastructure projects. 

e)	Limited capacity as the local governments, characterised by inadequate numbers of personnel, absence of specialised cadres such as entomologists for the agricultural sector, health workers and civil engineers among others. Most districts do not have fully functional contract committees, yet procurement is a critical component of budget implementation. Absorption and implementation capacity remain key constraints in most Government projects. This will require resolving inefficiencies in procurements.

f)	Limited capacity among private sector partners which tends to limit opportunities for undertaking Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects especially in energy and roads sub-sectors.

Madam Speaker, I am now going on to tax and I want us to see what we can do to improve it.

Taxation and Tax Policy

The country now needs effective tax policy measures to ensure recovery and provide incentives for production and growth. On PAYE, in its May report, the Budget Committee recommended raising the threshold of this tax from Shs 130,000 per month to Shs 235,000 per month. This could improve the well-being of the majority of our lowly paid workers such as teachers and nurses.

Specialised purpose vehicles for rural services such as mobile banking and mobile clinics as opposed to ambulances, because the minister in his speech talked about ambulances; these vehicles should be exempt from Import Duty and VAT. 

Communities on islands, both in Lake Victoria and places like Lake Kyoga, are suffering due to poor transport infrastructure. I propose that the Ministry of Finance exempts small boat engines of up to 25 horse power (hp) from Import Duty and VAT so as to make water transport more affordable. 

Our country has become a dumping ground for used vehicles. The excise duty on old vehicles is not deterrent enough. In other words, we are still bringing them in, in their thousands. I propose a complete ban on used vehicles older than seven years. Our neighbours in Kenya have this policy and it is enforced without fear or favour.

In conclusion, the strategic priorities for the national budget for the financial year 2011/2012 are derived from the NDP. The sector budget allocation for the financial year 2011/2012 is a reflection of priority areas. The financial year 2011/2012 budget is expected to improve employment, wealth-creation and social transformation. The identified priorities must remain in focus, be well-financed and monitored better than ever before. 

Supplementary expenditure requests midway the budget execution disrupt agreed priorities. Parliament should discourage this practice. I repeat, Parliament should discourage this practice. The government should prepare the Contingency Fund Bill, which when enacted, will address unforeseen emergencies or expenditures.

Madam Speaker, I beg to respond.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Budget Committee. As I indicated, Members may either accept or speak against it when the time comes. Let me now invite hon. Amoding. She has a statement from the youth before we go to ICT.  

4.23
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the temporary elevation to enjoy this little privilege of the Frontbench. 

I rise in line with Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure to make a brief statement on behalf of the youth MPs as well as the youth in Uganda concerning the youth employment programme known as the Youth Venture Capital Fund.

As youth leaders, we would like to make a formal statement on the proposed Shs 44 billion for enhancing youth employment as presented in the 2012/2012 national budget. This fund has raised a lot of mixed feelings from young people in Uganda. 

We want to applaud the Minister of Finance and indeed the government for recognising that youth unemployment is a critical problem today which we must respond to, both in the short-term and the long-term.

According to the recent World Bank report, the principal challenge for African economies over the next decade is to find productive employment for the seven to 10 million annual new entrants into the labour force as a consequence of historical rapid population growth as well as the swelling labour force by today’s school-leavers. Currently, as many as 500,000 young people enter the labour force each year in Kenya and as many as 700,000 in Tanzania, 250,000 in Zimbabwe, 392,000 in Uganda. 

We would like to emphasise the fact that Uganda is reported to be the second youngest population in the world after Niger with one of the highest population growth rates in the world, growing at an annual rate of 3.2 percent. This implies that every year, Uganda is adding onto its population about 1.2 million people. By 2050, Uganda will have over 70 million people. This situation is a huge challenge to Uganda, but also presents an advantage if proper planning is undertaken now. That is why it is important that any Government proposal brought in this spirit to address this challenge must be welcome and seriously scrutinised for better performance. 

In this spirit, as youth MPs, we have scrutinised the proposed fund and today, we would like to call upon you to make further input into the government proposals with a view of addressing this challenge as we discuss and consequently approve the budgetary proposals for the better performance of this fund and the other sectors which can address this problem. We have also met with various institutions meant to implement this fund and discussed in depth with the Ministry of Finance and come to some consensus.

According to the proposals of the 2011/2012 budget in regard to the Shs 44.5 billion, the following has to be noted. 

The Shs 25 billion which is proposed to be put in DFCU Bank for micro loans towards youth venture projects will be accessed at an interest rate of 10 percent per annum.

Shs 16.5 billion is proposed to go to KCCA under the job stimulus programme which is supporting the building of markets in Kampala as well as supporting the informal sector like the jua kalis etc. 

Shs 3.5 billion is proposed to go to Enterprise Uganda for skills training to prepare youth with business ideas before accessing the micro loans. 

The Ministry of Finance further needs to note that when all these allocations are added up, a total of Shs 45 billion is got, which indicates an excess of Shs 500 million and needs to be corrected.

The Ministry of Finance has come up with criteria for accessing these funds, which is yet to be widely publicised and also consists of the following:

a)	An applicant must have an Ordinary Level Certificate.

b)	The businesses to be funded have to be registered by the Registrar of Companies –(Interjections)- and must have existed for six months. (Interjections) We propose to the Ministry of Finance that at least let us lower it to three months because starting a business requires capital, which most of the youth do not have.

c)	Qualifying businesses should be able to provide employment to over four people and be able to expand for further employment.

d)	Each borrower will have to have two guarantees aged 40 years and above. They must have a good reputation. (Laughter)

e)	The fifth component of these criteria is that the beneficiary will be required to contribute at least 10 percent of the loan amount to avoid misuse. To be eligible for this loan, the applicant must be aged 21 to 35 years. Between Shs 100,000 to Shs 5 million will be provided as initial capital. However, we have recommended that at least up to Shs 10 million can be extended for business expansion. Beneficiaries under this category have to undergo financial management training. Also, there will be measures to follow up the awardees to monitor their business growth.

Finally, the ministry will be able to provide brochures which will be distributed to all MPs and implementing partners. They will be widely circulated through newspapers with national coverage and radio stations to expand availability of this knowledge to the public.

The Ministry of Finance has already brought on board other banks besides DFCU that have a bigger outreach. They include Centenary Bank and Stanbic Bank in response to the issues of inaccessibility of DCFU, which is only in urban centres.

The involvement of NGOs such as the Uganda Youth Convention who have been implementing the job stimulus programme in the past year should not happen again. This programme is of such important intent and it needs to be monitored by the responsible ministries. 

Uganda Youth Convention is hardly two years old and without any known track record of implementing such programmes and we are asking how then they can be trusted with such a national programme, which we want to inform the House, is now going to be operated by KCCA and yet we are also not very clear on how it is going to be operated. 

So, Members of Parliament need to understand this and support KCCA for better implementation. 

We are also totally against the monopoly given to Enterprise Uganda to do training of youths who will benefit from the loan programme. Moreso, given the fact that Enterprise Uganda is charging youth Shs 50,000 in urban centres and Shs 5,000 in rural communities for participation and yet Government is subsidising their operations by allocating Shs 3.5 billion, which they say will be able to facilitate them to train 10,000 youth this financial year. 

Our proposal, therefore, is to involve other existing training institutions to carry out the training simultaneously. (Applause)

Further, Enterprise Uganda does not have the capacity to carry out youth training in the country single-handedly. We also want to inform the House that as we spoke to Enterprise Uganda in the presence of the Ministry of Finance, they agreed to this proposal and they say that other institutions can be brought on board.

Reading from the criteria above provided by the Ministry of Finance, the fund as proposed will mainly benefit elite and urban youth. We, therefore, propose to the Ministry of Finance that a separate fund be created which will be more accessible to youth, especially those without the requirement of A’level certification. 

We also want to propose that a national youth employment fund which will be open to the youth who have innovative enterprises, irrespective of their education and age, be created. The fund will have mechanisms of reaching both the skilled and semi-skilled as well as the unskilled youth and empower them to create meaningful employment among other things. 

This fund, we suggest will be separately managed by the youth employment fund board which we propose will be housed in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for now, as the would-be responsible ministry for policy function related to this fund as well as to monitor and supervise its implementation.

The membership of the board, we propose, would be comprised of the following: the National Youth Council, the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the implementing institution, development partners who are actually willing to contribute to the fund, Youth Members of Parliament and also representatives of civil society. 

The Ministry of Finance has agreed to this proposal of creating a bigger supplementary fund to the proposed bank credit, which we could consider in the next financial year. This will cater for the rural youth, especially those under SACCOS, NAADS, NUSAF and other youth groups. 

There are lessons we want to inform the House that we have noted from a few African countries that have recently introduced such a kind of fund in response to the unemployment challenge; they include Kenya, Swaziland, Lesotho, and these actually have a status of a micro-finance institution with given tax exemption. 

As Uganda, therefore, we would like to pick lessons from such countries. The National Youth Council, the Youth MPs, have been tasked with the role of expediting the process of developing a proposal, which the Ministry of Finance can follow up for funding. 

In order to provide an appropriate institutional framework for youth empowerment and proper function of youth issues and employment issues in Uganda, there is a critical need to create a separate and full ministry for youth and employment. 

With the current arrangement in which issues are cramped up under one ministry of gender, which is handling more than six different sectors, which are also unrelated, the issues of youth and also the bigger challenge of unemployment cannot stand a chance.  

We also want to propose to you hon. Members that given the gravity of the problem that is before us, what needs to be done is to have a separate and specific ministry curved out to be given this special attention so that it can respond with maximum and sustainable attention, which the issue at hand deserves.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you for according this issue the special attention that it deserves. We would also like to emphasise to the whole House the fact that the concern of youth and unemployment will not only require the proposals we have made above, but holistic measures, among others, which will include an overhaul of the education system, to respond to the current demands of the job market. We also want to say that serious investment should go to tourism, agriculture, oil, as well as the mining sectors in Uganda as these are the areas where the country has comparative advantage and with potential to provide the needed employment. 

I want to thank you hon. Members and also pray that as you consider these budgetary proposals, you take into account the gravity of the problem before you and also think critically on how to resolve it. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amoding and the youth caucus in Parliament. I must say I want to commend you for opening our eyes to the problems facing the majority of our voters. I am actually alarmed by what I have heard, but anyway, you will have time to discuss it. Let me now invite the chairperson of ICT.

But before hon. Igeme comes, in the public gallery, we have children and teachers of Ikwera Negri School for the disabled, represented by hon. Tonny Ayoo and hon. Lucy Ajok, Kwania County and Apac District respectively. You are welcome. (Applause) 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE SPEAKER: I have permitted the Chair to present by power point, but the papers are also available. 

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the fact that we are entering into a very important and core function of Parliament, which is budgeting. But I think that procedurally, it would be right for the Leader of Government Business to move under Rule 14, which talks about suspension of rules that this House suspends Rule 177(1), which provides that, “Debate on a report of a Committee shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson or a Member nominated by the Committee or by the Speaker.” 

I think that would be the right procedure; that we suspend this rule because this rule says that a report of the committee should first be tabled three days in advance. Procedurally, the Leader of Government Business would do us justice by moving that under Rule 14 we suspend Rule 177(1). Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, are you suggesting that you are not ready to listen to the report today? (Interjections) I gave notice last week. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Obua is suggesting is just to make us move smoothly. He is not saying we are not going to debate, but that the Leader of Government Business should suspend the rule to allow the chairperson of the committee such that we are able to debate. It is just that, but not to gag the debate.

THE SPEAKER: No, but hon. Members, a time will come when you will say that you want the three days. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when we suspend the rule, the three days do not apply. That is what we want to do.

THE SPEAKER: For this or for all the reports?

MR OKUPA: For all the reports now. 

MR WADRI:  We need to go back to our Rules of Procedure as opposed to the recommendation which has been made by hon. Obua. Yesterday, the Opposition presented a response. Through our Shadow Minister of Finance we presented a response to the National Budget as having been presented by the Minister of Finance. In that light, I would like to direct us to Rule 129(5). I beg to read it verbatim. “Upon the motion that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply, and on resumption of debate, the Speaker shall give the first opportunity to speak to the Opposition Spokespersons on finance to respond to the motion, followed by the Chairperson of the Committee on the Budget, before recognising the rest of the Members to debate.” 

So, having read this provision of our Rules of Procedure, I would have expected that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee would have presented and after the Chairperson Budget Committee has made his or her presentation then the other subsequent committee chairpersons make their presentations, which now the member responsible for ICT is about to do. Once that is done, based on the history of this House, we do not have to wait for him to present and we sleep over it and debate it another day. Those of us who have been in this Parliament before - I stand to be corrected - immediately the chairperson delivers his report, debate ensues -(Interjections)– yes, that has been the practice. Debate ensues. 

That, therefore, means that we have been glossing over this provision of our Rules of Procedure as cited by hon. Obua. I once again say - I stand to be corrected if my recollection is wrong - that our past stand in this Parliament for the last 10 years, this being the 11th, is that immediately the chairperson of a committee makes his presentation, debate ensues. I beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what you want. What do you want Members? Do you want the report or you do not want it? Yes, hon. Ekanya.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we need your guidance on whether we are going to have all committee reports before we start the general debate on the budget, and then when each committee report comes we debate it. We really need to have that clarified because according to Rule 129(5), after the Shadow Minister of Finance responding, then the Chairperson Budget Committee responds and then Members debate. We do not need to have committee reports. After, they will come and pile; we would then have a general debate and then we conclude the general debate. We would have each committee bring their report, or it is you, Madam Speaker, to take the decision based on the time we have. We can have all committee reports presented and then we have a general debate. 

So, you can guide us on which approach to take because most of the issues of the other sectors will disappear. We have about 20 committees; how shall we remember all? The issues the Opposition presented are very serious and now they are going to be subdued by the ICT report. The issues that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee presented are very serious and they are going to be subdued by another committee. Why don’t we have a general debate then we handle committee reports?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I think that you will have to take a decision whether all the reports should be debated or not. When I met with the chairpersons there was grave concern that in the Eighth Parliament several committees never had their reports debated on the Floor of this House. They did not even present them. They were just laid and Members felt frustrated that they had done work and they were not allowed to present their reports. 

So, I said, “Let us make a difference and let the Members present and we give everybody an opportunity because all the committees of this House are equal.” In the past, only about five committee reports were being debated. The others were just laid and forgotten. If you want that, I have no problem.

4.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, the way the Order Paper was presented, the Speaker was giving an opportunity for a debate - not first the general debate on the budget and then the debate on the reports because we have tried both in the number of years I have also been here like my emeritus former colleague. (Laughter) You can spend a lot of time on general debate. We have just finished a general debate on the State of the Nation Address then you come back and have a general debate on the budget. By the time you finish that you do not have much time to have a debate on the committee reports. 

So, it is better that what we are following is that you have presented your report in accordance with Rule 129(5); and then similarly, the comment has been made by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee then the chairpersons of the sessional committees could present theirs. 

But I think what hon. Obua is raising is important; that if we are going to debate these reports immediately then we need to use Rule 14 to suspend Rule 177 so that the three days are not necessary; so that as soon as the report is finished, we debate it and in the process, by the time we finish the report on the sessional committees, we shall have had the full debate on the budget. So, I think it is important, but I do not think it is necessary that the Leader of Government Business moves that motion. 

THE SPEAKER: But you want it suspended for all the committee reports? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Not just this one?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we will have to agree. Hon. Mujuni

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas our Rule 129 is in such a way that upon the motion that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply, and on resumption of debate, the Speaker shall give the opportunity to the Opposition to speak and the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to speak, and whereas all that has been done, all this subsequent debate is in order. 

I also rise to support the motion raised by hon. Obua that the Leader of Government Business suspends the rule and you allow debate for all these other committees -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, you realise there is nothing general that we are going to debate in this debate that is not particular to the committees. If we have to discuss anything on ICT I think this is the opportunity we have as a Parliament, particularly to discuss ICT and I think it is only good practice that we do that. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: And also, I want to assure Members that nobody is fettered from talking about the Leader of the Opposition’s reply when he is talking about ICT. You are free to talk about it any time. It is available to all of you until the end.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The guidance I am now seeking from you is about what you just said a few minutes back because many committee chairpersons got frustrated after they had done a thorough job, but were not given the opportunity to make a presentation other than just laying the documents on the Table. Moreover we did not have an opportunity to look at those documents. Also, bearing in mind that there are very many sessional committees that are going to make presentations. The guidance I am seeking from you is that regarding the counter presentations from the Shadow Ministers, are we going to use the Commonwealth Parliamentary Practice Guidelines whereby the Opposition picks out those critical sectors that they feel are so dear to them that they want to respond to or are all of them going to get an opportunity to make their presentations?

THE SPEAKER: No, I had discussed with the Leader of the Opposition and also the Government Chief Whip to identify those critical areas; not everybody should speak on everything. It will not be fair, even to the House. You could let me know which critical areas you want your people to speak on and we allow you to speak on them.

MR SSEGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am getting more and more deeply concerned because you made a ruling earlier that hon. Tim Lwanga proceeds to present because we had intended to raise an objection in good faith that hon. Lwanga’s report, good as it is in terms of content or his response, is not a committee response within the meaning of Rule 177. In that case, therefore, it could not be debated as such. While I am in agreement with the Government Chief Whip that one of the alternatives is to suspend Rule 177, you can only suspend it if the response we are debating is that of the committee. Now, the argument is that it is not a response of the committee because it is not signed by the Members as required under that rule. 

I ask all Members to read all the Rules of Procedure together and complementary to each other because the chairperson of the committee is defined in the interpretation rule. For that reason, therefore, he must sign it as a chairperson. It must also be signed by a given number of committee members for us to proceed and debate that response.

Madam Speaker, we need your guidance on how we can debate an anonymous document; we do not know whether hon. Lwanga presented this document as a person or as a chairperson. If he had presented it as a chairperson, for it to fit –(Hon. Lwanga rose_)- I do not need information; I will get it next time. If we are to debate it as such, then it must comply with Rule 177; otherwise we do not even need to suspend our rules. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I ruled that you can use it as information; you can ignore, adopt or speak against it because it is just information. So, who is going to move a motion to suspend the three days’ rule?

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the motion is moved, I request you to ask the chairpersons of the committees to avail copies of the reports since we are now going to debate them immediately after their presentation. This will allow us to look at them beforehand and later debate from an informed point of view. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SUSPEND RULE 177

4.56
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion reads:

“AWARE that this Parliament is now moving into an important session of presentation, consideration and adoption of the reports of various committees;

COGNIZANT of the fact that Rule 177(1) of our Rules of Procedure provides that debate on a report of a committee shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the chairperson or the deputy chairperson or a member nominated by the committee or by the Speaker;

FURTHER aware that under Rule 14 any member can move that a rule be suspended;

NOW, THERFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of this Parliament that Rule 177(1) of our Rules of Procedure be suspended throughout the entire period that this Parliament will consider and adopt reports of committees on the Budget for this financial year.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

4.57
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion as presented by hon. Obua. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that Rule 177(1) be suspended as proposed by hon. Obua and seconded by hon. Akol.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Last week, I had requested the committees to complete their work at the end of the week so that they could pass on the reports to the Clerk and Members. Now that we have made it easier for you, please hasten to give them to the Clerk so that Members have them in time. On the other hand, we had a problem in the Eighth Parliament in that whenever Members received reports early they came back saying they had lost them.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, your office has provided virtually each MP with a computer and we are connected. Since we are in the computer age, we should have soft copies of reports so that we can access them easily. Moreover, your office facilitates us with stationery and we can print them whenever we want to read.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Clerk is directed to place all the reports on the Intranet as soon as they come out so that Members access them before they come for the House proceedings.

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Nabeta): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had tested the projector here but somehow it developed a problem. So, I will continue while they fix the technical problem. I beg to present the report from the ICT committee under Article 90 – 

THE SPEAKER: But you could give an executive summary. I believe you have that.

MR NABETA: Yes, I do have a summary. So, what I was going to do – we can move to page six of the report, where we look at the ministry’s sectoral performance for financial year 2010/2011 where the ministry performed 120 percent. This is because in the Vote 020/0503, NITA, which is National Information Technology Authority, was given an additional Shs 6.52 in a supplementary budget, therefore, performing at 156 percent. So, overall, the ministry performed at 120 percent.

On page six, the ministry highlights the challenges as: underfunding, high taxation, harmonization and inadequate ICT infrastructure. The problem, however, is that in the NDP, ICT is one of those primary growth sectors considered to be very important in terms of economic growth. However, the funding of the ministry has been dismal.  

If you look at the sector allocation for ICT, the ministry receives only 0.2 percent of the national allocation whereas when you look at public administration, legislature, accountability and public management sectors, they are receiving a lot of money instead of spending more money on ICT which would actually streamline the efficiency in those sectors. 

It should be noted that the ICT sector as it is today contributes 5.7 percent to GDP. If you take the 5.7 percent and you only get 0.2 percent of funding, then it leaves a lot to be desired. 

Madam Speaker, the ministry also highlighted high taxes as one of the challenges it is facing. Uganda indeed does present an opportunity for tax reduction on the sale of mobile handsets. In 2009, the Ministry of Finance in Kenya decided to remove taxes on these cell phones. The cell phones of today are no longer just cell phones but access devices to services. Therefore, when the Kenyan Government removed taxes, there was an increase of 7 percent in penetration in terms of mobile accessibility. That means that there was a 7 percent increase in access to services. 

We are, therefore, recommending that the Government of Uganda should consider removing taxes on access devices, specifically the mobile phone tablets because this will allow the local Ugandans to be able to benefit from some of the key services that are actually available like mobile money and M-Health. Actually, the government stands to make more money from the services sector rather than getting the little money they are getting through the VAT on these mobile devices. 

Based on that we are, therefore, also recommending that the Ministry of ICT which is now embarking on digital migration should also be given priority in terms of the roles each one should play. Right now, whereas the Ministry of ICT holds the policy regulator, which is UCC, it has had limited roles to play in analogue to digital migration. , We are, therefore, asking Government to let the Ministry of ICT to play a bigger role in terms of the analogue to digital migration as we look at page 9 of the report.

Digital broadcasting is defined as the sending and receiving of moving images and sound by digital or by discreet signals in contrast to analogue.  Maybe, on that,I will show Members now that technology is working. We are no longer analogue; we have gone digital. That is the cornerstone of ICT as core in terms of primary growth, but unfortunately if you look at the schematics, ICT is not being funded.  As you look at the MTF allocation, this is a better figure. You can see that we had to put a red line just to show the level of funding for ICT because you could easily miss it in the sector fund allocation. If you look on the left, Madam Speaker, you can see that actually public administration, legislature, advocacy, accountability and public sector management are actually taking a lot of money whereas ICT would have actually been able to enhance and reduce on the costs in that area. 

We were, of course, looking at the GDP contribution which is 5.7 whereas it gets 0.2 percent and then of course the VAT which we are talking about. If you remove the VAT on the phones the penetration would go higher as evidenced from the Kenyan case; when they removed the taxes on mobile phones the penetration went up by 49 percent. And  as we were saying, today the mobile phone is no longer just a phone; there is a linkage between the traders, the banks, then farmers and of course mobile money and other things. 

If you look up there, the near field communication devices (NFC), you will be able to use your phone to pay at the counters of Uchumi and other areas. So, since the device is now becoming more of a tool to access services, the taxes should be removed. 

When you go to the one about migration on page 9, which is the difference between analogue and digital broadcasting. In analogue you send it in waves and of course in digital you send it in packets.
 
And then –(Interjection)- in the analogue to digital migration, there are two ministries concerned; there is the Ministry of ICT and the Ministry of Information and National Guidance. Before, the Ministry of ICT had UCC and Posta Uganda and UICT, while the Ministry of Information had the Broadcasting Council and UBC.  Currently, because of the convergences, the Ministry of ICT has UCC and the Broadcasting Council has NITA, Posta Uganda and UICT. 

They have now moved Broadcasting Council from the Ministry of Information and merged it with UCC so that now the Ministry of Information and National Guidance is left with UBC, the national broadcaster, which is content, and UBC the infrastructure. Because of the evolution of ICT, you see now that broadcasting, telecom and IT services are merging into ICT as you can see now that you are able to have video voice and data at the same time. So, for most of you maybe who have gmails and yahoos, your e-mails are there and if you access them from here, you are actually going to the clouds. So, if you hear of cloud computing, they are talking about such kinds of information being elsewhere while you are here. 

So, because of that it has brought out the convergence of Uganda Communications Commission and Uganda Broadcasting Council into the Bill, which the ministry says they are bringing to the committee very soon; that is, the Uganda Communication Regulatory Authority Bill. Now, this Bill will be able to harmonise the Uganda Communications Commission today and the Broadcasting Council into one organisation which should now be the sole regulator of the ICT sector.

If you look at some of the challenges the ministry had highlighted, one of the problems is harmonisation of the regulatory role. So, this is actually the harmonising process of bringing all regulation under ICT, which is one UCRA regulator, which will in turn be able to oversee all public infrastructure, and which is what will look like the MTNs and Warids of today. And then of course the sector which will be regulated here is the public service providers among whom is NITA Uganda, the National Information Technology Authority, which is going to among other things promote BPOs and District Information Business Centres (DIBICs). 

In harmonising the Rural Communication Development Fund (RCDF), the committee had recommended that we move RCDF which was set up  to help Government to extend services in under-privileged areas from UCC to NITA now that the networks are about to cover the whole country. NITA should be able to look at expanding IT in Government. So, that is the recommendation from the committee; to see that NITA Uganda takes care of all e-government services and IT while UCRA regulates the Information Sector.

Because of our liberalisation, we have also had a boom in terms of having masts. South Korea for example is almost the same land mass as Uganda, but you see here it has 250 masts as a whole country and then in their analogue to digital migration, they will have 50 masts by 2015, which is the deadline. 

Uganda today has over 3000 masts and if we do not stop that today, we will more likely have about 5000 by the time we reach 2015. So, we are recommending that UCC, or if it becomes Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority, immediately undertakes infrastructure harmonisation so that we stop having this madness in terms of having masts everywhere and everyone putting up their own masts.

Posta Uganda Limited is mandated to provide tailored communications, financial and logistical solutions in a sustainable manner. One of the key issues to appreciate is that actually three years ago when we met them, they had a Shs 14.8 billion debt. Today they have been able to reduce it to Shs 7.7 billion, but in order for them to harmonise and take on the new challenges they face because of email and other competitors, Government should pay off the Shs 7.7 billion. Since it is now a profit-making organisation, Government should pay this money so that Posta can focus and invest in the new dynamics of the new field that they are playing in.

Uganda Institute of Information and Communication Technology is mandated to manage upright communications services and training centre as spelt out in the UCC Act. It is impacting skills, but the problem is that once it was moved from the Ministry of Education to the Ministry of ICT, it is not getting any funding from Government. Since it is giving technical skills, which are much needed in our drive from analogue to digital in all aspects of Uganda, it is important that Government of Uganda should fund key activities of the institute.

National Information Technology Authority Uganda 

This is an autonomous body, which was created in 2009 to coordinate, promote and monitor information technology development within the context of national, social and economic development.

One of the things is the National Backbone Infrastructure, in which they have completed phases one and two. However, the committee has demanded that they should operationalise phases one and two, and secondly, they should ensure that the forensic audit is completed in the shortest time possible so that we actually analyse the network, which was laid in the country now.

If you see the national backbone and how it goes around the country, which it is supposed to do, it will also be able to extend into other small towns. This is the main starting point, but the National Backbone Infrastructure will be able to reach the whole country. This will be more of the road for ICT in the country and we can now lay e-governance on top of it.

The biggest problem today and why we spend a lot of money in ministries, departments, agencies and local governments of Uganda is that today, Uganda IT is run on this level. Every ministry is trying to run its own IT system and its own small isolated systems that do not talk to each other. This brings in a lot of issues including lack of coordination in Government. With the national backbone as you have seen, this is meant to create the infrastructure, which is needed, and if you look at the national backbone, they are working on creating the national network, which is now the brain of the network; creating the small data centre, which they have done in phase two.

That will provide the infrastructure we need here in terms of helping Government to create an enabling environment that will lead to e-government. As you see here, it is Government to citizens, Government to Government, Government to business and Government to employees. Maybe also those MPs for Workers will be very interested in government to employees and the benefits it can bring.

The whole road map here is for Uganda to move into a shared IT infrastructure whereby all systems talk to each other for us to be able to benefit from e-governance. This is the basic layout of e-governance infrastructure. Most of you have heard of the National Security Information System, which is supposed to produce the National IDs, but actually the foundation is the National Automated Finger Printing Information System (AFIS) which is now the data base on which all e-governance would run.

The ministry through NITA is working to establish the National AFIS and if there was good coordination, we would not be wasting a lot of money in other duplicity projects like other ministries are doing. So, Government needs to harmonise most of these projects into one major project with all key stakeholders involved so that we are all able to benefit - those who are dealing with immigration, births and deaths, money, anything in health services, tax - if all these are linked together, we shall be able to get a good foundation. 

For hon. Ekanya, you were saying that we waste a lot of money. Now, this is actually the best thing you need to do if you want to have the best accountability because here if the individual is known and their personal identification, all these projects as you have seen in the report like the SIM card registration and National ID will be able to function if we have the core, which is the identification of the individual.

So, if we have the systems and all in place, we will be able to have something like this where from birth to death, you are able to digitally follow and get the correct identification and get the right services throughout your lifespan, because of the digitalisation that we would have if all this is put together.

For this to happen, however, NITA being the implementer of e-governance has a funding gap, which is currently about Shs 26 billion, but in the next phase they will need more money to fund some of the big projects they are working on. District Business Information Centres (DBICs) will be the information centres in districts that can be used to offer e-governance so that instead of somebody coming to Kampala for a passport, you will actually be able to apply for your passport in Gulu using these DBICs.

Business processing outsourcing is one of the key employment creation businesses in the World. It is a $ 1.3 trillion business now and Uganda is now strategising to become one of the destinations of BPO. This budgetary allocation, although small, NITA is now actually running a pilot of three BPO operators in Kampala and they will need more support in that.

In order for BPO to operate, you need the National Backbone Infrastructure operational and that is what they are working on now, to ensure that we have a good road to the global market where the BPO is more prevalent than in Uganda and of course the taxes.

Madam Speaker, some of the key questions are: Rule 70(g) of the Rules of Procedure should be amended to allow tablets, laptops and other access devices in the Chambers. Currently, this is not allowed, but in order to allow Members to enjoy some of these benefits, we propose that this rule be amended, maybe until we have a new Chamber, because I am assuming the new Chamber will have the machines already installed into the seats. So, for now at least, we should have the tabs like Galaxy, iPods and laptops to access these bills, reports and other things.

Secondly, Government should be able to provide us with Bills, ministry policy statements and reports in soft copy. It is amazing the amount of paper that goes through this august House. I think if we went digital, we could actually save on the amount of paper work in Parliament.

Then the Parliamentary Commission - instead of us fighting to put these things up in your way, we should have at least three or five screens here where we can just plug in here and be able to present our information without having to worry about that.

In conclusion, most of the general recommendations are highlighted on the last page in the main report. 

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, beg to move that the Committee on Information Communication Technology recommends that Parliament approves a total of Shs 16,819,539,000 for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology for the financial year 2011/2012 as follows:

i.	Recurrent expenditure (Wage and Non-Wage) – Shs 4,869,251,000 

ii.	Development expenditure – Shs 7,271,220,000

iii.	Taxes – Shs 4,679,068,000 and the total will be Shs 16,819,539,000. 

I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon. Chairperson. I have looked at the report and it has been signed by 13 out of the 19 members. Therefore, it meets the rules because a third of the members signed it and it is eligible for debate. 

But before that, I have received a note from Members that there are some Members of this House who have not yet got desktops in their offices. So, I would like to suggest that they register with the clerk so that we can quantify the problem and then make arrangements to sort that out sooner than later so that Members can have access to these computers. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to represent our ICT minister and –(Mr Obua-Ogwal rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Oh, there is hon. Obua-Ogwal -(Laughter)

5.22
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Benson Obua-Ogwal): As a Member of this committee and also the line shadow minister, I would like to associate myself with the report which has been presented to the House. We moved as a committee and the criticisms that are in the report are also my criticisms. But Madam Speaker, as a shadow cabinet, we were informed and requested to make or rather prepare alternative policies to be presented to this House. For ICT, I have finished, but we have engaged some technical people to have a second look before we can present.  

I would like to suggest or rather request that tomorrow, I just lay that alternative policy and make a 3-minute summary so that it also becomes part or property of this House. Otherwise, we concur that the budget to ICT is very low and yet if you study most countries that have accelerated their development processes, for instance, in the Asian sub-continent, it was because they emphasised ICT to the helm. If you look even nearer, for example at Mauritius, you will find that they prioritised ICT and that is why they have developed very fast, but in Uganda, we are not doing very well in supporting ICT. So, I crave your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that tomorrow you allow me to lay that document which is in its final stages and make one or two comments on it. I beg to move. 

5.26
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, on page 8 of the committee report, there is an observation under, “Distribution of computers to schools: In some schools, one computer that was given to about 70 children was insufficient. In others, there was no Internet connection, while in others, the computers lay idle in stores because the beneficiaries did not know how to use them.” This, in my opinion, is a big challenge to the nation. If one school can fail to have just one individual that is computer literate, then I think it is a big challenge to our Government. 

There is a project in Rwanda which talks about one computer per child and I think it targets children in primary schools; and I think here, we mean secondary schools in Uganda. I would like to propose that let the list of schools that did not use these computers be named and probably be put on the list –(Interjections)– yes, hon. Members; a whole school failing to operate a computer in this millennium? It is not apportioning blame, but they should have taken the initiative at least to let one of them learn how to use a computer such that he or she can in turn teach the students. 

You cannot do without ICT; science and technology in this millennium is more of a must and not a choice; but an imperative obligation on any citizen. Even we, the Members of Parliament, must know how to boot a computer. We could be crying about computers not being in our offices, but a number of Members of Parliament may not know how to boot a computer. So, this is something in which we must really show interest and ensure that the young generation learns how to use computers because we have reached a point where we cannot do without this technology. 

Secondly, on page 11, there is a recommendation that the ICT ministry and the Ministry of Works should have a provision or component of ICT infrastructure to be incorporated in the design of future road construction. I think this is a valid point that should be supported by this Parliament because we normally see so many good roads being dug because they are putting underground cables. Once it is incorporated, I think this will go a long way in ensuring that we do not damage some of our few good roads. Otherwise, I want to thank the committee for being compliant with the provision of this millennium ICT compliancy. Thank you so much. 

5.29
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three brief issues. One is on the preparation of the reports. It is important that you educate the committee chairpersons on how to professionally prepare these reports. You realise that with the first report, the chairperson did not sign; when you look at the heading of the second report; it is as though it was prepared by the Clerk to Parliament. We need these people to own these reports in future. 

Secondly, the presentation was okay, but I feel it has too much technical jargon and when you are presenting a report, you need to consider the audience to whom you are going to present the report. 

The third point is about the mobile communication network. People are being conned using the system of mobile money and people are being blackmailed using mobile telephones. I do not know the comments of the committee because we need to ensure that all the owners of the mobile lines are registered such that we are able to protect the public from being conned through these mobile networks and blackmailing. It is very important - even honourable Members of Parliament have been conned through this method of mobile money network and blackmail. It is important that we take it upon ourselves to make sure that telephone lines which are mobile are registered such that owners are easily identified. Thank you.

5.32
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would beg the front people to sit down, please. I would like to make a comment on the report of the ICT committee and I thank the chairperson. 

As hon. Denis Obua said, the world has gone internationally literate under computer, but in my constituency of people with disabilities, it is still a big problem in Uganda. We find that the computers in Uganda - I was reading the report given to schools and I was wondering how many of them were computer literate to feed a child with visual impairment because these people can use computers as long as a programme has been installed and that is a programme called Jaws.

Once this programme is there, it speaks; they do not need to use the mouse; they use the keyboard and they will do all the communication without support of a helper. It can also be used by a deaf person so that when you have your private information you can just be on face book; you can be on the computer and you can communicate and get all the information. I think there is need for Government to look at that and see that when we provide to schools - we need to have special computers for schools. 

I was in Iganga S.S. and they have an annex for special needs there and they told me, “Honourable Member of Parliament, if we could get an embosser”, you know when I use these terms, they are also jargons to some of you. An embosser is a system you put in a computer and it will bring out the material for examination in Braille than struggling with dots. I think some of you saw how hon. Baba Diri used to struggle before Parliament facilitated her. She would fear being noisy in the room, but with the embosser you will not have to hear this noise and it is just Shs 10 million. If it could be given to special needs schools, I could appreciate that Government helps them. The other year, all the examinations for students with visual impairment were brailed very wrongly and we had to complain to UNEB. 

I also want to say that the issue of mobile phones; again in Uganda, I have moved to shops and I do not see any phones that are accessible to people with visual impairment because these can send messages and they can get anything. We have them in South Africa, we have them in Kenya and I have some few friends who have flown out and have come with those kinds of materials. I have asked, “How do you use your phone” because that one will just tell you. If I am blind and the Speaker calls me, it will just tell me, “Speaker calling” then I say, “Yes please”. I do not need to ask somebody who is calling. So, we need to see how the ICT Department helps this kind of category of people to also benefit from ICT. (Applause) And I want to say that —

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Baba Diri.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, hon. Asamo for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that ICT for people with visual impairment has gone very far. I have equipment called SARA. It can read for me. I have it in my office except that it is too heavy for me to carry here. (Laughter) 

Secondly, I have Tagmet which I can use for writing and I can edit and I can do everything even on the computer. I have learnt how to use computer; you just use a programme called Jaws for Windows and you can use your computer like any sighted person. 

Now our problem here is poverty and Baba Diri is the only one having all these things in the whole of Uganda. What about the other children? What about the university students? We would like to see that Government provides for people with visual impairment and also for people who are deaf. The equipment is there, the problem is money and we need money to support people with visual impairment to benefit from this. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MS ASAMO: Thank you for the information. I brought it - you know in Makerere University and other universities, we have a lot of these students and they want to do research and this would be the best practice. They keep coming to us and we do not have that mandate to be able to support all of them. So, I think we need to look at that. 

The issue of the news; in the report, it is indicated that the committee will demand a report from the media houses to begin news  with sign language interpreters. It is a right to have information, Members, but you realise that a sign language interpreter is expected to be paid by -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to finish and then we get to the Members in the back bench.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to say that nobody in Uganda pays the news readers when they read. When we go back home, we listen to the news and nobody pays the newsreader, but the deaf people are being told to pay the sign language interpreter. I really beg that, let us give these people their right to information such that they become like any other Ugandan. Thank you so much. (Applause)

5.37
MRS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on ICT for the report they have made. I want to make a comment on page 18 where they talked of the revenue growth and they stated that they realised the revenue growth of about 68 percent. I want to ask a question. Now that most of these telecommunication companies have ventured into provision of financial services, how is the licensing being handled?
 
You realise that Uganda Communications Commission has the regulatory mandate over communication services in the country, but then if you see the telecommunication companies or how they are being taxed, it depends on the goodwill that they submit their returns to URA. Do they have independent monitoring equipment where they are able to monitor and then say that this is probably the amount of revenue they have realised so that URA can gather that information and tax the company?

If you see the money laundering - in the past few months, most of the conmen are using particularly mobile money to con people. They abduct children and say, “Send money on this line”. How is UCC trying to guard us against this so that money laundering is not really used? Note that they use the telecommunications messages to con people. 

I wanted to raise some questions on page 19 under observations. The committee observed that Government of Uganda acquired shares worth Shs 25 billion in Posta Uganda, but what percentage is this? Because that can make us know how many shares Government of Uganda has in Posta Uganda. Thank you.

5.39
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to the previous speaker and thank the committee that they have made a very good report. However, I have some few observations and maybe, I will seek a clarification from the committee.

When you read, on page 23, bullet 2 where they say in the recommendations: “The FTA should be given the seriousness it deserves by recruiting a credible company” to carry out the forensic audit. I do think that this Parliament passed an Audit Act whereby, any money spent by Government must be audited by the Auditor-General and all the audit companies within the country are under the Auditor-General. What do they mean by “A credible company audited this money for Government”? I think Parliament needs to know more about this. I am a student of auditing, but I do not understand what you mean by credible company because if you do not meet the standards of the practice of auditing you are not put on the list. So, what do you mean by a credible audit company?

Another observation is removing taxes from mobile phones. It is not clear whether this recommendation is for next year or not. We passed the vote-on-Account allowing Government to spend money and I believe that the indicative figures that were recommended by this Parliament include the taxes to be collected and which I think we are going to pass in the Finance Bill. So, if we remove them, where will this money come from if it is removed from the mobile phones?

Another observation is on the Post Bank which we think will make more capital. When you look at the assets and liabilities, the shareholding capital of Post Bank is not worth that capacity –(Interjections)– sorry it is Posta Uganda, not Post Bank. When you look at its assets and liabilities and the shareholding capital, you find that the money projected – Posta does not have the capacity. I looked at their statement for this financial year, and it indicated that their shareholding is almost at Shs 6 billion. Now you want to pour there money yet Posta Uganda does not have the capacity to utilize that amount of money –(Member timed out_)

5.43
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a response on the presentation made by the Youth MP –(Interjections)– we are free to comment on anything. I want to make a response on the issue of the Youth Venture Fund by Government of Uganda. Specifically, I want to talk about the training company, where Enterprise Uganda was given the monopoly of training the youth in the whole country. I seriously object to that, and I propose that training the youth in this country should be regionalized. Remember, each region has its own specific needs; youth from these regions have different needs. 

Therefore, I propose that Government identifies institutions that are based in those regions – Government can bid for certain institutions to present their documents and they pick out those which are best qualified to carry out the training; those who have the capacity and facilities to carry out this training. We have to take this training back to the regions because you cannot say that the needs of a youth in the North are the same as those of a youth in Central or Western Uganda. 

I also want to comment on the criterion for accessing this fund. The youth in the rural areas have been sidelined. Since the MPs proposed to look into it next financial year, I beg that they consider this matter as well. Besides, those of us who come from very hard-to-reach and disadvantaged areas our youth there will not even get a coin from what Government is giving – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Before the next Member speaks, Minister of Finance, I was alarmed by the criteria for the youth to access that money. If you are going to ask a boy in my sub-county of Mbulamuti to first travel to Kampala to register a company; first he needs the money to come to Kampala in order to register the company. Then he must also have an O’level certificate yet most of my voters stopped somewhere – No, I think we shall require answers later - that is a very serious policy decision, especially when in the Local Government Act we allowed people who do not have O’level papers to become chairpersons of LC III. We shall want some answers on that matter. 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, everything has a beginning and we did not want to begin on a wrong footing. This is just the beginning and we thought that in order for us to take off, we would begin with a grade of people whom we think are able to give us the results we want, rather than going with everybody and end up like we ended up in the “Entandikwa”. So, hon. Members, this is only the start; we shall clean-up as we build capacity and educate those who do not have formal education. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the argument of the Minister of Finance cannot go unchallenged. Hon. Minister, thousands of young people who are riding boda bodas are not registered. The cost of registering a company is not less than Shs 500,000 and you are going to advance not more than Shs 1 million. Registering a company requires a lawyer, the paper work and so forth. So, please, the youth who are roasting chicken in Idudi and Namawojjolo cannot do that. And we have Sudanese and Congolese who are buying produce all over the country when they are not registered; why should you demand our youth to be registered?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I would appeal to you to listen first; you will respond later because I know that many Members are really worried; I am also worried.

5.49
MR ALERO AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Members. I want to draw our attention to page 9. There is a heading there which says, “Analogue to digital migration”. 

Madam Speaker, we have heard that UBC has already been given the monopoly to control that transition from analogue to digital. So my request to the Minister of Information is to let UBS be technologically equipped; if not, they may not manage the task. As for now, even their signals are not clear; and if they are not equipped technologically or scientifically then we may have problems. That is one.

This programme will depend on the steadiness of electricity; that is power. Already, we are moving upwards to downwards. We are experiencing a lot of load shedding and we are talking of moving technologically. How can we succeed? The Ministry of Energy should expedite the process of increasing energy - increasing the amount of electricity; if not, we are going to continue talking about digital migration and may not succeed. Thank you very much.

5.52
MR MBAHIMBA JAMES (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few issues to raise. I want to refer to one issue in the budget response. You must be trained in order to access the youth fund. I have seen very many business people in Uganda who are very successful and have never been trained by Enterprise Uganda. I, therefore, wonder why somebody should be subjected to training in order to access the funds to start business and then pay for it. 

My submission is; there should be certain criteria that should be followed. These criteria should not include training by Enterprise Uganda. Personally, I am a businessman. I am a scientist by training and I am successful in business; Enterprise Uganda has never trained me. 

Point number two is about the report of the Committee on ICT in reference to migration from analogue to digital. I come from Kasese. Today, we are giving a monopoly to UBC. I have never seen any signal of UBC in Kasese. I have also read, like they have recommended down here that in other countries like Kenya, they have two companies for signals. Why do we take one in Uganda? Basing on history that UBC has not been reliable and also in reference to the confusion that we have had in UBC; why do we give UBC that monopoly? Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

5.54
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): First of all, I want to thank the Speaker. I want to begin with page 9 of the report which has observations. Analogue to Digital; I request that UBC does not handle the issue of digital migration. There is need for the Cabinet to reconsider its position and push the issue of digital migration to the Ministry of ICT entirely if we are to achieve the intended objective.

Then the issue of the fund; I am happy the issue has come to the House. When we had a meeting with officials from the Ministry of Finance and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance – we need to put a lot of emphasis on investigating some of our technocrats. We are beginning to realise that any issue of sensitisation training; our technocrats have a lot of interest in it. I am putting this with emphasis on the Shs 3.5 billion given to Enterprise Uganda. Even after looking at these conditions entirely, I personally disagreed with them in their meeting.

When you look at the issue -(Interjection)- of saying a business venture must be able to employ six people. If you are starting up a business and you are only borrowing between Shs 200,000 to Shs 5 million; which business can employ six people? Honourable minister, if you are saying all our businesses must be registered – I remember I disagreed with them in that very meeting. As young people in this country, three-quarters of succession businesses countrywide are not registered. To make matters worse, saying that someone must have O’level and above - it was our effort to ensure that they proposed to bring a supplementary because we said, “If you are not going to give us money, where are we heading?” They almost proposed to also bring a supplementary to cater for those who have not gone to school. 

I proposed within that meeting that if Enterprise Uganda is to be given the training then let us also cut the budget because you cannot tell me that you are going to train about 10,000 youth when you are looking at only those at post-O’level. Do you expect to get the targeted number of 10,000? You will not, because 10,000 would be, maybe general. To make matters worse, before I forget this point, during the ongoing trainings when Enterprise Uganda goes mobilising, they do not specify that it is post-O’level. Whoever comes is given the priority to go and train.

There is the National Youth Council, a body corporate. It is very ashaming to my Government that the National Youth Council, which is entirely in charge of youth programmes in this country –(Interjection)- (Member timed out­­_)  

THE SPEAKER: One minute for you to complete.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, if you look at the National Youth Council; not at any one point did the ministry ever think of considering this body corporate. Government spent Shs 51 billion for its structures from the villages to national level. What was the function of the National Youth Council if they were not consulted? Look at the funding Government gives to the National Youth Council. In a quarter, you are given Shs 800,000 in three months. Where are we heading? My appeal to our Government is, begin looking at us young people as a priority. That is our only appeal. Can all priorities be given to us as the youth of this country? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from the youth paper regarding the criteria. I am one of the proponents of registration. People must register companies, but this should be taken as the contribution instead of charging the youth 10 percent. Let their contribution be registration. They register a company and access the funds.

The issue of having the minimum capital advanced to the youth yet you are tagging a condition of at least four people being employed by a company; what will Shs 100,000 do? I think you need to raise this minimum amount of Shs 100,000.

The other criteria which they have put is that you must have two guarantors of 40 years and above. There are Members of Parliament here like my brother Ogwang there. He will not qualify yet he is a Member of Parliament. He is very credible. How can you knock him out? I think this criteria was not well thought-out. 

I want to thank the Minister of ICT, one, for providing computers to the schools in Kasilo, St. Elizabeth Girls Secondary School and Kamoli Secondary School. Thank you so much for providing the computers. I had provided some old computers; So, they knew how to use them. By the time yours came, they were dot com. Thank you.

The issue of Posta Uganda: I have been in COSASE; I am not in support of Government paying Posta this money. Posta is very negligent in its operations. Look at the Auditor-General’s reports. They do not even have an asset register. They do not know what belongs to them. I am surprised that on page 18, you are talking about – that they have inspected all their property; they have everything. We asked them in April to provide us with the list of all the assets. They failed to provide the list. We brought the issue – there are my neighbours here where Capital Shoppers is putting up a supermarket. That was property of Posta Uganda. They left that land; I do not know under what circumstances and gave it to Capital Shoppers in Ntinda to build a supermarket. We asked them, they could not answer. So, the management of Posta Uganda is very negligent. (Member timed out_)

6.11 
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Chairman of the committee for the work done. On page 8, Government is supporting some schools. In my constituency, out of five government-aided secondary schools, it is supporting two. Now, the issues there are that the two schools are overcrowded. Why can’t Government make it compulsory to support all government-aided schools? That is point No.1

Two, on the issue of masts; hon. Ibi has talked about the pollution. These masts are erected in residential areas. The noise and the pollution from the generators is too high. I have a friend who has a house but he has failed to sleep because he got that house when they had erected a mast and the initial agreement was 15 years. That is the contract which MTN entered with the owner before he sold the house. But he has failed to sell the house because the mast is near the house. Also, there is a case near where I live. The landlord entered a contract with MTN and they erected a mast near the house, but the tenants are suffering. They took the case to court and recently they told them to prove ownership but they are tenants and they cannot do much. I think we should look at how these masts should be handled.

On page 18, I support what hon. Okupa said. There are serious problems in Posta Uganda. I do not think that what you reported here, Mr Chairman, is correct. Whoever gave you this information, it is wrong information. Posta is having a lot of problems. They have failed to pay creditors and you are saying they are making money and they have got new buses. But they have failed to pay the creditors: NSSF, URA, all creditors. There is a lot of financial mismanagement in Posta. So, I do not support the issue of saying that Government gives money to Posta.

Then on page 22, on the national backbone, hon. Members, in the last Parliament we passed a loan from China for the national backbone, but you are saying they are not paying the youth. What happened to the money? I thought the money we passed was also to pay wages? If they are not paying them what happened to the money we passed here and what is the status of the project? One time they were saying the material which they were using was substandard and it was not the one which was requested for in the specifications.  Mr Chairman, what is the progress of this project? I thank you.

6.14
MR AMOS LUGOLOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am addressing myself to the issue of business process outsourcing and I want to provide testimony here, especially from countries that have been very successful in this area. Why we provide all this investment in infrastructure is because of the business end of ICT. Countries like India over 10 years ago invested heavily in this sector following trends of the private sector in exploiting the business process outsourcing the opportunities, particularly the call centres, backend operations, data processing, etcetera; and they made money and actually to-date they are still making a lot of money. But 10 years ago, India was earning over $10 billion in ICT business exports, particularly in this area. It is a great opportunity, therefore, for us to look at this sector very seriously and I am happy that NITA or the ministry is proposing investment in this area. In India, for instance, they proactively invested in software technology parks all over the country in major cities and it is good that the ministry is considering starting one BPO centre somewhere with 500 seats. I believe this is going to be a pilot and in the coming financial year, based on the success of that centre, they should consider creating many more centres because today we are crying about the problem of unemployment in this country. 

Over 60 percent of our population are youth and these are the kinds of jobs they are very happy to get involved in. Many of them do not want to go back to rural areas to engage in agriculture. These are the businesses they want to exploit. In fact when you go to Makerere University, one of the biggest lecture rooms that you have there is in IT. They go for these courses in anticipation that they will get jobs. We need to move proactively to prepare these young men and women for the world of work and this area is one of those fastest growing sectors in the world. 

So, I support to promote this area in this country and I think Government this time should come in very aggressively to promote it by way of creating the necessary software technology parks, what they have called the BPO centres. But also in terms of helping to proactively look for business overseas because these young entrepreneurs are not going to go to America to look for these businesses. So, to jumpstart this whole process, we need to help them look for these business opportunities. Something must be done by NITA in this area. It is a high growth centre and I believe and recommend that if you are to look for areas where we want to provide additional funding for this sector this is No.1 priority. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go to the issue of the youth. The minister has come out with the proposal that one of the criteria that those who want to access the loan should meet is that they have to have a registered company. I completely disagree with this. If you are looking for a loan of Shs 300,000 and registering a company requires more than Shs 500,000, I do not know whether this is acceptable. 

On the issue of composition of the board, I have seen that Youth Members of Parliament are supposed to be part of the board. I believe this is supposed to be an oversight body, so if they are part of the composition this is a conflict of interest. 

On the issue of budgets, I will go to the element of taxation and tax policy, on page 8. I do not know whether we should address hon. Tim Lwanga, as the chairperson of the committee, on this particular issue. But I will say that he has given us some information. He is talking of exempting Pay as You Earn from Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000. I am of the view that before we exempt this category let him come with information regarding how much Government will lose in terms of revenue. 

He went ahead to say that vehicles older than seven years from the dates of their manufacturing should actually be banned completely. I do not know whether he has also got some information regarding this or he has carried out some research. If you go to most of these bonds around town, you will find that most of the vehicles in these bonds are 1992. What does it imply? It implies that we Ugandans are poor and cannot afford new cars. And if we say that we should completely ban old cars, we shall have lost a lot of revenue. Let him come up with researched data on this. Thank you.

6.21
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the ICT committee for the elaborate report and its recommendations. I want to first address myself to the issue of the youth. It has been realised that whenever there is a project involving huge sums of funds, the Ministry of Finance wants to be responsible for it. Parliament must come up and say, “No.” 

I want to share my experience of the Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme at a time I was the Finance Secretary of the National Youth Council. The Ministry of Finance should liaise with the Ministry of Gender and investigate what happened to that project because this is not a new phenomenon; we used to have it. Why then did it fail? The Ministry of Finance owned the project and it failed. We have the National Youth Council which is a body corporate with a mandate of unifying the youth of this country. It is a channel through which amenities reach the youth of Uganda. The Ministry of Finance is charged with the responsibility of supervision and so this project should not be retained under it. It should instead go where it belongs, that is, Ministry of Gender. 

The Government of Uganda has just spent Shs 52 billion on youth elections. Why did it do that? I am a product of the youth council system and I know why. The training we got has made us what we are today. We must give the young people a chance to run the affairs that pertain to them. We must give the Ministry of Gender capacity and chance to run the affairs that fall under its docket. 

Madam Speaker, we have seen that very many bad agreements and concessions have been signed because the Ministry of Finance wants to lead, even where it has no technical know-how. I do not want to mention some of those I know – I will talk about them at an appropriate time. You cannot tell me, “Because this project is going to a wrong ministry, that is why they are asking for an O’level certificate. 

We are talking about agribusiness; 80 percent of Ugandan youth are in agriculture and they are in villages. When will they come to Kampala to access whatever? Some of them have never been to school due to poverty and now they are trying agriculture. But again we are telling them, “We want to do commercial agriculture.” Someone owns their gardens and you are telling them to go and register. How many of us started businesses with six employees? Really, when you are starting a business and you must have six employees who you must pay it means you have to pay their contributions to NSSF. Do we see the danger we are facing with the Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme? 

I want to end by moving a motion stating that the Youth Fund must be moved to the Ministry of Gender from the Ministry of Finance because the Ministry of Gender has a youth department, apart from the National Youth Council. Is that department inefficient? (Member timed out_)

6.26
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I am here as a product of the National Youth Council. I was elected a youth chairman right from the village, to the parish, to the sub-county and later Secretary for Legal Affairs at the national level, a position I just handed over last month. I associate very closely with young people because I am one of them.

I thank my colleagues, the Youth MPs, for raising this matter because it has been my concern as well. I only waited for it to be raised by the right people and I would support them. The money to support the youth has come at the right time, but there are experiences to learn from. 

To begin with, this is not the money the youth have got from Government. We have other experiences like hon. Nankabirwa has just mentioned; the YES was a project meant to help the youth to escape poverty. We know why it failed and even some of you who were following this matter know it. I am wondering why this country has a problem of creating institutions that it cannot sustain and make use of. 

We have a whole institution called the National Youth Council in the Ministry of Gender. It has structures from the village up to the national level. We also have departments in the same ministry which deal with the youth. There is a whole commissioner for the youth. At the district level, there are departments that deal with the youth. We have the community development officers at the district and sub-county levels and their role is to develop young people and the other community members. All these people are there, but we are not using them. 

This Enterprise Uganda which has been earmarked to get Shs 3.5 billion to train the youth does not have the capacity to do that. I was in Hoima recently and there was a programme launch by Enterprise Uganda. I really feel sorry for this country; they brought musicians like Chameleon and Bebe Cool to entertain the youth, and called it “training”. (Laughter) I refused to attend that “training” because when I saw the so-called curriculum, there was nothing to train the youth -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I add you one more minute.

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was just bringing the youth together at Hoima Boma Grounds; leaving them to sleep without food – I think some might have even contracted HIV because there was no protection. Moreover, the youth were moving around without organised transport. The trainers came out of the blue; the national youth chairman was not there; even area Members of Parliament and the Youth MPs were not invited. What is more surprising, you will later see that a huge amount of money was spent on that day. I raised this matter with the President and we are following it up. 

I suggest that that matter be taken to the right ministry as my colleague has already suggested so that we use the right institutions. We have the community development officers who can do training. That is the reason they are there and earning Government salaries.

The other thing is about the Shs 16.5 billion being given to KCCA to build markets. How will a man from Hoima benefit from those markets? Why don’t we distribute that money and add to the Youth Fund such that the youth all over the country can access it. We have existing markets; how have we benefited from them? (Member timed out_) So, I think this 3.5 million should be given to the –(Member timed out)

6.31
MR ASUPASA ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will address myself straight to the point that my colleague has been talking about; that is, the issue of the Shs 16.5 billion, which is due to be given out through KCCA.  KCCA is an urban area and the bulk of our youths are in the villages. It is a beautiful idea to develop the markets in KCCA and maybe it could help the youth to migrate to town. But how shall we be sure that our youths will get a share in these markets when there are already so many vendors on the streets and the vendors themselves are being promised the very markets that we are talking about? I would like to submit that the Shs 16.5 billion should be added to the fund such that it could at least be equitably distributed throughout all the districts in form of a quota. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I am looking at the distribution of computers in schools. Most schools don’t have computer science teachers. In fact most of the head teachers are themselves computer illiterate. I was wondering as to who is supposed to enforce computer science teaching in schools if the head teachers are themselves computer illiterate. It is my humble submission that the Ministry of Education takes up this matter by recruiting computer literate teachers in schools. 

We have very big schools in which we take some of our children with the ultimate aim of enabling them acquire computer skills. When these schools advertise in the papers, magazines and brochures, they emphasise that the children will be able to use computers, but to our disappointment, most of these children cannot use computers at all despite the fact that they have attended these schools for four to six years. 

There is a simple computer called a calculator. Most students except those offering sciences cannot use a scientific calculator despite their having attended these schools. I would, therefore, like to submit to this Parliament that the Ministry of Education should take up this matter and seriously recruit computer science teachers in our schools. 

Uganda Christian University had a programme to teach computer science to student teachers who would in turn go out and teach computer science in schools. This programme ran from 2006 up to around 2010, but when these teachers came out, they were not absorbed in any school. In fact, they were only absorbed in computer service outlets like those along Nasser Road where they are doing typesetting and some few are in audit firms around town - I know a few of them. 

Madam Speaker, it is not because this country lacks computer science teachers, but there is no effective policy of recruiting these teachers in secondary schools. I would, therefore, like to request the Ministry of Education to take up this matter very seriously and recruit computer teachers so that our children can acquire those skills. I thank you.

6.35
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity.  I would also like to thank the Committee on ICT for the report they have given. Right from the onset I would like to comment about communication which has been made very easy because of these mobile phones. You find that even a farmer in the garden is communicating via a telephone; a sweeper on the roadside is communicating through a telephone; everybody is now connected and communication has become very easy. We thank the telecommunication companies for what they have done. 

Secondly, I think the amount of money which we used to spend on airtime has been reduced because of their programmes where you can pay some money and you get a fixed service. We appreciate that.  

But there are two problems connected with communication using cellular phones; one, is the rechargeable battery. The batteries they have these days are very useless. When you buy a phone, you find that the battery needs to be charged everyday within a period of one month. And for a person in a home without power, these phones have become useless. Could I know whether these are second hand or brandy new batteries because they are wasting a lot of time and money on charging? 

Secondly, the waste of these telephones; some telephones are as cheap as Shs 35,000. What happens to these used phones? What plans do we have to collect all these phones and computers? I believe these things are very dangerous; what plans do we have to collect all these phones because they are lying everywhere, be it in our homes or on the streets. Even some look useless but must be kept because people want to use them to communicate. What do we do to these waste products? 

On my side, I appreciate Parliament for giving me this expensive equipment for communicating and reading. But I would like Government to take Parliament as an example and provide students and working persons who are blind and deaf with this equipment so that they can also communicate like me and many others who can afford.  Otherwise, these computers are very expensive.

Regarding this particular equipment, Madam Speaker, it is not easily accessible for me; I don’t know where to touch; somebody else has to assist me. Can you make it accessible for me so that I don’t have to ask somebody to help me all the time? I understand that there is light here, but for me light is useless. Can you make one that makes a little noise so that I can tell that it is on? So, if I have to be computer literate, I don’t have to be assisted all the time.  I don’t want to be helped; I can do it myself. So, please, you people of technology, let us improvise so that I can manipulate this technology on my own. 

Lastly, regarding the Shs 44 billion; this programme falls under the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development where I am the vice chairperson. We are debating this matter seriously and when the time comes, we shall move a motion to see that this money is reverted to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

I also ask the youth to come and join the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development. You should not have brought a separate report. We should be working together in the committee. So, please send some of your representatives to be there. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, I have taken note of your requests. We shall see how to accommodate you. 

6.40
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County, Sheema):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to comment on the Youth Fund. I think the primary target need is to be more clarified because when you talk about giving individuals money and then you demand that the business must be registered at least six months before, it is not clear.  Are you lending to an individual? Are you lending to a sole proprietorship? Or are you lending to a business or a company? And if so, and you are to use the Registrar of Companies to register businesses to benefit, then we ought to have decentralised the Registrar of Companies because how can you imagine a youth from Sheema coming to register in Kampala to benefit from 1 million.? And for how many days? So, I think we need to decentralise the Registrar of Companies.

I also do not agree with the idea of giving Shs 16.5 billion to KCCA. How can you give over 30 percent of the Youth Fund to one authority or district? That should be looked into.

I also wish to comment on Posta Uganda. Despite the challenges  that have been mentioned by honourable colleagues, I think it is clear that Posta Uganda has made significant achievements in the area of revenue growth and in the area of actually reducing on the debt. It is also worth noting that Posta Uganda has had so many changes in management that it is possible this could have caused some of the challenges.

But with this Internet revolution, to see Posta Uganda really making a profit, I think this deserves our support and the Committee on ICT is right to say that we should provide a Shs 5.5 billion, which is share capital, which actually Government pledged some time back. By giving them Shs 5.5 billion, they will be able to clear all the debts they have.

My final comment is on BPOs. It is not clear in this report, but it was pointed out that actually it is not the responsibility of NITA or Government to set up call centres. What they have set up is a pilot project, but what we expect NITA or Ministry of ICT to do is to actually provide incentives for the private sector to establish BPOs. The incentives must be tailored to clear outputs. Also, for a BPO to be supported; it should clearly indicate how many youth or employees it will support and how many of those are Ugandans. Also, incentives can be tied to, for example, Internet costs rather than blanket amnesty or incentives that are normally provided. 

6.43
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to add my voice to those who have already spoken, especially about the youth money. There are several criteria given here for the youth to access this money. One of them is that they must at least reach senior four, which is okay because we have many who have reached senior four. What about those ones who are more than 80 percent, who dropped out before reaching senior four? What percentage do you have for them now that the Shs 44.5 billion is for those who have reached senior four? That question should be answered.

I would also like to know why we are killing our own institutions. Why have we decided to give Shs 3.5 billion to Enterprise Uganda, which is a private company and we leave MUBS, which can develop programmes for training youth for two weeks? Why can’t we give this money to MUBS or MTAC, which is doing the work, because those are our own institutions?

I am also not happy to see that the ministry is giving Shs 16.5 billion to KCCA. I am, therefore, proposing that a district like Yumbe, which is also an independent entity like KCCA - if we have now decided to give this money to KCCA, let the Shs 44.5 billion be divided amongst all the districts of Uganda because all districts have youth and the youth should benefit.

I do not think my youth from Yumbe can use Shs 35,000 for transport to Yumbe and the transport back is Shs 35,000 which totals Shs 70,000 and which they will not be able to get. Therefore, let us take their money to Yumbe District.

I also want to comment on the report of ICT. What I want to ask the Chairman of the ICT Committee is, how much have you budgeted in this financial year for the extension of the fibre optic cables to West Nile and Karamoja because this is a project, which was already there, but last financial year, West Nile and Karamoja were not there. How much has the ministry budgeted so that those regions are also brought on board, because they are part of this country?

Concerning patriotism and nationalism, I want to support Posta Uganda Limited. Let us build our own institutions and leave these issues of supporting the private companies like Enterprise Uganda. We leave our own institutions then at the end, we begin to blame them for failing to pay their creditors yet we do not help them. This is the time when we must uplift Posta Uganda and support it because this is the only institution we have. Let us build it -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we are not saying that we should not support Government institutions, but I happen to be a businessman. For any business enterprise which has a poor performance and its accounts are not proper, you cannot continue to inject money into it. Its assets and liabilities are under insolvency and are questionable.  We do not mind; let them put their accounts in order. In a business, the moment liabilities are more than assets; it becomes insolvent even if you put money there.

Let them put their management in order so that the assets and even the portfolio of their finances are in order and then Parliament will allocate money and they will perform better. This is what we are talking about. We are ready to support Posta as an institution of Government, but the management of the institution is not proper and we are not going to send any more money unless the assets and liabilities in their balance sheet are corrected.

THE SPEAKER: But now you are taking hon. Huda’s time. 

MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kakooza, there is a document here on page 18. Have you read it? Key achievements for the financial year 2010/2011, Posta Uganda - 

1.	Revenue growth. The company realised Shs 14 billion compared to the previous year Shs 11.2 billion, a revenue growth of 26.8 percent.

2. 	Significant reduction of the long-term debt. National Social Security Fund was paid Shs 2.2 billion while Uganda Communications Employees Contributory Pension Scheme was paid Shs 1.9 billion. What is this?

MS OLERU: Let me conclude, I am going to break my fast. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that this is the time as a country when we must see that we have our institutions, which must be vibrant and working. It will not be a miracle that tomorrow you will see Posta Uganda excellent. We have to see how to put it right. For the institutions to work, they must have the money. The human resource needs money; everything needs money so that they can be there. 

Now we have realised that it has some problems. What we shall recommend is for them to solve those problems and it should be in existence. We cannot continue to contradict ourselves by saying that we are not giving money for Enterprise Uganda while saying Posta Uganda is not doing well. This is contradictory. Let us take a stand and see what we can do right. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

6.51
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three observations especially for the budget committee, and in the interest of reality; I will start with infrastructure development. I do not think it is really necessary to spend a lot of money when our roads around regions are in a very poor state. This situation is indirectly stopping investors from coming here and it has caused a lot of deaths as well as damaged a lot of vehicles. So, I suggest that we first pay attention to what we have now and then concentrate on developing others after we are sure of a proper state of roads to facilitate the current situation. 

My second observation is on agricultural productivity and production. Government says it continuously prioritises agricultural production and productivity to increase household incomes and promote equity. However, they do not clearly state how they are going to do this. All they do is allocate, but they do not tell us who the target groups are: Are they the low-income earners, the middle-income earners or those that already have? When you look at the practices of NAADS, it is clear that they have been favouring only those who already have and leave out the rest. 

The other issue is on the energy infrastructure. Madam Speaker, Government is continuing to develop the petroleum industry outside the National Development Plan and without a legal framework to regulate the operations of the industry. So, my question here is, why should the government go ahead to develop the petroleum industry outside the National Development Plan? Are they going against their own working framework? And if this is happening, then I think it is another dodgy kind of behaviour that is taking place because we must have a proper functioning framework for the country to move forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.54
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For most of the laws that we pass here to create institutions, we allow those institutions to collect fees and levies. Through you, Madam Speaker, can we have as a matter of urgency all institutions present reports of NTR because according to the information I have – 

THE SPEAKER: Which report is that?

MR EKANYA: NTR. All the institutions that have been created by this Parliament are allowed to collect levies and fees but they have not been declared here. Some of them are saving money in fixed deposits. UCC has over Shs 20 billion in fixed deposits for the last three years and it has not been declared. So, through you, can the Prime Minister get a report and lay it here because we have a crisis in Government and we need money, but we have institutions that are hiding money. We have recommended that the URA or the UCC procures what we call a financial intelligence system in order to collect revenue from the telecommunication commission year in and year out, and this happens in other countries. This technology is available. What is happening? Can we get clarification?

The digital migration system; this agreement was signed behind Parliament’s back without follow-up by the PPDA. So, how do we leave it with UBC? Hon. Kabakumba was then the minister. We need clarification on this matter. Second to that, in order to give Posta Uganda avenues to raise revenue, we need to have a law on the national address system so that the world over, every individual has an address. That will help Posta Uganda to be able to raise money because every person must have an address in order to deliver mail, but in this country, there is no address. So, can I know from the minister whether you are going to bring a law on the national address system?

My final point is on the youths of this country. Madam Speaker, if you go to China, there are so many small cottage industries. Can we know what plans the government has to transform Uganda? For example in China, there are youths making buttons, pins, shoes –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much hon. Ekanya for giving way, and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is about practical examples of youths being enterprising and productive despite having dropped out of school very early. They started enterprises from between S.2 and S.3 after dropping out of school and today when you go to the West Nile, you will see their products although they studied after a result of that income later on; but we recognise that Gaga Coach and Zawadi proudly serving the West Nile were initiated like that. So, the point of saying that the youth must first of all be of senior four level may be limiting. They are actual entrepreneurs who were forced out of school because of difficult circumstances and they went into enterprise and their brains are working and they started successful businesses. So, look at entrepreneurship skills rather than educational accomplishments. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, before I am cut off, we have a crisis in the country and Government needs to clarify. I hear our radar system does not work. We fly everyday – I said it here yesterday because I had got information that at the Entebbe International Airport, we are borrowing the radar system from the Government of Kenya. It is a serious matter that Government needs to clarify. We got information from the meteorological department that their system has fallen and it does not work. So, the airplanes landing here –(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have one minute.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. I wonder whether these people want us to meet the President. So, I request that tomorrow, we get information in regard to the radar system in this country. Thank you.

6.59
MR MICHAEL MARANGA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee of ICT for this report and I would like to interest myself with page 23 on the issue of the National Security Information System. In this report, I would like to ask the minister in charge of ICT how this company was outsourced to implement or execute this project of collecting information in respect to the National Security Information system. The idea behind this project was to set up a national databank. This is a project that was supposed to be implemented by the Ministry of Finance under the NPA but it was later hijacked by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I had the opportunity of looking at the questionnaire of this project and it is a one-page questionnaire, where Government is likely to spend more than Shs 150 billion and this project is not integrated. It will not be able to serve the interests of various MDAs. URA is running up and down looking for information on various tax payers because of the inadequate information that is available. The idea behind this National Data Bank was to close that gap. I would like this Committee on ICT to interest itself in this project to ensure that this project is integrated.

I am again wondering about the capacity of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to be able to collect data that will be good enough to sustain this project. I would like to ask the committee to interest itself in the cost of this project; the project that will not be inclusive and integrated because at the end of the day, we would like various ministries and MDAs to be able to interface in executing their day-to-day programmes and projects. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.02
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I am moving under Rule 46(k). I have listened carefully to Members’ concerns and aware of Government commitment and the statement which was given by the youth Member.

Aware that the budget of 2012 and the Government concern to help the youth establish business enterprises, I do move that Shs 44.4 billion should move from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Gender under the National Youth Council so that the problem we have of employment of the youth can be catered for and this is a Parliament which can even help Government against unemployment and we create more jobs rather than waiting and dilly-dallying with money. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I do appreciate the motion and I know that my voters will be happy about this matter. But why don’t we handle it when we are handling the final figures in the Budget Committee? Because we now want to deal with ICT - we have listened to the arguments and the motion is valid but the budget of the Minister of Finance is not here at the moment.

MR KAKOOZA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, I would like the Clerk to take note of this one, that when we are discussing the report of the Committee on Finance and the Budget, this motion must be revived. (Applause)

7.04
MR ASUPASA ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Having equally listened to the arguments and debate, I beg to move a motion that this House adopts the report on ICT. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: But I think that there were some areas which the committee chair wanted just to clarify. Let the chair clarify then the minister will come.

7.04
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nabeta Igeme): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to summarise, on the issue of Posta Uganda, we actually have seen that they have made progress and maybe, we shall coordinate with COSASE on any issue because if the Auditor-General reports you are talking about are before 2008 - if it is 2009/2010, then, we need to look at them and see the issues that you have brought. At least, we have seen some consistent growth and some good progress as far as Posta Uganda is concerned. So, if they are given this benefit of doubt and we remove the debt, then, they can now re-orient themselves for the future because they have to fight. All Postas worldwide are suffering because of the Internet. So, we can coordinate on that and then we shall agree on the way forward -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I agree with you, but of course, you know there must be a trend of consistency - that you could leave and give it two or three years and see the consistency; how it is moving then we can be able to inject money to that effect. I hope they are taking note of those issues Members are raising here because we do not want a situation where people keep Shs 400 million in the drawer and the following day, money has disappeared.

Then two, you will also correct the revenue growth here. That growth is not 26.8 percent. Cross-check and correct it in your report. In the report on page 18, that figure you have put as 26.8 percent is not the correct -

MR NABETA: It is about 26 -[Mr Okupa: “It is 25 not 26.”]- Okay, we shall verify the numbers. You know, usually plus or minus one percent is acceptable. Definitely, we shall coordinate with COSASE.

NITA is actually carrying out a national baseline survey to understand the e-governance readiness of the country so that they can be able to mark out the investment areas they are going to focus on as they drive Uganda into an e-governance era. 

Definitely, we have the masts. We have asked UCC - what we want UCC to do or the new Uganda Communication Regulatory Authority, is to carry out a feasibility study on how we can start harmonising all this IT infrastructure in the country so that we start reducing on the masts. Of course, all these masts have owners and they have invested money, but of course, the masts and the fibre - everyone has laid fibre and everyone has put up a mast. So, we need them to harmonise and do a feasibility study so that we start reducing on the masts rather than increasing. We should learn from South Korea because it is the same size as Uganda, but they only have 250 masts, and for us, we have over 3000.

Insufficient technicians - NITA is ensuring that we have enough technicians countrywide. We passed the Computer Misuse Act, the Electronic Signatures Act and the Electronic Transactions Act last year. These are all aimed at helping us in terms of enforcing e-governance, but they also provide for those who are harassing people and those who are conning people. These are now the laws. 

As you have seen the policy statement, the ministry is asking for money to operationalise these Acts so that we can be able to follow up the people who are using them. Same with the SIM card registration on page 16 of the report. The ministry is actually embarking on registering the SIM cards.

UCC informed the committee that they put out an advert to get the survey of the intelligence network. Now, they have put out an advert to actually procure the system; so, they have promised that they will have an intelligence system to monitor the calls within the next six months.

Of course, the FTA; when we were having a problem with the national backbone, we asked the Auditor-General to audit the national backbone, which he did and he even gave us the recommendations which we laid on Table in 2009. However, they did not have the technical expertise to look beyond the numbers so they asked us to look for a company which is credible.

We asked the ministry to put out an international advert so that they can get a technical company not an audit, but a company which is actually technically competent to understand fibre optics and actually do a technical analysis on the fibre, what we have, the network design and how we can actually make it better. 

I think, Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- the problem with UCC is that the law protects their - so they cannot put it in the Consolidated Fund. It is to be used for UCC or RCDF. So, why we are proposing in the new Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority - we are actually going to amend the law. 

Now, in the submissions, they had – I do not have the document here - they sent us a brief breakdown of the amount of money they have; but I think it is 19; but I will avail the information for UCC for further discussion. Madam Speaker, I think those are the issues.
 
7.11
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Matsiko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There were issues to do with KCCA, and a motion has been moved. However, I briefly want to say that giving KCCA this money was after realisation that many youth did not have workplaces, especially those who work in markets. You have been following how the youths went to Kansanga and tried to build stalls there; even in Lubigi. That is why Government has decided that we try to develop workplaces for these youths. 

Hon. Members, I want you to appreciate that the youth who are in KCCA come from all over Uganda; they are not specific to KCCA. We are waiting for the census next year to prove this point. So, I beg for your indulgence hon. Members, to allow KCCA to develop workplaces for these youth. I will not comment on the others under this project because they do not fall under my docket though I have some information on them. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya alluded to the point that this process of digital migration started while I was the Minister of Information and National Guidance. That is completely true and if you give me just a few minutes, I will give you the background to this decision by Cabinet to give UBC the monopoly to be the sole distributor of signals under digital migration. This decision was reached after thorough discussion and consultations. Even the technical people were in the meetings up to the last meeting when this decision was made. 

When I joined the ministry, UBC coverage was about 45 percent of the country. By the time I left, it had increased to 64 percent and we had already made a road-map to cover the whole country. 

On the issue of the HUAWEI project, the understanding between Government and this organisation –(Interruption)

MR BASAJJABALABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for that information. But I would like to seek clarification from her. She is saying that a bigger contribution of the Youth Capital Fund will be given to KCCA. But we currently have a problem of so many youths in the city as a result of rural-urban migration. So, what plan does Government have with regard to the expected rural-urban migration as a result of the establishment of the work-places that they want to establish in Kampala? 

MS KABAKUMBA: Rural-urban migration is an indicator of development –(Interjections)– yes. And hon. Nasser will realise that the locations of these markets are not going to be in the central business district; they will be outside there and in various locations. And of course, when you talk of a strategy - I wish I knew that this issue would come up. I would have prepared a comprehensive statement regarding what Government intends to do to address the challenges of rural-urban migration. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, minister, I think the issue of that youth fund is going to continue throughout this debate. So, maybe we should give you time to prepare and then give us a proper answer. All these Members now have that information and they are very interested in it. So, I think you should defer that.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. I want you to clarify on whether this rural-urban migration is only happening in the city and not in the municipalities and towns like Gulu. We also have people moving from the rural places to Gulu Town. So, why should you exclude Gulu from this exercise?

MS KABAKUMBA: We have picked on this project because it is to do with the Shs 44.5 billion. There is a project to upgrade Jinja Market; there is a project also to provide workplaces in Mbale Market and other areas. So, this is just one of them and not all.

But we have agreed that we shall provide comprehensive answers and I believe the Minister of Finance will be able to do it. But going to the question that was raised by hon. Ekanya about the digital migration; I want to request the Members to support the effort to enable Uganda to migrate from analogue to digital very fast. 

Whether it is UBC or any other institution, Government must find money and very fast to fund this process. The infrastructure that UBC has - I can say this with authority and without any fear of contraction - no other private broadcaster has it. And when you consider the masts, this was meant to address that; where we have masts that we can share, we do share them. Where there are no masts, UBC mast put up the masts. 

UBC would have been able to move very fast, but as you remember, they were supposed to generate local revenue through the TV Tax which was halted and there was no replacement. And it is not necessary for each broadcaster to own a mast. Once the infrastructure is in place – and even now, UBC is hosting other broadcasters and they are not complaining. Instead, the complaints are that there were issues where private operators take advantage of UBC infrastructure at UBC’s expense. 

So, I plead with you hon. Members to give UBC the opportunity to distribute and develop –(Interjections)– ICT has a regulatory mandate to co-ordinate and monitor. It does not have to own this infrastructure in order to streamline the ownership and operations of these masts. But if we work together with ICT and UBC’s infrastructure - there was even an attempt to bring this infrastructure, including that owned by Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd., under ICT, and it failed because of several reasons which I do not have time to elucidate on. 

It is important that as a country, and to be more organised, that we give an opportunity to a company of our own to distribute this signal. After all, the policy says after five years, we can review it to see if there is need to have more distributors or not. HUAWEI does not have to get worried. What was signed was a memorandum of understanding to allow HUAWEI mobilise funds. By the time I left, there was debate whether we should get a loan to support digital migration or find money within our own budget to support this process. A decision has not been made. 

Even if you read the Policy Statement of Information and National Guidance, you will see that priority is unfunded - even under National Guidance and OPM; this MoU was meant to facilitate the acquisition of a loan. For Members, you should know, especially those who are new, that no institution whether Government or not, can get a loan without approval of Parliament. If it is finally agreed that we get a loan, it will have to come here even if we are guaranteeing UBC as Government. It will still have to come to Parliament for you to discuss and approve or reject. But money has to be found quickly for this migration for us to beat the deadline. I thank you. 

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (MR NYOMBI THEMBO): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members. First of all, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the good report and again, the Members of Parliament for the support. 

I think there is unanimity when you hear the voices discussing this report. All of us support ICT to be in the middle of our development agenda. I thank the Members for the constructive debate on the report of the Committee on ICT. Of course as a ministry, we have listened and recorded most of these recommendations. We promise that we are going to chew over them and come out with a concrete way forward taking into consideration most of the positive and well-researched contributions you have made. 

We are pleased to hear that you are also concerned about funding. Of course, I should comment because we are part of Government and Government has so many competing priorities. Government is not neglecting ICT. But together, with this unanimity in thinking, I am sure we can move together to see that the sector funding is increased to ensure that we achieve the objectives of ICT; that is improved service delivery and of course, employment-creation and other such related matters.

A cross-cutting issue that has come up on the Floor throughout the debate was digital migration. I agree with the Minister for the Presidency. Cabinet made a decision on this matter, but as Government, we cannot close our ears to new, innovative ideas. ICT is such a dynamic area. Every day, every minute, innovative ideas come on board. It is upon us, the political leaders of the sector, to chew over these innovative issues, take them back to Cabinet and see how to move on.

We appreciate the concern about the digital migration which we must do as soon as possible. We appreciate your concerns about the partial monopoly given to UBC and I can promise on behalf of the ICT sector that our ears are wide open. We are going to chew over this matter and take it back to Cabinet to see what we should do. We shall come back to share with you what we will have decided. Of course you know that the switch-off date - we have set ourselves a target of 2012; East Africa, a target of 2015. Whatever we do, we must do it within that timeframe to ensure that we do not delay - we do not remain behind.  We are going to be very hasty on this matter to make sure we put you on board. I will come back here and report to you.

Non-tax revenue; I agree with you hon. Shadow Finance Minister. I think you said we should always come. There is nothing to hide. I want to assure Parliament that there is nothing to hide.  All the non-tax revenue, be it in UCC, or when we commercialise NITA Uganda, everything should be transparent because these are part of national resources. An organisation like UCC - I do not think it is bad for them to have money on deposit. We are telling them to procure an intelligent system. This is a system you cannot buy with a few dollars. Probably, you have to put money aside to prepare for such challenges. If you want the schedule, we shall avail this because there is nothing to hide.

The National Post Code Address; like my chairman has said, we are already piloting it in Entebbe. Already, we have the resources. In a few months’ time, in the whole of Entebbe, all roads are going to be marked; all plots, including the slums in Kitooro. We are thinking of how innovatively to handle our rural areas. You know, we shall have a challenge because our rural areas do not have streets. Allocating them postal codes may be difficult. We will still seek for your guidance on this matter as we move together. We should come out with some innovative approaches to handle rural areas because most of our people live in rural areas.

Another cross-cutting issue was that of masts. Comparisons have been made. South Korea, Uganda. We make comparisons between America and Uganda. Some of you have been to Manhattan, New York. Probably, you will never see a mast in New York. How are they covered? But look at the top of those buildings. Always, you will see those gadgets because they have those tall buildings. When you are comparing, you have to also be very careful.

With rural-based populations - because at first, what we were concerned with when we liberalised the ICT sector was accessibility. We wanted these ICTs to be enjoyed by the bulk of our people who live in rural areas. So, definitely, there was no way. You had to do it. You had to put masts all over the country. Now that we have achieved accessibility to about 90 percent, we are going to get quality because these masts can be a nuisance when they are too many. We need to say we have achieved accessibility; let us see how we go into quality. 

I am told by my technical people from UCC that they are already writing guidelines to see how to promote a policy on sharing of this equipment. When we are through with those guidelines, we will come and share them with you.

Hon. Mawanda asked how we sourced the company that is handling the national security intelligence system. As you know, in my report, you did not see that project under my docket. Probably, my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, will be better positioned to answer that.

Disability policy 

An issue was raised on the disability policy. I am told by my technical people that all schools for disabled people have been given 10 computers each. We have asked the Ministry of Education to install the relevant software to benefit our people in those schools. So, I am confirming that one for my people.

Computers in schools 

Some of them are redundant. Yes they are there. That was the first step. The issue now is to promote usage, but you have to take them there first and then promote their usage. 

Capacity building 

Some of you read about it in The Daily Monitor; you saw an advertisement calling on teachers from different parts of the country to come and attend a capacity building workshop so that we upgrade their skills to be able to teach our students computing. 

Posta is “incompetent”; I have heard words like, “it’s insolvent”. We don’t share that view unfortunately. Posta has had problems in the past. In the ministry, we are convinced that management, for the last two years, have been doing some good work to get Posta from where it was to where it is today. We haven’t gotten where we want to go, but we are coming up and we are convinced that they are doing some good work. If there is a specific problem, make us aware of that problem and we’ll handle it -(Interjections)- Of course, there might be some problems, but we think there is something better taking place in post office. 

You brought up the issue of land in Ntinda. Somebody raised that issue. I consulted my technical people and they are telling me that the statutory instrument that set up Posta Uganda in 1997 had all the lists of assets. That asset was not included. I have been told that that has been –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: That was the same information they gave us in the committee and when we asked them to bring that list, they never brought it, up to today. It is the same thing in Tororo and Soroti. The one of Soroti was given to somebody who has built a pharmacy in the compound of Post Office. So, they are not giving you correct information. Just look at the Auditor-General’s reports. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, try to wind up.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you very much for that additional information. We will investigate further, but this is the information that I have just gotten from my technical people.

I would like to thank the Members for the very constructive debate and I want to assure you, on behalf of the sector, that definitely we will work together on ICT and we will move together. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable Members. Twenty-four Members were able to contribute. So, I put the question that this House approves the report of the committee of ICT. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, tomorrow we shall handle the report of Public Service and Local Government. I was hoping that we might handle two reports, but so far, I only know that Public Service is the only one that is ready.

I had informed you earlier that we might have Eid next week. So, we may have to sit during the weekend to make sure that we capture the policy statements by end of the month. So, be ready to work extra. We may even have to do two or three reports a day, morning and afternoon, including on Friday. House adjourned until 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 August 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

