Monday 28th August, 2000.

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM.

96 Members were ascertained as being present.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is an adjustment on the Order Paper that has to be made. I am advised that certain things have to be worked out before item 4 is presented, so this item will be skipped.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Timothy Mutesasira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to present the report of the Sessional Committee of Social Services on the Policy Statements of the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports, and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

My report is quite big, it has 70 pages but Members started getting the copies on Thursday afternoon, and they got them on Friday and throughout the weekend. I request to present a summarised version, if Members so wish, but otherwise I am ready to read all the 70 pages.  I assume that  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this report will be recorded in the Hansard as having been presented, but you can present the summary you prepared.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Thank you, Sir.  

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament is mandated to set up a Committee for the efficient discharge of its functions.  Furthermore, according to Rule 143 of our Rules of Procedure, the Sessional Committees are mandated to critically examine Government recurrent and capital budget estimates, to make recommendations on them for the general debate in the House. In fulfilling this mandate, the Sessional Committee on Social Services examined and discussed the Policy Statements of the Ministries of Health, Education and Sports, and that of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

Procedure:
The Committee examined and discussed the Policy Statements for the financial year 2000/2001. It also examined the recommendations given to the Ministries stated above and their related autonomous institutions in the last financial year. Several consultative meetings were held with respective Ministers and their officials, while the relevant documents were submitted and clarification was sought before a consensus was reached.  The observations and recommendations made by the Committee are contained in the report.  

The Committee wishes to thank the Ministers of Education and Sports, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and the Minister of Health respectively, and their technical staff. We would also like to thank the Parliamentary staff and members of the public for their contributions, which enabled us to compile this report.  

Highlights of the Ministries
Ministry of Health:
The Committee reviewed and discussed the Policy Statement covering the following votes: 
Vote 014 - Ministry of Health. 
Vote 019 - Butabika Hospital 
Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital; and 
Vote 032 - the Health Service Commission.  

The Committee reviewed the recommendations made during the last financial year and appreciated the Ministry’s effort in addressing most of the issues that had been raised. Notably, the Committee observed, with satisfaction, that, through deliberate efforts by this Ministry, there has been a considerable fall in infant mortality rates and a rise in the utilisation of services. Epidemics like cholera, dysentery, malaria, measles, meningitis and plague have been controlled, leaving only seasonal outbreaks. Other measures to ensure equity and quality in health care delivery were also instituted. 

The Committee also noted, with appreciation, the introduction of a new health policy, which emphasises primary health care, and the downward trend in the morbidity and mortality statistics.  This is in spite of the increase in non-communicable diseases, the strain due to HIV and AIDS, and the resource constraints in financing the health sector budget.  

In addition to this, the Committee observed that immunisation has been revitalised throughout the country.  The Committee, however, observed that although the Minister of Health has, over the past two years, put in place comprehensive measures and programmes, the overall health situation of Uganda is still poor.  

The Committee further observed that there is poor sanitation and latrine coverage in the whole country, especially in Karamoja, where only four out of every one hundred homes have toilets. The Committee, therefore, recommended a special programme -(Interruption)

DR. NKUUHE: May I suggest that the chairman tells us the page he is on, at least, so that we can move together.

DR. MUTESASIRA: The Committee noted that the improved access to the rabies vaccine and the improved supervision of herbalists, to prevent them from exploiting AIDS patients.  

On child and school health, the Committee noted the laxity in school inspections. Therefore, we recommended the creation of capacity to address this problem, with emphasis on separate sanitary facilities for girls in schools, as this has been cited as one of the causes of the girl-child dropping out of schools. 

With regard to reproductive health, the Committee noted the low contraceptive prevalence rates (15 per cent), the high levels of teenage pregnancies (43 per cent) and the high maternal and infant mortality rates - 506 per 100,000 and 88 per 1000 live births respectively. The Committee, therefore, recommended the intensification of training of staff and disseminating of clear and concise information.  

On disabilities and rehabilitative health care, the Committee noted the opening up of a new centre in Mbale, the need for specially designed maternity beds for people with disabilities, and the difficulties in obtaining hearing aids. It was, therefore, recommended that districts should be sensitised to integrate disability programmes in their work plans. 

On integrated clinical services, page 14, the Committee noted the delayed payment of salaries, although Government sends money early. The Committee also sought explanation as to why we cannot do open heart surgeries.  Information was received that the personnel and equipment are available at Mulago, but the theatre is yet to be completed.  

On hospitals, the Committee also scrutinised the performance of hospitals under the Ministry of Health. We noted that services in some hospitals, like Adjumani and Moyo hospitals, are poorly utilised, and that there is a temporary diversion of salaries in Nebbi. These are going to be probed.  

On Butabika Hospital, the Committee noted the increasing patient attendance, support supervision to the other hospitals, and rehabilitative care of psychiatric patients within a radius of 30 kilometres.  The Committee commends the hospital management for the good treatment and the fair fees for the services. 

On Mulago Hospital, the improvement in infrastructure and service delivery was appreciated. The Committee, however, observed that a lot still has to be done at Mulago. The report on Mulago Hospital, arising out of hon. Lyomoki’s allegation, is ready and the Committee is going to discuss it before tabling it in Parliament.  

The Committee further observed the need to conclusively investigate the stories about alleged swapping of babies in the hospital. The Committee will appreciate if Mulago Hospital affairs are debated thoroughly in this House, when the report is tabled in a few weeks’ time. All of us need Mulago Hospital and we should therefore, strive to make it better. 

On the National Medical Stores, the Committee noted that these stores play an important social service role. It noted that, the position of the Chief Executive Officer has been vacant for over one year, and also that the National Medical Stores, which is to be privatised after a lot of heavy investment in infrastructure, still has a lot of expired and expiring drugs. 

The Committee noted that there is no incinerator to handle expired drugs, and National Medical Stores’ purchases are subject to SWIPCO, although the funds are not public funds. This makes the National Medical Stores’ drugs more expensive than those on the open market. This has scared the major clients of the National Medical Stores, which are Mulago Hospital and the UPDF. The Committee made specific recommendations on these observations, which are on page 17 of the report.

The observations made on the National Drug Authority are on page 18 and the recommendations are on page 19 and 20.  The Committee underlined the need for an incinerator as a matter of urgency. It is the view of the Committee that this facility should be a multi sector utility to safely dispose off fake drugs, expired drugs, chemicals and pesticides that expire while they are in this country. Fake and expired drugs, dating as far back as the 1950’s, and worth billions of shillings are still lying around. There is no guarantee that they are not being recycled.  You only have to visit the National Drug Authority to appreciate the risks all of us are exposed to. 

The Committee, therefore, recommended a national incinerator with a multi- sectrol approach, involving the following stakeholders, among others: 

    1. Uganda National Bureau of Standards
    2. The Ministry of Health
    3. The Ministry of Agriculture
    4. The National Drug Authority
    5. National Medical Stores
    6. NEMA
    7. UPDF and others.

The Ministry of Education and Sports: 
The Policy statement of this Ministry covers the following votes: 
Vote 013 – The Ministry of Education and sports
Vote 024 – Makerere University
Vote 040 – The Education Service Commission
Vote 042 – Mbarara University 
Vote 044 – Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo (ITEK)
Vote 050 to Vote 095– District Development Expenditure.

The Committee observed, with pleasure, that there has been a steady increase and commitment of Government expenditure to the education sector, particularly primary education. As a result, enrolment at the primary level has risen dramatically, after the launching of UPE 1997.  Through TMDS’ the percentage of trained primary teachers has also increased and a plan for post primary education is being developed, and will incorporate a strategic plan for secondary, technical, vocational and business training sub sectors.  

The Committee noted that, through the National Council of Sports, Government is committed to the promotion and development of sports. This sector is however still lagging behind in many aspects. This is exemplified by the absence of a department of sports at the Ministry headquarters, lack of a sports policy, lack of a separate vote, and an outdated Act, of 1964, for the National Council of Sports.  

The Committee, therefore, recommended that the appointing authority be informed of this anomaly and the need to address it.  In addition, the National Council of Sports’ Act, 1964 should be amended and a sports policy put in place to stop the ad hocism in sports administration.  

On the National Curriculum Development Centre, the Committee noted that this department is both under staffed and under funded, in spite of the fact that it is a core technical department in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends an internal re-allocation of funds and an adjustment in the Educational Strategic Investment Plan, to cater for the staff and financial needs of the National Curriculum Development Centre.  

On pre-primary and primary education, the Committee noted the absence of a policy on pre-primary education and the  teaching of Swahili in Primary Teachers’ Colleges. The Committee was also concerned above the appropriate age for pre-primary school entry. 

The Committee further observed that, there are still many primary classrooms, which are started by communities, but are yet to be completed by the Government. We wondered why the Ministry of Education and Sports is thinking about double shifts, when the Committee rejected the idea last year. After getting appropriate responses from the Minister of Education and Sports, the Committee recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports come up with a policy on pre-primary education, and prioritise completion of long standing community classrooms before construction of new classrooms.  

On Secondary Education, the Committee observed that implementation of UPE increases the demand for an accelerated expansion of the secondary sub sector. The Committee noted that city schools are very expensive to construct, and that some areas continue to be marginalised. It further noted that some secondary schools are in a very dilapidated state.  

The Committee, in respect to the above observations, recommended that disadvantaged areas be considered in the allocation of schools. The Committee further advised the Ministry of Education and Sports to consider rehabilitating all these structures and elevating their status through provision of teachers and materials.  

On technical, vocational and business education and training, the Committee welcomed the Ministry’s Policy and work plan for establishing community polytechnics during the financial year, 2000/2001. The Committee, however, recommended that, where communities have got an initiative, the Ministry should use a demand driven approach and help such communities establish polytechnics.  

On special education, career guidance and counselling, the Committee noted the importance of special education and career guidance, and recommended that amongst other things, gender issues and career guidance be introduced in more schools this financial year. Also, sensitisation of the masses about disability should not only be left to people with disability. The detailed recommendations are found on page 36 of the report.

On higher education, the Committee observed, amongst other things, as presented on page 37 of the report, that the cost of learning at public higher institutions is due to a high demand for private students, and that there is no clear policy to determine the fees. The Committee, therefore, advises the Ministry to put in place policy guidelines for determining fees payable at public institutions of higher learning. Government should not let the liberalisation policy be misused to deny its citizens deserved access to high education opportunities by allowing over charging at public institutions.

On Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo, the Committee observed that there is need to increase the ratio of male to female students admitted to this institution, and to ensure that the products of UPK employ themselves. The Committee, therefore, advised the Ministry to take measures to attract more female students to UPK, and to sensitise this and other institutions about the youth entrepreneurship scheme.

On Education Planning, the Committee noted the importance of this department to the over role education development. We recommended that it acquires more technical staff.  

The Committee noted, in its observations as outlined in the report, that the Inspectorate has remained poorly funded for long.  

The Committee further noted that cases of defilement in schools have persisted. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department of Inspectorate be strengthened to inspect all aspects of learning in educational institutions. In addition, the Education Service Commission should de-register teachers found guilty of defilement.  

On the Uganda National Examinations Board, the Committee noted that some teachers continue to collect examination fees from candidates but some of the candidates do not sit for the final examinations. In addition to this, there is a tendency for the so-called ‘weak candidates’ to be traded off to other schools. This leads to poor performance.  The Committee, therefore, advises that measures be put in place in the admission process, to cater for the so-called weak candidates. The so-called ‘weak candidates’ should be offered an opportunity to study in the best schools, since these students who perform poorly are not stupid but are studying in third world schools. Sending them to third world secondary schools only condemns them to being third class citizens.  

The Committee further advised the Ministry of Education and Sports to take strong measures against teachers who extort money from candidates and do not register them for examinations.

National Health Service Training Colleges:
Following the restructuring of Ministries, health-training institutions were among those transferred from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Education and Sports. The Committee observed that there is need to retain the titles of the officers affected in the transfer, so as to retain their professional identification. The Committee also recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports liase with the Ministry of Public Service to streamline this.

Departmental Training Institutions and Directorate of Industrial Training:
The Committee scrutinised the activities of the above institutions under the Ministry. It made observations and recommendations, which are outlined on pages 45 and 46 of the report.  

The Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo, supervises the National Teachers Colleges and the Primary Teachers Colleges. The Committee scrutinised its activities and recommended that students who perform well, especially at Primary Teachers Colleges, should be allowed to compete for Diplomas and Bachelor of Education Degrees.

Mbarara University:
The Committee reviewed the activities and plans of Mbarara University and made observations, which are summarised on page 48 of the report. The Committee was particularly pleased to note that an intravenous production unit will be constructed to supply fluids in the South Western region during this financial year. The Committee urged the Ministry to render maximum support to this important project.

Makerere University:  
The Committee reviewed the activities and plans of Makerere University and made a number of observations as presented on pages 46 to page 49.

The Committee, in particular, discussed the financing of the University and noted that Government allocation to the University has continually been reducing, which might affect the quality of education in the University.

The Committee, therefore, appealed to Government to review and focus on its role in the financing of the University.  
The Committee also recommended that the Ministry of Education come up with a sponsorship figure in order to rationalise the policy of financing at Makerere University.

The Education Service Commission:  
The Committee reviewed the mandate and mission of the Commission and noted, in its observations presented on pages 49 to 50, that a draft Education Service Bill has been made and it is before Cabinet.  

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development: 
The Ministry presented to the Committee their policy and budget statement for the financial year 2000/2001. The Committee scrutinised the activities and plans of the Ministry for the past and current financial years respectively. The Committee made a number of observations, and they are summarised on pages 51 and 53 of the report.  

The Committee particularly noted, with satisfaction, the following: 
The schedule of duties for the Ministers are now in place, although the terms of service, in terms of facilitation, are not yet up to the expectations of the Committee.

Funding for statutory councils has improved, and youth and women councils now have development action plans, which will be used for mobilisation.

The Committee, however, observed that the Ministry still has problems of inadequate facilitation, in terms of transport. In addition, the poverty alleviation project has not yet been transferred to the Ministry.

The Committee recommended that the Minister and Ministers of State should be well facilitated to enable them fulfil their duties, and that the poverty eradication plan should be implemented.

The Committee further recommended that all micro-finance related issues be under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in order to enhance control and accountability.

The Committee further scrutinised the specific departments, sections, as well as projects of the Ministry. I hereby present a summary of the key observations and recommendations the Committee made on them:  

Directorate of Labour:
The Committee examined the mandate and objectives of this department and observed that the Workers Compensation Act, 2000 is not being implemented due to delays in financing from the Ministry of Finance.  

The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development be allocated supplementary funds to cater for the implementation of the Workers Compensation Act, 2000.

The Directorate of Gender and Community Development:
The Committee observed that the Habitat Project withdrew its support from the community management programme. The Committee recommended that Government continues funding this programme. 

The Legal Literacy for Councillors at Sub-county Level:  The Committee noted the plans of the Ministry for this project and made observations and recommendations as presented on page 59 of the report. 

The Department of Disability and Elderly:
The Committee noted that the facilities of people with disabilities are very limited. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Gender liases with the Ministry of Health in order to provide more orthopaedic appliances for the disabled.

Functional Adult Literacy:
The Committee noted that there is no policy on the elderly yet. It therefore, recommended that the Ministry expedite the formulation and presentation of this policy.

The Department of Youth and Children:
The Committee noted, with concern, the escalating cases of child abuse in the country. It therefore, recommended that the Ministry, amongst other measures, sensitises parents on the Children’s Statute.

Child Rehabilitation and Development, Child Institutions and Projects: The Committee reviewed the performance and the plans of this project and made observations as presented on page 62 and 63 of the report.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry steps up the restructuring of the rehabilitation centres.

PEARL – Programme for Enhancing Adolescent Reproductive Life in Uganda:
The Committee noted that this project has not yet covered the whole country. It therefore, recommended that the Ministry persuades Government for more funds for the project, to be able to cover the whole country.

Department of Poverty Eradication, Economic and Civic Rights: 
The Committee noted that the Equal Opportunities Commission is yet to be put in place. It recommended that the Ministry expedite the setting up of the Equal Opportunities Act through the normal process. 

The Semi-autonomous Bodies and Institutions: 
The Committee scrutinised the semi-autonomous bodies and institutions under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. These include, the Entandiikwa Secretariat, the National Women Council, the National Youth Councils, the National Council for Children.

The committee made a number of observations and recommendations. The details of these are on page 66 and page 70 of  the report.  However, I present a summary of the key observations and recommendations:

Entandikwa:
The Committee reviewed the activities of this scheme. It noted Government’s position of not injecting new funds in this scheme until the remaining 12 billion shillings has been fully recovered. It also noted that the recovery progress has improved in most of the constituencies, although recovery in some places is still poor.  

The National Women Council: 
The Committee applauded the move to offer credit to women groups. It recommended that women negotiate for a credit facility of their own. 

The National Youth Council: 
The Committee commended the Council for the good accountability of funds and the good relationship with Members of Parliament during the past financial year.  The Committee, however, recommended that one centre should be created to co-ordinate the three offices of the youth, women and the disabled.  

The National Council for Children: 
The Committee noted the mandate and the objectives of the National Council for Children. We urged the Minister of Finance to provide money to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to enable the Council fulfil its mandate, which includes curbing the rampant problem of child abuse.

The Industrial Court: 
The Committee observed that the posts of the President and the Vice President of this court are vacant. We recommended that the Minister takes the necessary steps to get them filled.   

The Public Library’s Board: 
The Committee was informed that the principles of the draft bill of the Board have been approved and are ready for discussion by Parliament. The Committee, therefore,  recommended that the public be sensitised on the use of  libraries.  

NOMMO Gallery: 
The Committee noted that, its ownership is not yet clearly defined. The Committee recommended that Government should take up the issue of ownership.   

The National Social Security Fund: 
The Committee closely studied the operations of the Fund, and it held a workshop with the leadership of the Fund.  The Committee has produced a detailed report on those activities. The report is attached to the main report.
Briefly, the Committee pronounced that it did not support  the privatisation of the Fund, but that it supports the change from a provident fund to a pension scheme. 

The Committee further appealed to the board and the management of the Fund to deal with the problems of inaccurate record keeping and disappearance of records, and also address the problem of corruption among some of its officers.   

The Committee further advised the National Social Security Fund to sensitise the public on how funds can be easily accessed.   

The Committee recommends the following for Parliament’s approval for the financial year 2000/2001:

The Ministry of Education and Sports: 
Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports - for recurrent expenditure 42,000,990,000/= and for the development expenditure 5,000,913,988/=.  

Makerere University, vote 024, the Committee recommends a recurrent expenditure of only, 23,000,288,973/=.

Vote 040, the Education Service Commission - 584,000, 856/= for recurrent and 248,081,000/= only for development expenditure.

Mbarara University, Vote 042, the Committee recommends 1,830,000,000/= for recurrent expenditure and  2,413,000,973/=  for development expenditure.

Vote 044, Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo - the Committee recommends 2,149,000,369/= for recurrent and 747,000,824/= for development expenditure.

Overall, the Ministry of Education recurrent expenditure is 325,715,000,932/= and development is 140,565,000,891/=.

The Ministry of Health:
The Committee recommends the following figures to Parliament for approval for the financial year 2000/2001:

Vote 014, Ministry of Health: 
21.68 billion shillings for recurrent expenditure and 2.98 billion shillings for development expenditure.

Vote 019, Butabika Hospital:
The Committee recommends 1.41/= billion for recurrent expenditure and 0.58/= billion for development expenditure. 

Vote 023, Mulago Hospital:
The Committee recommends 5.62/= billion for recurrent expenditure and 5.63/= billion for development expenditure.

Vote 032, Health Service Commission: 
The Committee recommends 470,000,000/= for recurrent expenditure and 257,375,000/= for development expenditure.  

Overall, for the Ministry of Health, the Committee recommends 232.93/= billion for recurrent expenditure and 14.07/= billion for development expenditure.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development: This is Vote 030, and the Committee recommends 3,858,720,000/= for the recurrent expenditure and 2,488,251,000/= for development expenditure

I thank you for listening to me, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to move. 

(The full report of the Committee is to be found in Volume I, Sessional Committee Reports on the 2000/2001 Budgetary Proposals)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before we start the debate, I have received some complaints from Members that they have no copies of the report. Can I ascertain how many Members do not possess the copies? So, it seems some Members have no copies.  

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Speaker, these copies were put at the reception on Thursday afternoon, and a notice was put up for Members to pick copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.  So, Members are advised to get copies from the reception.

MS. KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, I am one of the Members who did not get a copy, and I went to the reception and I was told that they got finished. I am sure this applies to other Members. Copies were not enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, what do we do?  But there are very many of you who have copies, I think those who have will be competent enough to debate.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, even for those who have got the copies, a vote by vote allocation of funds is not indicated at the end.  For example, when the chairman of the Committee was reading figures for vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports, he read the allocation for the recurrent and development expenditures for that particular vote.  But that is not indicated in his report that has been printed.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Speaker, I got a late communication from the Ministry of Finance, which was detailing the exact figures and correcting the earlier submissions.  They are now photocopying this summary, and by the time we finish discussing and come to the actual votes, these papers should be ready for everyone.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we can go on with the details. We can have a debate on details. 

DR. KAKUNGULU SHANNON (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank the entire Committee and the respective Ministries that were handled by this Committee for a job quite well done. However, there are some clarifications and a few remarks that I would like to make on certain issues raised in the Committee.  

On page 9 of the Committee’s Report, under number four, it says, “ despite the fact that the STD programme is well funded, it owes the National Medical Stores a lot of money.”  I find that absurd. What happens to the funding money, what does it purchase? The report does not indicate why they should incur debts when they are well funded.  

You realise that up to 60 percent of the population in this country is attended to by private practitioners.  But until now, there is no mention about their role or even possible Government facilitation in helping them handle the bulk of the patients that are seen not by the Missionary hospitals or the Government Hospitals. It is high time private practitioners became recognised by Government and facilitated in one way or another to either acquire equipment at subsidised costs or at  reduced tax rates.

On page 24, it is really absurd, when, in big letters, under Sports, it says “THERE IS NO BUDGET FOR SPORTS AT THE HEADQUARTERS.” What is hon. Ogaba doing in that Ministry? That is a big question. Is he window-shopping or should something be done about facilitating that department under the Ministry of Education and Sports?  As you know, sports is one of the things that sells Uganda internationally. If we have a whole Minister who is not facilitated, it raises a big question mark. What do we do as Parliament and what do you do as the Executive? 

Under Sports as well, there is wrong prioritisation. The National Council for Sports’ budget is very skewed towards one particular sport in particular, that is football. The biggest part of the National Council for Sports’ budget is to do with football. However, we have been disappointed time and time again. However much money we put into football, they have never produced results.  Boxing is one of the sports where we have excelled internationally. However, if you look at the budget of National Council for Sports that goes towards the development of boxing in this country, it is pathetic.  We should know where we score strongly and we should put emphasis in that particular sport.

On the Ministry of Education, on page 44, the Committee comments on the National Health Training Colleges. We have a comprehensive nursing college school in Masaka, however, to date, the terms and conditions of service of these comprehensive nurses are not yet defined. These are nurses who are taken in after senior six and they are trained for at least four years, after that they go out to the field. They have not yet got recognition from the Ministry of Public Service and they do not know what their terms and conditions of service should be. They asked me to come and raise this in Parliament, and I am here to raise it for them. Where do they stand when they come out? They are just considered ordinary nurses, which is wrong, given the long period of training they undergo.  

On page 50, we look at Makerere University and the Ministry’s response to questions regarding Hyuha Mukwanason. The integrity of Makerere University is at stake over this Hyuha Mukwanason saga.  The very basis and integrity of the degrees offered by Makerere University is at stake. The office of the Registrar of a University is the most important office that handles the academics of a university. But the way it is being handled, I think, leaves a lacuna and a grey area. The international academic world is looking at us.  

During Amin’s time, the Governments of the Western World had stopped recognising qualifications from Makerere University.  Doctors had to sit other examinations to be accepted in America, in Britain and all over the world.  Over time, we had to build up a reputation, and we were getting our own doctors and engineers recognised again.  But when they hear that the registrar of the university was involved in malpractice and we are handling him with kids’ gloves, it raises a lot of questions. Government must put in effort to make sure that this scandal is put away for good, to maintain the integrity of Makerere University.

Finally, I would like to touch on child abuse. Parliament has not really stood its ground and considered this question of child abuse as we ought to have. Everyday, we see more and more cases of child abuse, but it rare for the responsible Minister to come and give a word of consolation to the families affected or the children affected or even to make sure that the long arm of the law takes its course. For instance, last year, there was some criminal called Muwanga. He defiled a child of about six months, and to date, we do not know what is happening to that criminal? What has happened to that child, what about the trauma the family has gone through? 

Just last weekend, a fellow called Lumu, an ex-convict, defiled and killed a child and threw the body in a pit-latrine. I have not heard a statement from the Minister of Gender or even of Integrity, not even from the Attorney General. None of the Members of the Executive has even bothered going to that place and asking about the circumstances relating to this case. It is really absurd! We are not doing much, as Government and as Parliament. More emphasis should be put in protecting the rights and lives of our children. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

LT. NKALUBO ANNETTE (Army Representative) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for a job well done, but I have a few comments to make. 

I thank the Committee for considering the issue of defilement, but I think they should have gone further. They should have at least warned the head teachers who go on entering into negotiations with parents on behalf of their teachers, so that at the end of the day, the matter is left there, or sometimes the children are forced to get married.

I also expected the Committee, since it considered the health of children, to say something about pads, especially in lower schools. Girls find it a problem because they are too expensive. Some parents cannot afford them. I thought the Committee should have worked out a policy to advise the Government to reduce taxes or to removes taxes on sanitary pads.

I also expected the Committee to consider the issue of girls who get pregnant while they are in school. I thought the Committee would have worked out a policy. We have a problem. Most girls, after getting pregnant, are forced into marriage. Some others end up sitting at home, because after they give birth, it is up to the head teacher to allow that girl to go back to that school or to look for somewhere else. I think girls should be given a chance, after giving birth. For the majority of them, it is not their will, men sometimes force them, sometimes the economic and social conditions, or even teachers, force them. 

The Committee should have done something about that, so that our girls, who get pregnant while they are in schools, are given a chance to go back. If the parents became aware of a policy to that effect, I know many of them would want their children to go back to school. It would also protect the lives of girls who, most of the time, end up having abortions and many of them die because of that.
I do not have much to say on that, those are the few comments I had.  Thank you.

MR. ERESU JOHN (Kaberamaido County, Soroti) Mr. Speaker, I have gone through the Committee report. Twelve years, from this year, Uganda will be celebrating 50 years of Independence.  50 years of Independence will mean we shall have to invite visitors and friends, and those who wish us well, to come and see the progress we would have made  down the road to our Independence. Basing on that, and the observations that I have made, I would like to comment on the report of the Committee.

On page 10 of the report, there is a comment on the health problem in Karamoja, and we are talking about pit-latrines. Only 12 years from now, we shall be celebrating 50 years of Independence, and we have a short time - only 12 years - to stop talking about how to have pit-latrines. It is a very serious issue. And to say that it is only Karamoja, which needs a special program, I would like to say -(Interruption)

MR. OMONGOLE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. In Karamoja, it is not only a question of pit-latrines, we now hear the Karimojong do not bury their dead. We would like to know, from the Minister of Health, what they are doing to encourage the Karimojong to bury their dead. You heard about the recent clashes that were in Karamoja where hundreds of people were killed, and all of them were left unburied. That is definitely a health hazard. So, I think that should also be taken care of.

MR. LOKERIS: Mr. Speaker, we bury those who die near home, but those who die a hundred miles away, while we are fighting, we find it difficult to carry them while running and bring them back home. At times, our enemies chase us away from the dead body. I do not know whether, if it were you, you would stay there until you are also killed and nobody carries the dead bodies home.  Thank you.

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to give this information, aware that we have one country, called Uganda. The discoveries that are being made about Karamoja should not surprise anybody. The Karamoja of today is a Karamoja that the National Resistance Movement Government has known. This region was left as a closed region in the past because of the upheavals that this country has had. It should not, therefore, surprise anybody, and that is why therefore, it is necessary for this programme to be in place. It cannot only be one programme, it must be one amongst many, if not, all the programmes.  

About the Karimojong not burying their dead, I did participate in burying those who were killed. So, it is not true that we do not bury the dead, but we need the Government’s help. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ERESU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I brought that up as a serious and pertinent issue, to link it to the golden jubilee celebration we shall have twelve years from now. 

The question of health and sanitation is very important to this country. We should not only confine it to Karamoja, we should think of the country as a whole.  Not too long ago, there was also cholera in Kampala, and that is not Karamoja. It is still there and it will be there.  I would like Government to see to it that they take up a comprehensive policy to make sure that these preventable diseases are seriously taken care of. And I would like to propose that, if possible, coercive methods are used to ensure that people have pit latrines in their homes.  

I would like also to recommend that chiefs and RCs be made to do their work. The weaknesses we have here is that, when we talk of RCs at the local level, these are politicians who want votes. They know that, if they coerce their voters to dig pit latrines, they will not get the votes. So, I think, we must device a serious method so that, when we invite our visitors, twelve years from today, for the jubilee celebration of our independence, good things are in place.  

With regard to the Ministry of Education, I would like to agree with the previous speaker, hon. Kakungulu, who said that sports is not budgeted for in the Ministry of Education. I would like to ask whether sports is a career in Uganda. I do not think so. There is evidence, as hon. Kakungulu has already stated, because they do not budget for it. It is not a priority. 

And also, as an observation, our best sportsmen at the end of the day, end up as street beggars. So, there is no career in sports. This country had a good sports woman called Judith Ayaa, but she died a pauper. What are we talking about? In other words, we must plan ahead if we are to make people develop interest in sports. We must forecast, so that people follow that forecast and achieve something good for themselves, for their community, and  for the nation. In that way, we will plant a seed to develop our country all round.  

On page 35, the report mentions that school head teachers do not plan for careers in schools. This is quite obvious! Careers have not been taken care of in schools because of the economic situation that schools find themselves in. Increment in teachers’ pay is meagre. The teachers are those kinds of people who sit in schools from morning to evening in day schools. Even in boarding schools, they are there twenty-four hours. 

It will be so good and a great honour if the Minister of Finance, in collaboration with the Minister of Education, restored the esteem of the teachers through increment of their pay and improving their conditions of service. Twelve years from now, when we celebrate our golden jubilee, that day, they will mention so many people who have achieved great things for Uganda, and they will say Uganda has achieved such and such. If you increase the teachers’ pay, you will have performed a good deed for this country and that honour will be bestowed to you. 

There is also something else, which I do not understand, with regard to Ministry of Education, and that is the meaning of good schools and bad schools. There are good students, best performing students and poorly performing students.  The inter-relationship of these two situations is such that, the best performing students are admitted to the best performing schools and the poor performing students are admitted to the poor performing schools.  I would like to raise a serious question, what are the criteria used to determine a good school and a good student or a poor school and a poor student? I can hear hon. Medi Kaggwa say that if you perform badly, you are poor. Yes, but I would like to say that this is the end result of the observation not empirical evidence determining the whole thing -(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member that, I have followed his question, which is very important, and I think that the poor performing schools, by definition, are rural schools. Good performing schools, by definition and past records, are urban schools. The majority of our population lives in rural areas.  Therefore, the majority of our people are not given the same opportunity as those who live in urban areas. I hope that this information will satisfy the hon. Member.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I am very satisfied with that information. It makes it easier for me to conclude on that particular point, by saying that we are condemning the rural poor, by virtue of their poverty, to no opportunities to go to good schools and read and be part of the development of this country. Something must be done to address this situation - (Interjection)

MR. BEN WACHA: Thank you, Sir. I am intrigued by the argument from both hon. John Eresu and hon. Karuhanga, because there are instances in these ‘poor schools’ where a student passes. Students in those poor rural schools have passed. Do we still consider that student who passes, however badly, and comes from that area, as being a poor student, and if not, what sort of criteria do we draw up for those people now?  

MR. ERESU:  Mr. Speaker, the issue is very serious. As hon. Ben Wacha has put it, we must look for measures to upgrade those students who come from a rural background or from a poor school. We can spot their talents so that they are helped, so that they become part of that group of society, who we refer to as people who have got opportunity. There is no need to make them remain where they are.  

To answer the question raised by hon. Ben Wacha, the criterion we must have is assessment. We must have criteria to help those schools, which we think are poor and are in rural areas. We must know that the urban schools have facilities, we must know that the urban schools are more exposed. So, we must think seriously about helping those who are not exposed and who do not have opportunities like the urban schools. In that way, we shall uplift the standards of the country generally, otherwise, we are going to create a society that is divided. There will be those who come from where they are exposed and are therefore able and have the means, and then those who do not have the means. Is that development?  

Finally, arising from what I have just been talking about, I would like to say something with respect to the brilliant students we have in this country. I would have thought, twelve years to our golden jubilee celebration, Uganda would now be thinking of having some kind of organisation, where we have the best brains of this country are put together to conduct some research to improvement our technology. For how long is this country going to depend on foreign institutions? - (Interjection)- my time is nearly up, but, Mr. Speaker, may I ask you to give me one or two minutes because there have been so many interruptions.  

For how long are we going to depend on foreign institutions to help us?  When are we going to create our own capacity? We hear about best performing students from various secondary schools and even universities, but some even fail to get jobs and end up on the streets, and the girls even melt away into marriage. The girls become prostitutes and the boys become thieves, and yet they are very brilliant people.  When shall we create capacity for our country?

The observations by the Committee on page 57, 3.2, on the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, excluded one thing. They excluded the conditions of the labour unions of the workers. Nothing has been mentioned on that, although there has been an increase in private investments in this country. We have called upon any body who has capital, wherever he is, to come and invest in this country. Some of these investors, unfortunately, do not respect the laws of our country. The laws of this country also allow employees to be unionised. Some of these investors, unfortunately, do not allow their employees to have unions. This is a very serious matter.

12 years from today, we shall have a golden jubilee, and I think we need to begin to plant a foundation to prepare ourselves in these 12 years. It is not very far, so we should consider this point seriously. I thank you very much.

MR. RWABITA DEO (Ibanda South, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You must agree with me that delivery of social services to our people especially health, education and even mobilisation of the youth and women, is the gauge by which people judge effectiveness of a Government. So, this is an important report. It is voluminous and we cannot read through the whole of it, but it is full of information. I hope the Government will take heed and follow up the recommendations of the Committee.  I thank them for a good job done.

I want to begin with Ministry of Health. I would like the chairman or the Minister of Health to clarify to us what  a district health unit means. In some areas, the practice is very painful to the communities. I have a living example from a health centre called Ruhoko.  This is one of the oldest health centres in the country. The community built half of the theatre six years back, and Ministry of Health gave us a doctor. With the new system now, this doctor has been taken away. Is this in the spirit of decentralisation? I thought decentralisation was to bring services nearer to the people. Can the Minister clarify this?  The common person cannot go to a paying hospital, which has been given to the sub-district health unit. I will ask the Ministry of Health to go back to the drawing board and make sure that the communities are served and not deprived of such an important service of a doctor.

On Ministry of Education, I want to talk about UPE. UPE has been a very good policy, but the funds are not properly supervised. The monies are now shared between the headmasters and the management committees, and they always buy the same items like chalk and some books.  They spend money on entertainment and travel. And you find that, in certain primary schools, there is no change for the last three years. There is not much to show for the thousands and millions of shillings, which are going to those schools. So, the Ministry of Education must employ more supervision for this money. Otherwise, in some areas, where there is good supervision, there are some positive changes, and that is encouraging.

UPE has got a problem upcountry. In upcountry areas, we do not have nurseries. You find parents sending three year old children for UPE. ‘Bona basome’, so the whole lot goes, but at the end of the day, that three year old or four year old child cannot cope with the P.1 syllabus. The result of all this is that this child will be retarded in his or her education faculties. Therefore, the Ministry of Education must come with a policy to control this practice. Otherwise, we are destroying our small children upcountry, when we allow them to go to P.1 at three or four years old. I think this must be addressed properly.

Let me turn to secondary schools. With the output from UPE, there are going to be many students joining secondary schools. But as we stand now, Government has no capacity to absorb those children from UPE. There was a promise that every sub-county will have a secondary school, but this has not yet covered the whole country. Instead of trying to build new schools, why can’t the Ministry of Education take over community schools? There are so many of them. Parents, communities and L.Cs have put up school structures, but they lack teachers, they lack books and they lack scientific equipment. If the Ministry could come in and boost these schools, then we would have the capacity to absorb the students from UPE.  But if you wait to build a new school, that will take you another year. What will happen to all these students who are coming out from P.7? This is a very simple suggestion and I hope the Ministry of Education will take heed, so that our children do not just finish P.7 and go back to the villages to drink malwa and waragi.

I would like the chairman of the Committee to tell us what ‘seed schools’ mean for secondary schools.  I do not get the concept of these seed schools, and they are saying that they are going to also be built in sub-counties. I hope this time, since they are Government schools, they will be distributed equitably in all sub-counties around the country.

Still on education, I request the chairman or the Minister to tell us how the issue of core-PTCs ended.  You remember we had a problem where some of these core-PTCs were unfairly distributed, and the Cardinal met with His Excellency the President, who promised that some PTCs will be made core. As a matter of fact, the Bishops went as far as indicating four regional PTCs to be upgraded, but up to now, nothing has been said about them. In the policy statement, there is no money allocated for these colleges, the chairman has even not talked about them.  So, this is an area that the Ministry of Education should re-visit very quickly, so that the people know what happened to those promises by His Excellency the President. We may know that a promise was made but nothing is being done at all.

I turn to the Ministry of Gender and Labour. The rate of illiteracy is still very high, especially in adults and old youth who never went to school. Up to now, the Ministry does not seem to have a national policy on adult literacy. I just look ahead, within the next ten years, and most of the youth will know how to read, write and count, but some of their parents will just be illiterate.  How do you talk about modernising agriculture, how do you talk about industrialisation when some of our parents are illiterate? The Minister of Gender should come up with a national policy so that all these adults, who never had a chance to go to school, should learn how to read and write. This will make it easier to mobilise for the modernisation of our economy. 

There is the problem of street kids who are increasing everyday on the streets. What is happening? What is the Ministry’s policy on this? Prostitutes are increasing everyday on the streets. You only have to drive along Speak Hotel after 8.00 p.m., then you will see what is happening down there. So, what is the Ministry doing to curb such an influx of young girls in our towns? I think this is a dangerous point, which should be - (Interruptions)- this is not a case to joke and laugh about, it is a national problem - (Interruption)

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Rwabita, for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that it is not only young women who go hanging around the streets. There are also many old men and young men who go hanging around those streets, either chasing after those ladies or standing with them.  

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member says that the number of prostitutes is increasing. Can he tell the House how he found out? - (Laughter). 

MR. RWABITA: I thank the informer, but it is very simple, unless you do not drive at night in Kampala. You drive through during one month, and the next month you can see that they are many more. That is simple research, you can do it yourself anyway - (Laughter).  

Regarding street kids, I understand there are some NGOs, which may be encouraging these children to flood our streets. They entice them with some money and some items and therefore encourage them to come to the streets - (Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Thank you very much, hon. Rwabita. First of all, in economics, we believe in the rules of demand and supply. Where there is no effective demand, there can never be increased supply. So, maybe you will also have to look at that. But on a more serious note, there is a very high level of unemployment. People are very poor. Gainful employment is falling because of low production in almost all the sectors in our economy. So, most of these people are unemployed.  Most of the parents cannot afford to look after their children, and then these children become needy and they go into this kind of thing. So, it is something that we need to look at in relation to the development of the economy as a whole.  Thank you.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Gender and Labour is attentive and she has heard about the national problem of unemployment, street children and  these prostitutes. Something must be done. If need be, let the Minister draw up a programme where he can organise all these people so that they are put into special areas. For the street kids, there are some NGOs, which, I understand, give them money. So, can the Minister find out about those NGOs. If those NGOs can not control the children or take them for training, then that aid they give to these kids is very detrimental to our society. We will get a lot of kids coming from schools, coming from villages into towns, and they will be a menace to this country.  

I want to end by requesting the Minister of Gender and Labour to consider the mobilisation of the youth more seriously. The women are more or less old and they know how to mobilise themselves, but the youth are scattered. It is unfair for adults and politicians to abuse the students and the youth that they are useless and they drink waragi and they are killing themselves, when they are not organised. The mother Ministry has not put any proper policy in place so that these people, strong and   innovative as they are, can be guided and develop this country with their mothers and fathers. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KUTESA SAM (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would just like to make brief comments on the Ministry of Education, and probably on the Ministry of Health.  

First of all, many Members of this House have been contributing and pointing out a disparity in the levels of education between urban and rural students. This report mentions sponsorship of students at University by Government and others who are sponsoring themselves and the costs related there too. I think it is about time that we began to consider setting up distance education.  I am told, if you were to set up just 20 Tele-centres in 20 districts, it would not cost you more than five million U.S dollars. What do you achieve? When you set up Tele-centres for long distance education, you achieve the following: 
First, people do not have to move to urban areas to study, where it is more expensive. So, you minimise costs.  

Second, you have bigger coverage and you can teach many more students than you can admit at Makerere University or these other mushrooming universities.  

Thirdly, there is standardisation of education material.  The same lecturer who teaches a subject in law at Makerere will deliver the same lecture in these Tele-centres in these other 20 areas. So, you achieve standardisation.  

I think we are looking at education in the most traditional method of just a mere classroom. There is software that is being developed all over the world. It is happening in India, it is happening in Israel, it is happening in South Africa, and other countries, actually even in Zimbabwe. I think we should begin to talk about long distance education. We solve the problems of having to bring - (Interruption)

DR. RWENDEIRE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Sam Kutesa for giving way, and for a long  time, I have not seen hon. Sam Kutesa in the House, I also want to take this opportunity-(Laughter)

MR. KUTESA: Considering the fact that this is the first time I have seen hon. Rwendeire in this House recently, is he in order to impute that I am the one who has been absent, when actually I am seeing him here for the first time in many months?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think both of you may be right-(Laughter).

DR. RWENDEIRE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that very wise ruling. We, in the Ministry of Education and Sports, have had a programme of introducing an Open University of Uganda. This was contained in the Government white paper of 1992, following a report by Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi’s commission. The recommendation at that time was that the Open University of Uganda should be introduced by the year 2000. 

I would like to inform you that last year, the Ministry of Education and Sports set up a committee to look at the modalities of establishing the Open University of Uganda. This committee was chaired by Prof. Lejuni, the Vice Chancellor of Nkozi - to show that the Ministry of Education has can partner with the private sector. Hon. Nkuuhe was also on that committee. They reported in June this year, giving us the modalities of establishing the Open University and definitely the centres that he is talking about were proposed. Once Cabinet passes this, it will be established before the end of this Calendar year.  Thank you.

DR.MATOVU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much, hon. Kutesa. I would like to inform hon. Kutesa that one of the well functioning departments at Makerere University is the distance education department.  They are doing very well. There are so many people taking advantage of this department at Makerere University, teachers and others. If he has got anybody to advise to go for further education, I would like to inform him that this department is functioning very well at Makerere.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister and hon. Matovu Byatike for their information.  First of all, I am not quite aware, and I do not know how many other people are aware, of this department of long distance education at Makerere. If it is there, we need to know so that people can take advantage of it, but what I am talking about is slightly different. I am talking about setting up telecentres countrywide.  I am talking about rural areas accessing the same quality of education as people in urban areas. I am talking about you having one centre here in Kampala, for example, and having these 20 centres and computers and classrooms. I am talking about someone going into this studio in Kampala and teaching the same subject as he teaches here in Kampala and the same quality of teaching goes to all these centres. This is what I am talking about. I am not talking about coming and going to Makerere to attend mature entrance or something like that. That is not what I am talking about –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Thank you, hon. Kutesa, for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Kutesa that the Uganda Science Council, of which I am a board member, through one of their programmes, which is being funded by the Canadian Government, and I think DRC, already have a programme to set up telecentres. We already have one telecentre on ground, and through the arrangement of ACECIA, possibly before the end of this year, we shall have progressed. In the last meeting we held in Mozambique, we discussed  the setting up of these telecentres. The Government of Uganda has a programme jointly with Senegal, Kenya, and South Africa to set up telecentres. The only thing I would like see is the integration of the education curriculum, as hon. Kutesa said. This arrangement could be integrated together through discussions with the Ministry of Finance, the National Science Council and the Ministry of Education.  I thank you.

MR. KIBAALE: I seek clarification from the hon. member as to whether telecentres are part of a methodology of teaching distance education. The problem with Uganda is that, with fluctuations of electricity, this method may not be very conducive for the rural area. If we are talking about the rural people, then we should be talking about people who are sub-urban. We cannot talk about the rural people of Budadiri. Unless Government makes a deliberate effort to take power to the villages and at the same time stop the fluctuations, how will this be possible?

MR. KUTESA: I start by first responding to the query raised by hon. Wambi. UEB is not the only source of energy.  Tele centres can run on solar energy, and they do run on other forms of energy. So fluctuations of Jinja power can not be a hindrance to this.  

Secondly, on the information given by hon. Mukula, I am aware of this Canadian funded project. These are really rural development centres for telecommunication, and may be an Inter-net and the village telephone. But that is not what I am talking about. I know that there is one in Luwero, there is one proposed for Bushenyi and a few other places, but that is not what I am talking about.  In fact, I was aware of this before I was removed as Minister for Planning. I am the one who brought that particular project. But that is not what it is. 

What I am talking about are regional or even district education centres. I have said that 20 of them can be set up for 5 million US dollars. You can start with 20 and the following year you get another 5 million US dollars and start others so that you cover up the districts. The students will remain in their areas, they do not have to come to Kampala and stay in stinking hostels. The chairman of this Committee is complaining about at Makerere, they can stay in their rural areas. Teaching them at home will probably cost 300,000 shillings per annum, per student, in that way, you are going to reduce the cost. But as I said, even more importantly, they will be learning the same things that our urban fellows are being taught.  

Secondly, these telecentres do not only become education centres. Maybe we teach for four or five hours and then that facility can be available for other things. You can use it for telemedicine and for advocacy for every project we pass here, like nutrition programmes. There is an element of advocacy and money being spent on advocacy. Many times it is difficult to find out whether this advocacy has arrived in that area. But these telecentres can be used for advocacy. The Ministry of Health can use these telecentres to pass on the message of the control of AIDS to different people. In the morning, you can have students studying. In the evening, you can have adult education, and in the afternoon you can have people explain health programmes. You can even advertise private companies and make money. Instead of going on radio, private companies can also use these telecentres to advertise. So, it is integrated and self-sustaining, and it is multi-purpose. I think it is time the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education talked about this. 

We were talking about agricultural practices and extension staff the other day. You can use these same telecentres to pass on new knowledge about agriculture.  You can have software teaching ordinary citizens using these same methods. So, I would like to call upon Government, even not in this budget, to give it some thought. These are useful centres and they are happening elsewhere. This is the age in which we are all moving, the era of technology. Modernisation of education, agriculture and health could be done in this way. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MS BABIHUGA WINNIE (Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the Committee for their report, which is very informative and thorough, and for the excellent way in which the chairperson summarised it. 

I will be brief and comment on those issues that are threatening the development of our country. The future of this country lies in the strengthening of the decentralised governance that we all rely on for service delivery. I will give brief comments about some issues that are really tormenting our people in the districts, with regard to the Ministry of Education. 

Today, there is a validation exercise for teachers, which is being implemented by the Ministry of Education. I have never seen such confusion because teachers are being threatened out of their jobs. They are being asked, for example, to produce certificates of attainment and they must verify that they had several distinctions and credits in their ‘O’ Levels. So, if you have a grade three teacher’s certificate, if you had several passes at O’levels, you lose your job. I was really appalled with this communication. 

The Ministry of Education is aware that they phased out many teachers’ colleges, which were operational within the districts. In Rukungiri, for example, Karukata college was closed, Kihihi college was closed, and not only that, there is a huge backlog, when it comes to giving teachers their certificates, in spite of the fact that they paid the fees for the certificates. I even attempted to advocate for these teachers, only to be told that these teachers could have had college dues. Why should the Ministry of Education expect students, if at all they had college dues, to pay dues to colleges that were closed? I find it absolutely unreasonable, and it is really rubbish for the Ministry to deny teachers, who qualified as teachers, their certificates. I do not want to say anymore, but it is a denial of human rights. I call upon the Ministry to try and mitigate the misinformation, which is really disturbing teachers in our districts.  

I do not know why the Ministry of Education is reluctant to fully decentralise the functions of education to the districts. How do you expect the inspectorate at the centre to go through all the 45 districts, and very soon a few more will de added, and the 900 plus sub-counties, to inspect the schools? Therefore, it is no wonder that some of these schools have never seen the face of an inspector. They do not even know what an inspector does. No wonder our schools are not performing well. It is not enough to sit here in Kampala and work out the policy. It is within your mandate and job to go down and inspect these schools and ensure that the standards are being maintained. Therefore, I feel that, even the lack of compliance of the Ministry of Education to the Local Government Act should be challenged in the courts of law. They should decentralise, because it is easier to inspect the schools from the district headquarters other than Kampala.  

UPE is a good policy, but the Ministry of Education does not really take into consideration the needs and requirements of the different districts. Recently, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government visited Kisoro District, and we found that the enrolment in most of those schools is overwhelming. In fact, in one school, Mulamba primary school, we found 170 pupils being taught by one teacher! Head teachers in Kisoro say it is impossible for them to even get teachers who are willing to teach in those schools. How does the Ministry expect those children to study? The children are hurdled on the floor and they are covered in dust. The teachers will run mad very soon, because they cannot control those classes.  It is impossible for a teacher to handle such large sized classes. And the Ministry just slams blanket policies on some of the districts that have got very unique features, for example, Kotido, Rukungiri, Kabale, or even Kisoro. You expect classroom construction to cost the same in the terrains like Mpigi as classroom construction in some of these places, where you have got to move hundreds of miles to even find a stone, sand or even timber! If the Ministry of Education means well, I feel that it is high time for them to test their policies and make special considerations for some of these districts, in order to enable them to have, at least, the basic structures that other districts have. 

I would also like to comment on the health needs in some of our districts. There are some districts that do not have district hospitals, and they have endeavoured to build health centres, which have got theatres. Those centres, I am reliably informed, are grade four hospitals. I feel that the Government needs to put in place an inter-ministerial Committee to look at the needs of these sub counties and draw resources from the Ministry of Energy and other relevant areas, to make these health units operational. Otherwise, these centres remain white elephants in some of those areas. 

I would like to end by thanking Mulago Hospital for the efforts that they are putting in to upgrade service delivery within the hospital. They have inaugurated the technology of telemedicine, and I want to appeal to the Ministry to widen this technology, so that even rural districts can benefit from this technology, and be able to improve the levels of service delivery for our people. 
I thank you.

MR. BAGUNYWA ARTHUR (Mityana South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to join my hon. colleagues in thanking the Committee for producing a comprehensive report, although it is a bit concise in some areas. I would like to address myself to three aspects of the Ministry of Education’s policy. So, I will restrict myself to the Ministry of Education and its policy. 

One of the aspects of the education policy that worries most professional educators, and I happen to be one, and even informed lay men in the field of education, appears on page 27 of this report. It is indicated, under the observations on the National Curriculum Development Centre, that the committee was concerned about the level of manpower of the department and wondered whether training teachers to implement volume II of the primary school curriculum has started. The Committee has put its finger on the right spot here. 

Educators agree that we take children to school to teach them three things: knowledge, which addresses educating the head, skills for training the hand, and values for educating the heart, according to Dr. Aggrey. For a long time in this country, we have addressed ourselves to educating the head, and the four subjects in volume one of the primary school curriculum address knowledge for educating the head. They are taught English, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. We neglect the other two components, which are very important! We neglect teaching them or training their hands to exploit some of the agricultural potential of this country. They can be taught very simple skills in agriculture. All this is in volume II that has not yet come out. We are delaying it all the time. They can be taught some very simple skills in business and in technical education, and exposure and sensitivity to skills that they will need to be able to repair implements on the farm. They can be taught home management and also management of any other enterprises.  But now all this has now been left out, it is waiting. It is in volume II and we do not know when that will come.  

A very important aspect is the balancing of the curriculum of the primary schools, or balancing of the curriculum at any other level, except university probably, where balancing is not required. Another aspect of the curriculum, which has been left out, and which is in volume II, is training in values or teaching of values. We have yet to agree on ethics. Some people have told us that you go hunting for integrity when you want to appoint people in Uganda Revenue Authority, and so you  look for those who are professed balokole or saved. I am not so sure whether that is the case. I am not so sure that people cannot claim to be saved when they are not.  So, that may not be the criteria for teaching values, but we all know that values are very important. Ethics must start when children are young, and it is possible, and it was designed in the curriculum in volume II, but it has not come on board yet because some people think we can afford to delay that.  

I remember, when I was a child, to prove our honesty, our parents used to hide a 50 cent coin below the carpet. So, when you sweep the room, if you were honest enough, you would go and say, ‘I found this 50 cent coin under the carpet’, and you returned it. They would begin assessing your honesty, it would be developing. You have to start when young. Our attempt to try and get honesty and reliability at the adult stage is futile. It will not get us there. 

Neglecting balancing of the curriculum at the primary school level, by leaving out the two important components and addressing ourselves only to educating the head, is giving them knowledge without skills. And when we talked about skills, very often, we meant literally skills or reading and writing, but now we mean production skills,  exposure and sensitivity to agricultural skills for production which is perfectly possible at that age. We can give an example, under the Namutamba project, which we started at one time, children of the age of fourteen could produce on half or quarter an acre of land and get anything up to Shs 500,000 per month.  I have tried it in my own area, and I can prove it. 

We are playing into the hands of the donors, and if I may be allowed to ride my hobbyhorse, this is what I call ‘toothpaste economics’. That is how we play ourselves into the hands of the donors. They give us money because we have said we want UPE, and under the curriculum, of course, we stress, and rightly so, the fact that every one of these children, six million plus, in school now must brush his or her teeth at least once a day. That will mean a tube of toothpaste costing Shs. 2,000 per month. That is when you are not very generous, and if you multiply six million children and 2,000/=, you get 12 billion shillings on toothpaste, and in a year, Shs. 144 billion in primary school alone. I am leaving out secondary school, university, the adult stage and so on. If you go and check with the Ministry of Trade and Industry, you will find that the new cars coming in do not cost even a quarter of that amount. So, we are likely to play into the hands of the donors. When we announce Universal Primary Education, they will probably dance in the streets because they know they will hold us to it.  We will have all the time to buy their toothpaste.  

Somebody asked why we do not make our own toothpaste.  How can we do it when WTO does not allow us to do that?  We do not have protection for Nile Toothpaste so we cannot sell. That is one aspect of it. The faster we can balance our curriculum, the better.  

The other aspect is an inside story, only probably known to educators. How do we get effective primary school teachers? We have gone in for people who pretend to teach what they do not know. There was a time when we picked the best brains at primary school level and we said that, if they went for teacher training, they did not have to pay.  There was not even any cost sharing. If they went for secondary school education, they paid. So, at that level, we divided them. Some good brains came to us for teacher training because they knew they were poor and they were orphans, as is the case now. They would not have to pay, but they were good at mathematics, English or languages, music, science, they were good at everything. This is the G-factor in education, for those people who know educational psychology. The person who is good at everything is way above that one who has special ability in a single subject.  We have now failed to attract good brains in our primary Teacher Training Colleges. 

I happen to be on the board of governors of Nakaseke Core-PTC. We have failed to attract people with at least a pass in mathematics in a good college like that one.  We say they should come with at least a pass in mathematics, a good credit in English and so on, but we do not get them. Maybe we should have thought of changing our tactics slightly and looking at this cost sharing that is talked about at the bottom of page 33. The Committee says that cost sharing at PTCs is turning away students. The Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry of Education and Sports could waive or put cost sharing on hold for some time. I believe they have put their finger again on the right spot. If we can waive cost sharing for primary teacher education, we will attract good and effective brains with a G-factor. They will be good at everything and, therefore, they can effectively teach in a primary school. If we expect primary school teachers to have mathematicians who teach nothing but mathematics, musicians who teach nothing but music, or science teachers who teach nothing but science, we will not get there. It will be too costly. So, we better get back to attracting the right brains, people who have the G-factor in them, to teach in these schools.  

I would have gone on to the third aspect, but this has been pointed out by two previous speakers, who addressed the entry age for primary education.  UPE is beginning to pay diminishing returns. As we went round in the South West and in the East, we saw people being applauded for sending so many children to school. Some children were three years old, and they were sent together with those who were aged six years. Parents are very anxious to get their children into school. Once you announce that it is universal primary education, they get them there. 

Educators know that if you put the mental age of six over the chronological age of three and you multiply by 100, you get 200 per cent. There are very few people in this world who have got IQ of 200 per cent. We are making a great mistake.  We will be producing repeaters for a very long time, and it will be very wasteful for the system.  It is gets us nowhere. The sooner we start issuing birth certificates, even through other Ministries, the better. I know, at one time, village chiefs would issue birth certificates, I cannot see why under the LC system, they cannot issue these birth certificates, so that we know the age of the children when they come to school.  

I would have gone on and on, but at least those three worry me. The entry age to primary school and the way we putting ourselves at a disadvantage, admitting them at the age of three and applauding people or over anxious parents who do so. It is all wrong, and they will end up repeaters. Some of them will be frustrated and will not like school by the end of the third year of school, because they are trying to work with people who are above their age group.  The balancing of the curriculum is the other one and the last one was the effective primary school teacher, who must have a G-factor in intelligence. We should attract people with special abilities, and the sooner we can put cost sharing on hold, as the Committee has recommended, the better our education system will be.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to say a few things about the Committee’s report and the policies, which they commented on. Let me also join those who have thanked the Committee for producing a concise and good report on so many Ministries.  

I stood up to comment on a few things, which do not seem to appear in the report. The first, is the proposed paramedical institute, which was supposed to be built in Gulu. Some time back, in the early ‘90s, some Good Samaritan offered to fund the construction of a paramedical institute in Gulu, and we received this very well and we even located land. Since then, nobody seems to be talking about it and it is never mentioned in the Ministry’s reports. It is mentioned nowhere and nobody knows what has happened to the project. Can we know what is happening? I had hoped that this year somebody would have raised it. Unfortunately, I did not remember seeing this issue in this Committee report.  

Recently, I was told that the whole area of training institutes has now been transferred to the Ministry of Education. Maybe this is where it is resting. The Ministry of Health seems to now say that it now belongs to the Ministry of Education, but this does not even appear anywhere in the Ministry of Education’s statement or recommendations. Can we be told what has happened to this project? 

The other area, which seems to have been neglected in the field of education, is infrastructure. I am referring to houses for teachers, particularly teachers in rural schools. Many of these schools that are springing up concentrate mainly on buildings for classrooms, but no consideration seems to be given to the welfare of the teachers, in terms of houses for accommodation. Many of the teachers, particularly those in the so-called rural secondary schools, have to rent huts from the villages. You can imagine the kind of conditions that we are subjecting these teachers to. No wonder, good teachers do not want to go to these rural schools. The living conditions are extremely poor. 

Even in the primary schools under UPE, the concentration seems to be only on construction of classrooms. I appreciate that children must have decent classrooms, but no provision is made at all, even in UPE funds for – (Laughter)- I nearly said UPC, but I did not mention it, although, I am perfectly entitled to say so. But, there are details on how these UPE funds should be deployed, but you find nothing on teachers’ houses, yet these people are supposed to stay somewhere near the school so that they teach properly.  It seems that these things are being left with parents, but the parents, particularly in my area, are over burdened because they also have other problems.  They are over burdened and the teachers’ houses seem to be the last thing on their minds, and this seems to be the same with Ministry as well. Maybe, the Ministry should consider this, whenever we have a project, particularly for rural secondary schools, some consideration should be given to building houses for teachers, even if they are temporary structures.

The other issue is the Ministry of Gender and workers’ welfare. I would like to thank the Committee for dealing with the National social Security Fund in some detail.  But there is one area that people do not seem to consider at all, and that is of payment of these funds to the workers who contributed. 

In 1987, the shilling was devalued and the two zeros were cancelled. This affected the contribution of the workers in service at that time.  I understand, afterwards, the two zeros were reinstated in calculation of the benefits of the current workers. This does not, however, take into consideration the workers who contributed before the two zeros were eliminated, and yet some of these workers contributed for a long time to this fund. 

Understandably, for some time the funds were mismanaged, but that is not the fault of the workers who contributed. Some of them have contributed for 20 years or 30 years, but if they go out now and they ask for some money, it is paltry compared to those who are now being paid under the new calculations.  And I wonder why this discrimination was introduced in the system. I do not know whether the Minister knows about this, but this is what is happening. Those workers who retired soon after the devaluation of the shillings are being paid at the devalued rate as opposed to those who are now being paid after the two zeros have been reinstated. And yet now, even at that time, the Ugandan shilling was reduced because of the currency exchange rate. At that time, 1 US dollar was fetching 1400 Uganda shillings, and we thought that was really inflationary so we had to cancel the 2 zeros. In spite of that, these workers who had contributed are not being considered. 

I think the hon. Minister should take this into consideration, because these people have really contributed to the fund in a considerable measure. I do not see why they should be discriminated. And some of them really need it. They invested so much and their employers also contributed so much, now they get almost nothing vis-à-vis their contribution. 
Those are the areas that I thought the Committee should have dealt with, but they were left out completely. I thank you.

MS. NAMUMBYA SARAH (Woman Representative, Iganga and Bugiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to thank the Committee for enabling us discuss this report, which has given us some insights into what is happening in these Ministries.  

I want to start by commenting briefly on Ministry of Education. I would like the Minister in charge of this Ministry to show cause as to why this Ministry should  continue to be called the Ministry of Education and Sports. There is nothing at all at the grass roots to show that there is also a department of sports within the Ministry of Education and Sports –(Applause). Some of the Members of Parliament here can support me, because it is Members of Parliament who are funding this department, even the Minister in charge can testify. Very many Members have gone to this department to get equipment, not on credit or even at a subsidised price, but for the full price. So, I think that this Ministry should terminate the other part of its name and stay just as Ministry of Education –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr. Omony Ogaba): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Members for the interest that they have shown in sports. My Minister is going to say a lot, but allow me to say something about the scheme of higher purchase. When I was appointed, quite a number of my colleagues wanted sports equipment, and I did not have money, neither did the National Council of Sports have provision for giving out free sports equipment. So, in order for my colleagues to benefit, I discussed with the National Council of Sports and they accepted that Members could get sports equipment and start the payment. Indeed, Members have benefited and have popularised the sports in their constituencies. I thank you. 

MS. NAMUMBYA: I thank the Minister for that information, but I think the ball is in the hands of the Minister in charge for that Ministry. I have told you what the people on the ground are saying. They cannot feel the Ministry.  Maybe we should add music, dance and drama to that name so that it becomes the Ministry of Education, Music, Dance and Drama. Now we see so many singers coming up as professionals, but as for sports, people are not sure whether such a Ministry really exists in Uganda or it is just on paper, to have somebody in Cabinet.

The other major issue I want to comment on is the policy the Ministry of Education has of having one secondary school for every sub-county. We have sung and we have heard about that policy ever since we came to this Parliament. We are now leaving this Parliament, and that policy is still on paper. This could be the reason why some people are saying that MPs are not delivering. How can we deliver, when we keep talking and making recommendations that remain on paper? If that policy is too big, the Ministry of Education should opt for the policy that Ministry of Health had. Ministry of Health opted for one sub-district health centre per constituency. There are constituencies, which do not have even a single Government aided secondary school. 

We are here implementing UPE, which is producing so many graduates from that level. Ugandans need an explanation from the Ministry of Education. What should they do with these students who are coming out, more so, when some constituencies have no ways to absorb those pupils who are coming from primary level? Bunya County, for example, has got three constituencies, but they only have one Government aided school. Here, another problem comes up with girls, who have to travel so many miles to attend the only Government aided school. I think the Ministry of Education is employing double standards here. You bring these girls from primary, then you expose them to a lot of risks, by making them travel long distances looking for Government aided schools.  

The other point I want to bring out, still on education, is the co-ordination between the concerned Ministries in implementing UPE. Some of these UPE schools have got big numbers. The headmasters and parents are requesting the Ministry of Education to work with the Ministry of Health such that at least they provide health services, which these headmasters can run to for first aid. You can imagine a pupil fainting and yet even in the nearest sub-county there is no health centre that he or she can be rushed to. I think that this is something very small. The Ministry of Health could at least allocate some drugs, monthly or termly, to these schools so that they can use them for first aid.  

We have also read from newspapers about these children who are being abused by being denied the right to living or the right to good services like food. I want to point out that, even with UPE, such a thing is being noticed. You can imagine, there is a policy that parents should not be asked for money to feed these children who are undergoing UPE! Even we, Members of Parliament, we cannot imagine staying hungry without food or tea from morning to evening. What type of people are we to punish those children like that just because we want them to go to school? Here, the Ministry has got to do something. If Government can fund their feeding, let it fund, if government cannot fund their feeding, let all parents be forced to pay money for these children to eat food at school. These children in Kampala who are paying for food will perform well and they will go to Buddo, meanwhile those ones in Iganga who are starving 12 hours in a day, will not have the ability to perform well at PLE. The same exams are sat in the whole country yet the circumstances vary.

The YES programme is good, and the youth have appreciated it, but there is another category of youth who are not graduates from tertiary institutions but who are just school drop outs from P.7 or S.2. There is a missing link here. Such youth cannot access this sort of facility because it has got guidelines that strictly benefit post graduates or graduates of higher institutions of learning. They are the ones who have got access to it. 

I would like to commend the Ministry of Gender helping women at least access entandikwa. But there is an observation here for the Minister. This entandikwa is too small, but we hope that as we go along, the vote will be considered so that it would make sense to those who have it. People have made it a laughing matter. They ask, how can the whole of Iganga, which has got around 31 sub-counties, just get 5 million shillings?  If you divide 5 million shillings between those sub-counties, each sub-county will access Shs.100,000. And the guidelines are, before you access that money, you must open up an account. The cheapest accounts such people can open up are savings accounts, which need an opening fee of around 50,000=. So, Madam Minister, you can imagine, after being given Shs.100,000=, you need to get 50,000= to open up the account, then you are left with only 50,000/= for the whole sub-county. And the sub-county has got very many groups, which need such a facility. I hope that the Minister in charge of that Ministry will at least seek support from other Ministers so that they consider that issue. 

One time hon. Kutesa asked us why we keep on lamenting and lamenting. I think he was even asking the Minister for Gender why she keeps on lamenting?  Why can you not act, such that these women councils can get some money that can improve their way of living, and on the other hand, they would also be helping this country?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I realise this report concerns very many big Ministries, thus the added interest. But I do not know how I will give each of you time to contribute. So, I suggest each contribution should not go beyond five minutes. I will start with the Member for Mbarara Municipality, then the Member for Persons with Disabilities, Eastern, then the UPDF representative, and then I will definitely come this side.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA  (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):   Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for the excellent report they have presented. I would like to thank the Government for the UPE programme, but I want to raise some equity issues in the education budget.  

First of all, I think it is important for us to note that, despite the fact that we have UPE, the drop out rate for girls is still very high, particularly starting from Primary 4 up to Primary 7. The gaps between girls and boys at school continue to be wide and the constraints that cause these gaps are known, well studied, and well researched. Some of the factors are socio-cultural, some are economic, and some are to do with the school environment. They are well known. They have been written in many policy documents, but the problem is that there is a gap between what the policy says and what the budget pays for.  I therefore, ask the Government to put its money where its words are and begin addressing those issues that continue to prohibit girls from taking advantage of the UPE policy. 

Again, with respect to primary education, I want to go on record here and say, contrary to what the newspapers tell us every year that the best student in primary school is a girl or the best school is a girls’ school, these figures from the papers are misleading. The fact is, girls still perform poorly, much worse than boys do, in primary school. There is a wealth of research to show that their performance is weaker that the boys. 

With respect to secondary schools, I am also bothered by  the dropout rate, which is higher for girls compared to boys. I am also concerned that increasingly, in general, poor girls and poor boys cannot pursue secondary school education. What is the Government going to do about this?   Why can we not have the beginning of affirmative action for girls at secondary school level, and with the poorest girls in community?  What is the use of having 1.5 at Makerere, going to the daughters of the richest people in this country?  What is the point? I call for the Government to look at the possibility of giving an opportunity to the poorest girls to access secondary school education. Forget about this tokenism at the university level, which benefits the girls from Gayaza and Namagunga, whom we all know very well are our children and children of other important people in the Government.  

This country is set to have the highest number of  orphans in Africa. We have registered 1.1 million orphans, many of them victims of AIDS, their parents having died because of AIDS. The Government up to today, does not have a policy on orphans. This means that, even the best programme, such as UPE, does not benefit these most vulnerable children. As long as there is a cost that parents have to pay for UPE, the orphans cannot benefit, as well as those children with very poor parents. I ask the Government to put in place a policy for orphans, so that children who have lost parents can benefit from primary education, from secondary education, and from basic health. I ask for a comprehensive policy to deal with the plight of orphans.

University standards are falling. I do not agree with the report. You do not have to be a professor to see that the classes are stretched to capacity, and the lecturers are stretched beyond what is humanly possible. Could we have some setting of standards? Can it be put somewhere that this is the maximum size of a class? The search for extra funds by the university cannot be limitless, there has to be a limit in order to uphold some standards in our university. I do interview many young graduates for different jobs in the non-governmental sector and the private sector. So many of them cannot spell, cannot write grammatical sentences, cannot express themselves in English, and do not even understand basic concepts of what they are supposed to have studied. It is clear that they were not given any attention while they were at the university. So, I think that it is time we accepted the problem of falling standards and begun to address it. 

My last two issues also concern equity. I continue to be concerned about sponsorship of students by the State House, because, in my constituency, I get so many students coming to me and asking how they can also access a State House scholarship to the university. I still cannot give them an answer. I do not know where to get an application form for this kind of scholarship. I do not know the criteria for this kind of scholarship, I do not know who is benefiting and who is not, and I am a Member of Parliament. So, I would like this information availed to us. For as long as there are some people who can go to a Government department called State House and get sponsorship to the university and other higher institutions of learning, I will continue demanding that this be given out openly and transparently. I want my students from Mbarara Municipality to be able to go some where and get a form and fill it, and expect to be considered as full citizens of this country.

There was an issue, which was a burning issue this year, and that is the choice of core Primary Teacher Training Colleges. The President made a promise that in the budget of this year, there would be money allocated for the purpose of setting up core colleges from Catholic and Muslim founded Teacher Training Colleges. Could the Minister show me, in this budget, where this money is and which colleges are going to become core colleges as the President promised?  

Lastly, adult education does not feature under Ministry of Education and I do not see a budget for it anywhere. Yet, as long as we continue to pay for people to go through the school process, we are actually favouring men. We must remember that 60 percent of the women of this country are illiterate and do not have the opportunity to go through the whole school process.  Their chances of having some meaningful existence are in getting some kind of adult education. Statistics show how much the life of a woman and her children improve as a result of a few lessons, a few basics on functional literacy. So, I call for a real budget of adult education, to benefit the women of this country who do not have opportunities to go through the whole school process, but who need the knowledge in order to live full lives, bring up children, and sustain communities.

What is going to happen to the people with disabilities?  The Ministry of Gender and Community Development is a marginalised Ministry, I recognise, but in that marginalising, the people with disabilities are even further marginalised. We have institutes that have been serving these people. One of them is in my constituency, it is called Ruti Rehabilitation Centre, and it serves the whole region. But in this whole restructuring of Government, these institutions do not fall anywhere. The districts do not want to recognise them and the headquarters have nothing to offer them. Are the people with disabilities of this country full citizens or they have to be only remembered when there is some extra money? I ask the Ministry to put aside some money for these institutes that serve whole regions of the country.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for persons with disabilities.   Please limit your contributions within the five minutes.

MR. MWANDHA JAMES (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In view of the time constraint, and in view of the fact that nobody has discussed the subject of disability at great length, permit me to start with it. 

I would like to thank the Committee for their 70 page report, very comprehensive and well written, however, I think they probably did not have enough time to dig into issues affecting people with disabilities. There are a number of laws that we have been expecting to come to this House, but for one reason or another, nothing is happening. The National Disability Council Bill has been promised for months and months, but I do not think that the Sixth Parliament will pass this Bill. There is the Equal Opportunities Commission Bill, which the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, who is not in the House now, promised to bring in three months’ time. That was about four months ago, that Bill is nowhere to be seen. And I would have thought that the Committee would have looked into this.

Another area of concern is the state of the rehabilitation centres. These rehabilitation centres are very important to us. They provide rehabilitation, they provide skills, so that the disabled people can actually become independent. As a result of restructuring, these centres continue to be in a terrible mess. The Committee said nothing about this. 

The supply of assistive devices is another matter, which is very important. For disabled people to be able to be independent and earn a living, they need these devices.  We understand that the Ministry of Health said that disability is not life threatening, and therefore, most of the money goes into fighting Aids and Malaria and so on, which is understandable. But we would like to see a little bit more money put into mobility devices, so that more and more of these are made available –(Interruption) 

DR. KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Mwandha, for giving way. We have not said that disabilities are not life threatening. Indeed, if you read through our policy statement, we regard issues of disability as a priority, and we take them as such.  Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: I am happy to receive that assurance. I hope that assurance will be followed by real concrete action, so that more money is put into the manufacturing and availability of orthopaedic and other mobility devices, which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Health. 

The Constitution of this Republic says that sign language is one of the languages of this Republic. I know that the Minister of Education says that there are plans for developing this language, but the Committee somehow never mentioned this matter. We would like the Committee to actually look into these matters and inform this Parliament what actual action is taking place. 

We were promised that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development would come up with a national disability policy so that all issues of disability will be contained in a statement of Government, which spells out all the policies. We do not want to simply get lip service. We would like to see a concrete policy in place, but this is not forthcoming and the Committee never looked at it. There are issues that affect even the more vulnerable disabled groups like women, youth and children, but, again, nothing is mentioned in this report.  

Disability is cross cutting. We do not necessarily have to find it in the Ministry of Gender or in the Ministry of Health. Disability issues cut across, and we would have thought that this Committee, which is responsible for social services, would have actually written a report to satisfy this House, whether this matter of the cross cutting nature of disability is being addressed by all other Ministries and sectors of Government. So, we hope that in future, the Committee will find a bit more space in their report to write about some of these major issues. 

Let me use my last minute to talk about the Ministry of Education. UPE is a policy that has worked well, but UPE came in a manner that was not as a result of survey or research. It was simply proclaimed, and I think, it is time that there is an evaluation of UPE. I have sat here the whole afternoon listening to hon. Members and they had a lot of concerns about UPE. I just wonder whether the Minister of Education will undertake a comprehensive evaluation of this policy and give this Parliament a report, so that House can also discuss this policy. In fact, we can find the way forward so that this policy can continue to serve the citizens of this country. 

I do not want to be disobedient, I had a lot of points to bring across, but I will stop here. I hope, in future, people with special interests will also be given as much time as other people, as it has happened this afternoon.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member for Moroto and hon. Gagawala Wambuzi should also prepare themselves.

MAJ. OTOA TONNY (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank you, in a very special way. At least you care to let my constituency be heard, even on issues that do not concern security.

I have very brief comments to make on the three Ministries mentioned in the report. First of all, I want to start with the Ministry of Health. I want to appreciate the focus on damage limitation by the Ministry of Health on HIV and AIDS control. I also want to appreciate their effort to eliminate polio from Uganda, but there are deadly problems and deadly diseases, which may have been sidelined by our focus on these things I have stated. 

Recently, I went to my home area, and syphilis in the rural area is on the rampage. Syphilis in rural area was not known, it is a new disease. It was there, I think, in the forties and fifties, but now, people do not know it. When somebody gets infected, they think that it is either a result of bad neighbourliness or somebody has bewitched them. I went to a home, with a family of ten people, out of ten people, two had died of syphilis, and the rest are all infected. People from 50 years old right down to a child of two years old are infected. This is a very serious issue. I would like to call upon the Ministry of Health to go a little further into the rural areas to try and sensitise our people on the dangers of syphilis.

Secondly, I would like to comment on accessibility to drugs for snakebites, tetanus and rabies. Many of our soldiers in operation areas have died as a result of snakebites because sometimes we operate in forests infested with snakes. It is very difficult to get a clinic or hospital nearby, which stocks anti-snake bite drugs.

I am amazed at the quantity of expired drugs being sold in unlicensed clinics in rural areas. You can walk into any rural clinic and you will find ampicillin being sold there. I think ampicillin could be classified as one of those very poisonous medicines. I am not very sure about that, someone will help me.

On page 29 of the report, the Committee inquires why the Ministry of Education could not send engineers to supervise the construction of classrooms for primary schools. I am amazed at the response from the Ministry of Education on page 30.  They say: “contracts are awarded with the recommendation of the District Tender Board.”   My foot! Out of 45 districts, if I am not wrong, I think only about 10 or 15 district tender boards work independently, most of them have been hijacked by politicians. Tenders are awarded to friends and political supporters, and bricks and sand are used. 

In Lira District, more than two primary schools, which were built this year, have collapsed. So, it should be the Ministry of Education’s concern to make sure that the funds we send down to the local governments are effectively used. Otherwise, in ten years time, all our efforts to put up classrooms in all the primary schools will be wasted.

On page 33 of the report, the Committee mentions the validation of head teachers. In August 1999, an exercise of validation on the qualifications of head teachers was carried out. Many of them were retired, some were promoted, others were demoted, and some were sent to other schools. Up to today, those who were retired have not got their salaries or their pensions. I think it is high time that the Ministry of Public Service, together with the Ministry of Education, does something about this.

Finally, I want to protest the assertion of the committee on page 66, where they say, “the Ntandikwa scheme is not a flop, the rate of recovery of the funds in various districts is very high.” I am surprised, and I want to be assisted in this thing. I have been to Dufile sub-county in Moyo District. Out of the 30 million shillings lent to this sub-district, only Shs.400,000 was recovered. I do not know from where the Committee derives these figures to give this impression that entandikwa has never flopped.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ABURA KENE (Moroto County, Lira) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me start by thanking the chairman of the Committee for this very good report, which covers the Ministries of Education, Health, and Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

Education and health are very important. I am not saying gender, labour and social development are not important, but education and health are very important.  These are the indicators UNDP uses to measure the level of our development. That is why, because we are still very far in these two issues, apart from national income or per capita income, we are way back in the 150s or 160s out of 174 countries. So, education and health are very important. The Ministries of Education and Health should help this country come up, so that at least our development or early development ratings can be considered effective. At least people will be happy.  

Let me start by thanking the Ministry of Health for the work they have done. They have started a policy for district hospitals. They have got grade 4, grade 3, grade 2 health centres, and they have got sub-dispensaries. If these are implemented, the ratings, which I was talking about, would improve very much. 

I also have a problem with Ministry of Health. It seems there is some rehabilitation work that considered and decided at the headquarters. When people are sent to do the work, the people at the districts have no idea who is coming to work there. They do not even know what work is going to be done. I landed into problems with one health centre, which had been contracted to one some group from Mbale, I think, by the headquarters. There were some houses, which had not been considered and yet they had major cracks on the walls. They were actually not fit for habitation, but nurses were staying in them. 

If these decisions are made at the centre, they should also contact districts and sub-counties. There was a group that went to Amugo, they went and just started knocking down walls and people were not aware of what was happening. I think the Minister is going to look into that, and I believe, since he has a very good policy on paper, these solutions are going to help us.   

Secondly, I have a problem with children with a hearing problem. I appeal to the Minister to consider starting small training centres at district level. Some people move all the way from my county to go to Apac District.  You know that parents are now very eager to have their children educated, but you when know you take a child who has impaired hearing, problems come up. He will be too young, or he can not fit in, or the school is very far so parents can not go and visit that child. If the Minister could consider having training old schools per district, even if they are small, they could be attached to a certain school in town where the parents can at least have a chance of visiting them easily.
 
The other issue I would like to comment on is the mental hospital. It appears that we have only one such hospital in the country, and that is Butabika. Because of the problem we have now, the number of people with mental problems is increasing. I appeal to the Minister to consider starting a small ward near the district hospital for these type of people. They now roam a lot in town here because they have nobody to care for them. At least if they are within their districts, relatives would visit them and take care of them and maybe this would play a major role in improving their mental problems.  

I have one point on education. I know I have talked about my secondary schools and I think the Minister is thinking about them. I also have a problem with teachers. It seems there is a problem with the ceiling imposed by the headquarters and districts are not informed. I know about three teachers, who have come to me and we gone to schools and we have found out that there were ceilings in those schools so they could not be posted. So, I think the Ministers should find a way of co-ordinating with the districts and then various bodies are informed accordingly.

Lastly, last year we talked about Akii-Bua’s house. I was told it would be catered for in the budget and we would get it. Up to now, nothing has been done. May be since this is the last year of this Parliament, the Minister will do his best to make sure that these children are catered for. I have a problem with handling their issue.  I appeal to the Minister to start thinking seriously about this house and to do something about it.  

I have several other things to talk about, but I will be obedient to you, Sir. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There could be a problem of quorum, and I could adjourn, but as I am ascertaining, we can proceed.  Hon. Gagawala.  

ENG. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a few remarks within five minutes, on the different social service sectors. 

I would like to start by asking the Minister of Education why we are educating our children and for what. Are we educating our children to learn how to consume imported goods? I am following up on what hon. Bagunywa was saying. Generally, as hon. Winnie Babihuga was saying, the standard of the products coming out of the production line is so poor that we are heading in the wrong direction as far as education is concerned. Are we educating our people to fight both mental and material poverty? I would like to ask the Minister to tell us clearly whether we are educating our children to learn how to conquer poverty both mentally and materially. The way things are going now, it appears as if we are educating our children to go round in circles. As hon. Bagunywa was saying, we are educating our children to learn how to buy toothpaste. In short, we are educating our children to become a market for foreigners to come here and dump things. I ask the Minister to clarify to us whether we are really heading the right direction as far as the curriculum for our schools, both primary and secondary, is concerned. Are we really teaching our children to learn how to learn or are we just teaching them how to cram things, like parrots?  

I would like to go on to mention something about pre-primary school. I think it is very important, at this stage, and with UPE, for the Minister to tell us whether he wants our children to start school at three years, six years or nine years. If we are not careful, we will really destroy these children rather than educate them for civilisation. I would like (Interjection) 

DR ABEL RWENDEIRE: Thank you for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and I also thank the Member holding the Floor. The Ministry of Education certainly has a minimum age for any child to go to school, and the minimum age is five years, but not three years. We would certainly encourage all children to go to school, even six year and seven year olds, but the minimum age is five years, hon. Members.  

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I am focusing on the issue of age  because when they go –(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker, may you protect me from hon. Kyaligonza, please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. 

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I will try to be friendlier. I am stressing the issue of five years to nine years, because that is the prime age, when children learn how to learn.  That is the time when you teach children the skills of identification of patterns.  Now, it appears very many –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, just hold on.  The question of quorum was raised. I want to confirm that we have quorum because we are 106 in here.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That gives me a chance to air out a few things. It has been pointed out that, if you do not teach mathematics well before the age of nine, it would be too late for you after that to try to turn somebody into a mathematician. So, if we are finding difficulties with mathematics and science, it is because we are making mistakes at that tender age.

If the curriculum is not focused on which products we shall need in the economy in the next five years, and we just have a general curriculum, it is possible that we shall not get out of poverty in this country. So, it is very important for the Minister of Education to have a curriculum that is time sensitive and that we can adjust with time as we go on changing our status quo.  

I would like, at this time, to ask the Minister of Sports -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, although I have said we are 106, you should not leave and then we have to call you again, otherwise, we shall have problems. So, I appeal to you to stay around so that we transact business.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister for Sports why we are bent on importing balls. Surely, in a situation of unemployment how can we import a thing like a football, which is basically handicraft? The Minister should have the initiative of turning his Ministry into a productive Ministry so that the youth make their own footballs.  We are importing footballs and yet MPs are being harassed and the Minister is just looking the other way.

I would like to go on the issue of education. When hon. Kutesa stood up here, I wanted to raise a point of order, but because he was with my O.B from Buddo, he knows very well that at that time, TV education was already in Buddo. But to stand here and start arguing that Tele-centres are going to solve the problem, I think, is to belittle the problem. Yes, we need to establish Tele-centres, but the –(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker, I need your protection from hon. Mulassanyi because he has been physically pulling me down. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, it is possible for us to develop tele-centres as a medium of education, but it is also very important to note that Tele-centres are not a solution to this problem. The real problem is poverty. As long as we are poor, and we are solving poverty permanently, even Tele-centres will not help. I think the Ministry of Education should be asking Cabinet to give loans to all students who qualify, to go to secondary schools and the University. This is not asking for too much. It is better for you to give a loan to someone to go to a secondary school and a tertiary institution than hoping to give them a loan when they have already failed.  

Finally, I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for its performance. I hope it will keep its word that the Kamuli Hospital projects will mature very soon. The Balamogi are looking forward to having three health units. But we should not forget that, if we do not conquer our health problems, there is no way we can say that we are going to become rich or we are going to conquer poverty. The first step is to conquer our health problems completely, before we can start dreaming of conquering poverty. There is no point in somebody spending six days of the week treating malaria in the whole family, and then you expect him to fight poverty on Saturday and Sunday. The money you are lending him as entandikwa is going to be used to fight the malaria. With those few words, I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you realise that we had a general debate on the President’s Speech and a lot of what has been said was covered.  You will also realise that we had a debate on the Budget, and a lot of what has been said here was also covered. So, do you not think that it is the right time to call upon the Ministers in charge of the sectors to wind up and then we pronounce ourselves on this? But, I call upon the Member for Kibaale first.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES (Kibaale County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me join my colleagues in thanking the Committee for the comprehensive report they have given us. I would like to make few comments on the various Ministries. 

First of all, I will comment on the issue of expired drugs. This problem is becoming rampant and I think the Ministry of Health has to find a way of addressing it.  The report says the Ministry he recommended buying drugs from National Drug Authority and Joint Medical Stores.  But some of these drugs expire while in circulation, and the inspectors of drugs in various districts or various areas connive with people in drug shops. Some of these drug shops are joint ventures between the shop owners and the inspectors. You find drug shops acting as pharmacies and selling classified drugs. The Minister has to ensure that this problem with the inspectors is addressed.

On the Ministry of Education, I must say I was intrigued by the report, when it said that there is no sports vote, no sports policy, and the Act is outdated. I do not know why it is called, the Ministry of Education and Sports! I think the only component of sports within the Ministry is the Minister.  There is no other component, so I think we have to change this. There is no policy, no vote, and the Act is outdated, maybe the Minister of Education could tell us why.

Last week, when we were debating the policy paper on the Ministry of Natural Resources, they said that the Meteorological Training School and the School of Survey were transferred to the Ministry of Education. They are not mentioned anywhere in the report. We want to know to whether these two schools have been phased out. We need surveyors. We still need more people to tell us about the scattered showers and thunderstorms. So, unless these schools are opened, these issues will not be addressed.

On higher education, I think there is need to also decentralise secondary school education. Primary education has been decentralised, but secondary school education is still a burden. We have Government aided schools in our constituencies but these schools have only about three to five teachers on the payroll. The rest of the staff have been in these schools for more than five years, but their names cannot be taken on the nominal payroll because of the ceiling. And these are Government aided school, which have three teachers being paid compared with some of the schools here with over 20 teachers. The Ministry should decentralise to get the correct data, because I do not see what they are aiding, when a school has only three teachers who are paid. The rest of the teachers, sometimes over ten, are a burden to the parents.  So, I think this issue has to be addressed.  

On the Ministry of Gender, I would like to comment on the youth enterprise schemes. 16 per cent interest is still very high. Although the Minister said if they remove the 16 per cent, that the programme will not be sustainable, I think with 16 per cent, this programme will fail in the first year. These people are going to fail to raise the funds to pay up and the programme will fail in the first year as we are still launching it. The issue of the percentage has to be addressed.  With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you received the detailed reports from the Ministers. It is their turn to answer the queries you raised during this debate. I will go by the order in which the report was presented. The hon. Minister of Health, then the Minister for Education and then that of Gender.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you Mr. Speaker. 

Dr Kakungulu raised the issue of assistance to the private sector in health care delivery. He also raised the issue of classification and appropriate placing of comprehensive nurses. I would like to correct the impression hon. Kakungulu created, when he said that private practitioners provide 60 per cent of service delivery in the health sector. While we agree they play an important role, their share is not as high as 60 per cent. We have not yet been able to help the private practitioners because of lack of means. We made a start with church based NGOs and our intention is to move on to assist the private practitioners as and when we get resources. 

On comprehensive nurses, hon. Kakungulu is correct. We have been passing out these people, but they have not been given appropriate certificates and their grading in the hierarchy of the service is also not very well clarified. We have started consultations on this with the Ministries of Public Service and Finance, and we think this will soon be solved.

Hon. Eresu made a very strong presentation on the issue of sanitation and latrine coverage and one could not agree with him more. Even if we did not have golden jubilee independence celebrations, it is not correct for us not to even solve a simple problem like latrine coverage. My appeal to hon. Members of Parliament is that this is an issue, as hon. Eresu did point out, that all of us, over and above the health sector, should take  seriously. It is not just a matter of digging the latrines, it a whole matter of behavioural change. It is an issue of changing the mentality of our people. 

In Karamoja, for example, I have been there many times, and the moment I start talking about latrines, they just laugh at me. They laugh at me because they there is so much bush, so why bother constructing pit latrines. In areas around Pallisa and Tororo, there are even much stronger beliefs against toilets. They believe that, if your father visits you, and obviously is going to use the toilets, then your wife must not use the same toilet. If someone is pregnant, in some areas it is taboo to use a toilet. So, we should not only address the problem of latrines, but we should also work at changing the whole reasoning of our population. As the report says, in Karamoja you are even lucky really to find a toilet. That is why we are talking about four per cent. The only areas, we could say have succeeded in really motivating people to have toilets are mainly Rukungiri and Kabale, where the coverage is 80 per cent. In the rest of the country, the latrine coverage is very poor. So, my appeal to hon. Members of Parliament is that, each time we are out there mobilising our people, we should not forget to appeal to our people not only to have latrines, but to ensure that they are fully used. 

Hon. Rwabita raised the issue of Ruhoko and the general policy on health sub districts. It is true that hon. Rwabita and I have had discussions over this matter. In his constituency, a health centre had been struggling to put up a theatre because the local administration in Mbarara had posted them a doctor. Now, our policy is that, every constituency must have a unit, where there is doctor, first and foremost. After that, any district is also free to appoint doctors to other units. In the case of Mbarara, in hon. Rwabita's constituency, there is already a hospital, Ibanda hospital, which is not a Government hospital. Next to his constituency, in hon. Guma's constituency, there is no doctor. So, because of equity, our advice to the district is that, all the constituencies must first be covered by units, where there is at least one doctor. Thereafter, if the district has more resources, it can then move other doctors to other units. This is the explanation I gave my brother, hon. Rwabita, and we have agreed to continue discussing this issue.  

The issue of sex workers, as raised by one of our colleagues, is really a serious matter, particularly because we think we are making progress in bringing down the problem of HIV/AIDS. I think this brother has made very important points. He says, if we cannot solve this problem now, let us make some arrangements, and in my own words, perhaps to protect them. We, from the Ministry of Health, while we see this as a serious problem, we want an entry point into this group of our citizens. Our first concern would be to ensure that they are protected, and that they have condoms and are actually using them. We hope that Parliament will be behind us and will support us, because some people will think that helping them, we are encouraging this practice.  

Our first and foremost concern is to protect their lives. And if we achieve that, then we will have time to re-organise these fellow citizens. But this is a serious issue and all of us, as leaders in this country, need to identify ourselves with it.  

Hon. Namumbya, from Iganga, has made a strong case about health services in schools. Indeed, what she said is what we would like to do in the school health programme. In every school, there should be a master or a mistress who has some basic training in treating basic conditions like malaria or diarrhoea, and also appealing to people to be immunised. So, precisely what she said is what we would like to do. 

The people with disabilities are upper most in our mind. Indeed, we regard this sector of our population as marginalised, and there should be affirmative action for them. I think there are three or two members of the Social Services Committee, who have been very articulate in putting forward the cases of people with disabilities.  We hope to start soon on subsiding some of the critical implements that the people with disabilities use. We can not provide them fully free, because they are expensive, and the budget cannot really take them on whole sale.

I heard Members very well on the issue of expired drugs and the issue of drugs being sold in the wrong places. The Committee was also very hard on us on this point. We plan to phase out the practice where inspectors in the districts have been employees of the districts. We have just been asking them to help us. This being a very serious issue, we want to work towards having full time employees of the National Drug Authority rather than depend on the districts. So, I want to promise Members of Parliament that this is an issue we recognise as a weak point, and we are going to move to address it.

On mental health, we are not very much on the ground, apart from Butabika, where our presence is clear. But for some years now, in every referral hospital, there is a mental health unit. Referral hospitals mean places like Kabale, Mbarara, Fort Portal, Arua, Soroti, Mbale, Jinja and Gulu. Now we are discussing a programme with ADB, which is going to give us even further assistance. We want to strengthen these services at referral level, but also in some districts. At the same time, we are stepping up training of clinic officers in psychiatry, and also some nurses, so that these can get closer to the population. So, I do accept that as far as mental health is concerned, we are still weak on the ground, but the programme is to strengthen mental health in the country by further training and improving infrastructure. 

Those, I think, were the main points raised by colleagues on the Floor, but allow me to take this opportunity just to underscore three or four points in the health sector.

First, I would like to comment on the issue of HIV/Aids, which I did allude to in response to the questions. It is true, as you have been hearing on radio, that we are making some progress in bringing down the cases of Aids in the country, both new cases and total cases. But the situation is still very difficult because we are still talking of over one million, who are HIV positive, and many of them have not yet become seriously ill. So, we are yet to see the bulk of the people going down with the disease.
  
I would like, as I did on sanitation, to call upon colleagues, each time you have an opportunity to address a group of people in your constituencies, do not forget to say something about HIV/Aids. What Uganda has achieved has demonstrated that our people listen and they follow advice, particularly from leaders, and political leaders at that. Let us rededicate ourselves to this problem by ensuring that at least, -(Interruption)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification on the point the Minister of Health is articulating, that is the problem of HIV/Aids. The cost of treating the symptoms is very high. We were made to understand that there was going to be a provision, through World Bank and a US funded programme to subsidise the cost of this treatment. It is not reflected in this report. Could the Minister give some clarification as to what progress is being made in that direction?  I thank you.

MR. ONGOM: The Minister talked about the use of condoms for protection. My problem with that are the penetration heights of the condom itself. Both its education and supply seems to be restricted only to urban centres. Is there a programme for penetrating it into the villages, because that is where the biggest problems are?

DR. KIYONGA CRISPUS: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just as I was saying, the medicine number one is prevention, hence the importance of the messages to the population, through all opportunities. And I was stressing the contribution of us leaders, especially Members of Parliament. We must be heard speaking out and advising the population.  

Going to the condoms, as raised by hon. Ongom, I agree with him totally. This is also a point of weakness in our programme. As you go deeper into the rural areas, the condoms get rarer and rarer. We have already observed this, and we are going to put in more effort to ensure that, not only the messages but also the supplies are close to those who need them.

With regard to treatment, I think what my colleague had in mind are these anti-litrovilo drugs. As we have said many times, these are very expensive. They do not treat, in the sense that they do not cure the disease, but what the Government has done so far is to create the opportunity for these drugs to be in the country. If we try to fit them in the budget, we will not be able to do anything else. These drugs can now be accessed at about five centres in Kampala, mainly at the JCRC at Nsambya, in Rubaga, in Mulago and also at the Mild May centre on the way to Entebbe. 

The Uganda Government is centrally involved in negotiations with the producers of these drugs in order to bring down the costs. But having said that, there are other drugs that people require even more. There are people with this disease who have pain, skin conditions, intractable diarrhoea, and they meet a very difficult death. In our view, the intervention should be more on that side. Let us control the diarrhoea, let us deal with pain, let us deal with all the thrash, let us deal with skin conditions. Eventually, if we should get more money and price should come down, then perhaps some subsidy can be considered. 

My next point is on tuberculosis. Every year, we see 70,000 new cases of TB. This situation has been aggravated by the weakness of immunity caused by HIV/AIDS. The message to Members of Parliament is again to appeal to the people, because some people think that TB is not curable. There are drugs for TB, but there is a lot of stigma in the population. Once people know they have TB, they tend to hide it, even when there are drugs.  You are supposed to take your drugs, but because you are among people, you fear to take them. Let us try to work at removing that fear. In the meantime, the Ministry is trying as much as possible to reach the population, so that at least those known cases of TB can be treated. 

The take home message is on the issue of drug supply to health units. Last year, we gave each health sub-district, which is headed by health centre four, 15 million shillings to support primary health care including buying some drugs. This year, in the budget, the proposal is to increase this to 39 million shillings. And our expectation, if the money could be handled properly, is that this should improve the drug supply in a big way. The drug kits will continue to go, but over and above that, the money, part of which can be used to buy additional drugs, is being increased from 15 to 39 million shillings.  

The other take home message is on the issue of recruitment of staff. Some districts have done better than others because of concern and responsibility. I am glad to inform colleagues that Moroto District, which we thought was unpopular with health workers, was the first district to take an opportunity of this initiative. You go deep to places like Tokora or Amudat and you will find medical officers already there. These officers are from Karamoja, but they are born in Mpigi, Masaka, and the young men and women are willing to serve any part of their country. But we are disappointed with some districts, which are playing games in the District Service Commissions. They either want their own people, even when they do not have them, or they rush for other things, which perhaps will give them better money. So, last year, a lot of money was not used. However, this year, we have a programme to send the same amount of money, so that more health workers can be recruited. So we would like to request Members of Parliament to urge the districts to take this matter seriously.  

We have also made provision for re-training nursing aides. Those who are already in service will have further training, of three months, and we are going to pick new ones, who have finished S.4, and they will train for up to nine months, so that we can improve the skills of service to our population.  In conclusion –(Interruption)

MR. BAKU: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I expected the hon. Minister of Health to say something about the Ministry’s policy on cost sharing in health units or in hospitals before he conclude. During his tours, His Excellency the President, in many districts,  made pronouncements that he is one of those who is against cost sharing in health units, especially in peripheral areas and in some districts. This has been taken as a directive to stop cost sharing. So, some districts have actually stopped cost sharing while others are still implementing the policy of cost sharing. So, can the Minister clarify what the policy of the Ministry is on cost sharing, and what message we should take to our people.

DR. NKUUHE: Could the Minister also clarify on malaria, considering that malaria is the number one killer, way ahead of AIDS and tuberculosis. Could you comment on the malaria programme?

DR. KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of malaria is very well articulated in our policy statement. But briefly, we think, this year, we are going to see a much bigger fight against malaria. We are going to work with Members of Parliament, because there are initiatives, which we want you to support. You have heard of the mosquito nets or materials, which are impregnated with insecticides. These are real things, and they work, they kill these insects. We would like to co-ordinate with Members of Parliament in encouraging the people we represent to use these materials.  

We are also going to use other chemicals to spray inside  houses. This chemical, it is said, can remain on the walls for six months. As mosquitoes come, they just die out. But of course problems will arise with the typical peasant houses, which are made of either grass or mud and wattle. We are not sure whether they will have as much retention power, but that is what we are going to do. We are going to change the treatment of malaria in some way, because we have come to the conclusion that there is a fairly high rate of resistance against chloroquine. This issue is well articulated in the policy statement and also in our plan. 

My understanding of the view of the chief executive of the country, His Excellency the President, is that cost sharing should not totally be thrown out, but we should have a different approach to it. This is a contentious issue because even in Parliament, there is no unanimity.  Some people support it, some people do not support it.  We have had three discussions in Cabinet, without concluding on this issue. So, I did not have anything specific to say on it, but I will only promise that the discussions will continue in Cabinet, and the President is part of this discussion. As soon as we have come to some consensus, we will be able to announce to Members of Parliament and to the country.  

Finally, I just want to make a final appeal. All of us, Members of Parliament, have the opportunity to talk to so many people, if each time we speak we can remember the three elements, HIV/AIDS, immunisation and sanitation, we will have made a major contribution to our people’s welfare. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I will start by responding to issues that were raised by my colleagues, then I will go on to general statements and specifics. I would like to thank the Committee for a very good report. I also thank members of the Committee for the support they gave us. 

Dr. Kakungulu was concerned about child abuse. I have only this to say, not until Government has given me enough money to implement the Children’s Statute, child abuse will still remain a problem. This Parliament is already aware, through last year’s budget, that the total implementation of the Children’s Statute required ten billion Ugandan shillings. This was in order to reach the villages where the family courts, which are the arbiters in children’s matters, are supposed to be. We need to re-train the police, we need to re-orient the judiciary and many other stakeholders.  Each district is required to have separate remand homes for girls and boys, under decentralization. 

On this issue, I must congratulate the media, because we sensitised them on unearthing these bad evils in society against children. So, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development says this is a positive, because these things were previously happening but so little was known. I appeal to the Leader of Government Business to give me enough money to implement the Children’s Statute, and I think child abuse will be no more.  

Dr. Kakungulu alleged that the Minister never came back to Parliament to talk about child abuse. In my view, the Ministry of Internal Affairs handles some of the criminals. They should be arrested, the DPP is there, he should charge these people and they appear in court!  What we have done is on record. It is on record that hon. Kakembo and myself, together with the chairperson of the NCC, have addressed the issue of child slaughter by witchdoctors. We have visited children who have been abused, even as recently as two weeks ago. My colleague was in hospital with this child who had been starved.  So, now, if Parliament wants us to come here and report on every child abuse case, we shall do so, but we thought that the method that we have been using is sufficient.  

Hon. Nkalubo, we are equally concerned about parents who negotiate with people who defile children, but that is society. And this will happen until Government facilitates the front line workers, who are community development officers, to go and sensitise the communities about these new concepts. Defilement, in some cultures, is actually accepted as early marriage! So, we need to introduce these new concepts within communities so that they respond. We are equally concerned, but sometimes we do not have the resources to go and mobilize the communities. 

She was also concerned about what should happen to girls who become pregnant at school. There is no policy. I talked to the Minister of Education about this issue, but there is no policy. The general understanding is that the girl should be allowed to go back to school after breastfeeding the baby. That is the general understanding, but I hope that very soon, we shall discuss this and have a policy in place.  

We are equally concerned, like hon. Eresu, about the investors who do not recognize worker’s rights to unionise, but we are not just sitting. We have met Roko and Karim, these are the two notorious employers, who had refused to allow workers to unionise. We are discussing with them because we must also take into account the  investment environment. But as Ministry concerned with workers’ rights, we are going to pursue this. 

In respond to hon. Rwabita, yes, there is no written policy. You want a document on functional adult literacy, but in essence, there is a policy. We are operating, even in your own constituency, and in this year’s budget, through PAF money, the Ministry is going to access one billion Ugandan shillings to continue to expand nationally. We have been operating within districts and sub-counties. We hope that Government will continue to avail resources so that we can reach every village. There is no way we are going to modernize agriculture, there is no way we are going to industrialise, with the levels of illiteracy in the country –(Interruption).  

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to me whether this policy of adult education covers all districts, including Sembabule. If that is the case, it is conspicuously absent in Sembabule.

MRS. MUKWAYA: I do appreciate that if my Ministry had money, if I was in every constituency, every Member of Parliament would come back, but I have just said that we started off with only 16 districts. It is only this year that Government has given me one billion shillings to go national. I have just stated this. Even in the districts where we are operating, we are not operating all the sub-counties. I must quickly add, however, that I appreciate the support from some Members of Parliament and some districts. They have realised that there is no way we are going to move as a country, and they have started voluntary functional adult literacy classes. I am very grateful to you for that.  

I must also say that adult education is not only functional adult literacy per se. Functional adult literacy is a component of adult education, but adult education at Makerere University means up-grading maybe from one certificate to a diploma and then to another level. So, the Ministry of Gender is providing for functional adult literacy to those people who were not in school, and they are the producers. So, I emphasize that area while the Ministry of Education addresses the other components of adult education.  

Hon. Ongom raised an issue about NSSF. This is a technical area, and if I went into it now, I would not complete the topic. So, I want to promise that I will bring a paper to show hon. Ongom and others. This paper will show how NSSF started as a fund, how we compute benefits, and the effect of the macro economic policies, that is the two zeros and the 30 and so on. I cannot handle it here, but I promise to bring a paper that will be to his satisfaction.  

Hon. Namumbya was concerned about youth who are not graduates –(Interruption). 

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, hon. Minister, for allowing me to   seek clarification. I just wanted assurance that this document that you are promising me will come. We have been promised some of these things so many times and they never appear. I was hoping that you were going to answer me in some detail so that I could also react. The Minister had occasion to tell me here that, at one time, workers were paying only 40 shillings’ contribution from employers, and that, to her, was not much. But I would like to remind her that she could put this in an economic perspective. When people were paying 40/- actually that 40/- was very strong and could go a long way. Even compared to their own earnings at that time, 40/- and 80/- was a very good amount of money.

MS. KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe, the Minister can use this chance to clarify to us what we have been reading in the papers on NSSF. This is about the board people going to study in Ghana and taking Shillings 55 million, and now we have read today that it has been cancelled. Can we be clarified, since we are dealing with the budget?  Thank you.

MS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I think my colleague, hon. Ongom, was trying to continue debating.  We had debated, and I had promised that, in technical matters, I cannot continue to debate without technical input. And I can swear by the Almighty Allah that I will present that paper. I also want to tell him that I do not remember him raising that issue and I have never responded to it in this House. I promise to bring the explanation, Isha Allah.  

My colleague, hon. Namumbya, was concerned that the YES programme does not address school dropouts or the youth who are not graduates. That is also our concern, and we are reviewing the entandikwa scheme to see the percentages, as provided for in the law. We want to see how many youth have benefited, how many women have benefited, and what the effect of entandikwa was. That is the only legal framework addressing micro credit for those youth, but the youth can also benefit through PAP. This is a programme under the Prime Minister’s Office.  

After the recovery of entandikwa, when we recycle the money, we shall take into consideration the category of youth she was talking about. So, I want to advise her to advise the youth accordingly. 

Hon. Namumbya also said that I should stop lamenting. I do not think that I am lamenting. When I am given audience to talk to the legislators, I want to draw their attention to some critical areas of concern that are not always addressed. This is important because with the central Government I am supposed to handle policy guidelines, monitoring and evaluation and setting standards. The actual implementation of every programme for youth, women, people with disabilities and children, is in decentralised services. So, the local governments are the actual implementers. 

Hon. Winnie Byanyima was concerned about affirmative action. I agree with her, but much as we should have another strategy, we should not also abandon the 1.5 bonus mark, because what it has done for girls in Makerere is really commendable. It has done a lot for those girls who would not have made it to Makerere University because of because of domestic chores.  

I agree that we do not have a policy on orphans, but as I stated, this is not the only policy that is not in place. There is no policy for orphans, functional adult literacy and many others. I think Government should take note so that money is availed to me to have these policies in place.  

Hon. Winnie Byanyima was also concerned about no monies found in the budget for functional adult literacy or adult education. I have already informed you that, in this financial year, there is something. When we go to the details in the document, I shall identify the one billion shillings from the PAP money. 

She was also concerned about Ruti rehabilitation centre. I want to refer her to Article 178 of the Constitution, which mentions co-operation among districts. This is a regional tier, and in our Local Government Act, we are talking about decentralisation. We are decentralising at the district level, but districts of the western region, who use Ruti, can use Article 178 to put in place that regional tier. Article 178(1) of the Constitution says:  
“Two or more districts shall be free to co-operate in the areas of culture and development as set out in the Fifth Schedule to this Constitution and may, for that purpose, form and support councils, trust funds or secretariats, subject to the following – 
    (a) such co-operation shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in this Constitution;
    (b) the councils, trust funds or secretariats so formed shall not have power to levy taxes; but Parliament may make provision enabling them to raise funds in addition to funds made available to them by the co-operating districts;
    (c) the terms and conditions of the co-operation shall be embodied in a charter signed by the -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there is general notice that those provisions exist, can you proceed.

MS. MUKWAYA: My sister prompted me to read this out because she was not convinced, so I was really responding to her concern.  

Hon. Mwandha, I have taken note of your concern, but I want to also tell you that the Disability Council Act is before Cabinet. I hope we shall pass it, because you have all the support here. My chairperson agreed that as soon as I present it, it will be discussed. 

Hon. Otoa, UPDF, said that we lied when we said that entandikwa was not a flop, and he gave an example of one district, that is Moyo District. I have information for him from my colleague who handles the day-to-day entandikwa -(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I did not only raise the issue of the National Disability Council Bill. There are many other issues that I mentioned. Is the Minister accepting my concerns and, therefore, not responding, what is happening?  Thank you.  

MS. MUKWAYA: Different people have different styles of responding to issues. I started off by acknowledging your concerns, but I singled out the front that I am working on. I cannot commit myself to other areas, but I acknowledged them, as I have always done.  

I was talking about Moyo. The hon. Member gave an example of one sub-county in Moyo, but according to the records, it appears that Moyo District is one of the best performing districts in West Nile. The recoveries in phase one are over 65 per cent, and as of July 2000, the IA had over 15 million shillings on their account for the third recycling. So, I think hon. Otoa should correct his information.  

Hon. Mwandha was concerned about people with disabilities accessing the YES money. My colleague says that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the last two weeks, has been training 35 people with disabilities and they are waiting to receive their cheques.

On the 16 percent, I had thought that I had technically explained that to the Committee. But if Members are not convinced, I will submit information on how we calculate the 16 percent and the economists here will either disagree with us or they will agree.   

Finally, each time my Ministry’s budget comes to the Floor or even to the Committee, it is summarised to centre on street children and prostitutes or sex workers. I want to draw the attention of this House to other burning areas of concern, which would be of interest to you as Members of Parliament. The lack of transport for inmates in Naguru remand home is one of those areas of concern, because if these children do not go to court, it is unconstitutional. The institutions are roofed with asbestos sheets, which are known to have health problems. So rather than address sex workers and street children, whom we are ably handling as I have told you, let us address other areas of concern like child abuse, defilement and others.
I thank you for your support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we should hear next from the Minister of Education, but I realise that it is almost 7.00 p.m. I must thank you for maintaining the quorum. I have been secretly monitoring this quorum, and we have not gone below the required number. So, I thank you, and please keep it up. 

As you remember, we said, at the beginning of the Session, that our plan is to complete the Budget this month. We may not achieve that but at least we have tried. To complete this report, we require a response from the Minister of Education, and I think he has a number of points to respond to. I will adjourn the House to tomorrow at 10. 00 a.m., and I would expect everybody to attend. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.52 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29th August, 2000 at 10.00 am.)

