Friday, 27th August 2004

Parliament met at 10.25 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, last Monday, we received information from the hon. Awori that there was likely to be a volcanic eruption at the Kenya Uganda border affecting the citizens.  We also heard that there was a looming disaster also in that area. We had indicated that the government would give a statement yesterday, but because we worked until very late, it could not do so.  I will now alter the Order Paper to permit the First Deputy Prime Minister to update the nation on the situation on the Kenya – Uganda border.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.26
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, Mt Elgon located at the border between Uganda and Kenya in eastern Uganda, is a volcanic mountain raising to a maximum height of 4,321 meters and has a diameter of 96 kilometres.  It is composed mainly of nephelinite agglomerate rock, which is a jumbled mass of rock formed by solidification of molten magma after volcanic action.  Mt Elgon has not erupted since its formation centuries ago and has been categorized as a dormant volcano.  

On Friday, 20 August 2004, about 5.00 p.m., information about an emission of smoke from a cave called Kepsio at Sendera sub location, Namorio location, Kapsokwony division of Mt Elgon districts of the Republic of Kenya near Uganda border was reported by the local communities to the Kenya Government authorities.  

On Saturday, 21 August 2004, the Department of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees received the report and activated short interval contacts with the Kenya Government National Emergency Operations Centre and the Kenyan Mines and Geological Department.

Populations and the local leaders living on the slopes of the mountain on the Ugandan side in Mbale, Sironko and Kapchorwa districts have reported no abnormal phenomena on the mountain such as emission of smoke or toxic gases, deformation of the earth surface, tilting of trees, rising temperatures, formation of fissures (cracks) and emergency of hot springs which are normally early warning symptoms of a potential volcanic activity. The Uganda department of Geology and Mines did not record any tremors.  Tremors are normally experienced at short intervals before a volcano erupts.  

The Department of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees called for an inter-ministerial technical committee meeting on Monday, 23 August 2004, and dispatched a team of experts led by Dr Ezra Twesigomwe of Makerere University to conduct a rapid assessment of the volcanic status of Mt. Elgon.  A detailed report of the expert findings will be presented to Parliament on Thursday, 2 September 2004.

Reports from Kenya: 

Experts of the Republic of Kenya who have been monitoring the Kepsio cave have made the following observations:

1.That on Friday 20th and Saturday 21st, smoke laden with particular matter was being emitted from the inside of the cave about 40 metres from the entrance.  The smoke was emanating from the floor, which was baked and cracked over an area of about 15 square meters.  The shape of the baked area forming the centre of activity was ecliptical and measured about five metres by three metres.

2.The fine particulate matter in the smoke settled around the baked area forming ash deposits.
3.The temperature in the active area was about 170 degrees Celsius.  The smoke was accompanied by an acrid and slightly choking smell.  At one point the acceleration intensified and produced a red-hot glow.  

4.From Monday, 23rd August, the emission and temperature began to gradually reduce and by yesterday, 26th August, it had substantially reduced to just a warm surface.

5.Deduction.  

Experts from Nairobi University and the Kenya mines and geology department who visited the site concluded that the smoke represented exhalation from the magma chamber and signified the initial stages of volcanic activity.  They believed the feature was releasing pressure, which had built up in the chamber.

Conclusions. 

The Kenya Government scientists concluded that the volcanic activity was at a stage that did not warrant any eminent danger of an eruption.  

The Kenyan Government did not evacuate its citizens seven kilometres from areas near the site as it has been reported in some places here in Kampala.  People living closest to the cave and the valleys were instead informed to maintain heightened alertness and report any symptoms mentioned earlier above.

Immediate medium and long-term strategies. 

As already stated above, the Department of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees dispatched to Mbale, Sironko and Kapchorwa, an inter-agency team of experts from Makerere University department of Geology and Mines, United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and its own disaster response experts to monitor any seismic activity, to observe any cracks on the ground, analyse ground and water temperatures, trap and analyse any gas and particulate emissions.  

The team has visited Mbale, Sironko and are now in Kapchorwa.  Information received from the team at 2.16 p.m., that afternoon, indicated that the machines have detected no tremors, gasses or smoke.  The local population interviewed have observed none of the symptoms stated earlier above.  The people are continuing with the business normally and most of them are not even aware of the incident on the Kenya side of the mountain.  

The Uganda Government experts, like their counterparts in Kenya, believe there is no eminent danger of a volcanic eruption from Mt. Elgon.  

The Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee is however working on a standing readiness plan for evacuation of a population of 100,000 people for future use.

The Department of Disaster Preparedness is organizing a regional comprehensive scientific study on the entire mountain and has requested for support from the United States, Germany and Britain.  The Government of Germany has indicated willingness to support the regional study and terms of references being drafted by GTZ.  

Parliament will receive a detailed report on Thursday, 2 September 2004, after the experts have returned from the Mt Elgon area.

Madam Speaker, there is another statement on the famine which you directed earlier on that will be read as early as possible, next week, because, we have to do some other consultations.  Otherwise, thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister.

10.40
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to start off by thanking the Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister for that statement.  I would also like to add on, that we have four earthquake monitoring stations in the country.  One is in Dundu, Entebbe; there is one in Mbarara; another one is in Hoima and we have one in the eastern region.  These stations are located in areas, which are known to be volcanic prone areas and these monitoring equipments are very, very sensitive.  They detect the slightest tremor and they are globally connected and far from the readings; there is no indication of any tremor.  What we suspect in the ministry is that, the phenomenon on Mt Elgon is similar to hot springs, except that in this case instead of hot water coming out of the ground, it may be steam or gas.   But I would like to comfort the honourable members and the country at large, that if there is any slight tremor, those monitoring facilities would detect it very quickly and it will send signals globally and the country will be informed accordingly.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Awori, I hope you are now comfortable.

10.42
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Government for its promptness in acknowledging the concern by sending a team of experts to look at the situation.  This is what I expect of a responsible Government. (Applause) In regard to Kenya, that is a different matter, but in terms of responding to a concern, I do appreciate what you have done.

However, Madam Speaker, at the same time I would wish to inform the Government, notwithstanding your preparedness to detect such a situation; I do not think we should now sit back and say, the problem is gone.  Volcanic situation is not under anybody’s control.  It can erupt, it may not erupt, there is no way it can give us notice.  But, I do in principle wish to acknowledge and thank the Government for a quick response, notwithstanding the last part of the First Deputy Prime Minister’s statement that, as far as famine in Busia is concerned they will react later.  We are hungry.  Thank you.

10.43
MS OLIVIA WONEKHA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would also like to add my voice to hon. Awori’s thanks to the Government for that response this far.  However, what message is Government sending out there to the people on Mt Elgon. Madam Speaker, whereas this technical work is going on, the people’s fears have to be allayed and have to be encouraged. So are there any messages on radio? What is happening, Madam Speaker, in as far as the population outside there is concerned?  What is Government doing besides the technical work going on, Madam Speaker?

10.44
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, I actually sympathize with the Rt Hon Deputy Prime Minister, that the Ministry of Finance under funds the department.  But what actually does it mean to be disaster prepared?  In fact, the minister is addressing the issue of disaster response, yet we are supposed to be disaster prepared.  For example, he has told us that Government has alerted the people to keep on watching the situation.  What have we informed our people in Uganda, because these people are going to see the team of experts moving around and even those who did not know, it is going to rise their worry.  

What message have you sent to the people to be prepared and watch out?  That is what it means by disaster preparedness, unless we have to change the ministry and call it the Ministry of Disaster Response, which is expensive.  Otherwise, disaster preparedness means you have to prepare the people on the ground, which is not the case with this team.  That is what I wanted to know.  Is this team also sending the message to the population that, you people, something has been observed in Kenya.  What you should do now, keep also observing and watch the situation and we shall be informing you of anything.  Is that message being sent across?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

10.45
MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Madam Speaker, as much as many people have spoken about keeping alert, the Minister of Energy just informed us that there are machines around which are detecting these volcanic prone areas and they can detect any eruption whenever it is foreseen.  But apart from that, Madam Speaker, I think the Ministry should also make it clear to the citizens that once pointed that there is fire likely to happen, people must be advised never to stay around those dangerous areas.  As much as Kenya has warned her citizens it is also better for us to keep people off from those dangerous areas because evicting them may become very expensive.  It is better to avoid a problem than just waiting for it to happen.  I think this is also very important.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I am aware that next week we are supposed to discuss a report, which touches the ministry for disaster.  But I think in view of the circumstances, I will allow the Prime Minister to respond to these and then we move on.

LT GEN MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, On 24th August, I issued a statement on radio and people on the foot of Mt Elgon are actually informed of what to do.  They must observe unusual occurrences, and should there be a danger then they should inform the people as soon as possible and be ready to get out in case of problems.  

Like a snake, Madam Speaker, you do not know when a snake is going to go in the house. You cannot tell somebody get out of the house because I heard a snake is going to go into your house; where does this person go.  That is I think the dilemma we are in. If we now tell these 100,000 people to get out because this emanate eruption is coming, where do we take them to begin with?  The fact that we have sent the people is better action. 

I have said, Madam Speaker, that notwithstanding what is happening, we are planning to ensure that we have a medium term and long-term plan.  So next week, Madam Speaker, when these people come back, on Monday, we shall have a meeting of all the technical people and then we shall come with a plan. If need be we shall even bring a majesty plan for Parliament to know how ready we are, should we be taken by surprise.  So the, honourable members, should also have trust in some of these statements we make because there are not out of blue.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. members, -(Interjection)- but he has finished.

MR AACHILLA: It is very important, Madam Speaker.  This is to the First Deputy Prime Minister.  Last week one of the officials from Mbale was on Radio Uganda telling people there is no threat.  I think there is a need to give a coordinated message to these people at district so that people do not get confused about these messages.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do have some bad news for you.  First, early this week, the hon. Elly Tumwine’s family was involved in an accident in which four of his escorts died and two of his sons were hospitalized in Kitovu hospital.  One of the young men has died, but I do not have yet the details for the burial. He was 15 years old and I thought I should let you know about it. 

Then the revolutionary leader, hon. Kibazanga has lost a brother. The deceased was a police officer and he was shot last night in Maganjo where they were trying to chase some robbers.  So they are meeting to agree on when to take the body to Kasese.  I do not have the details of all these burials. I thought I should inform you and we observe one minute of silence in memory of these Ugandans.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004-2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday you debated this report and now I want to ask the Minister in Charge of the sectors to respond.  I think we will start with the Minister for Energy.

10.50
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members.  I want to start off by thanking the committee, the Chairman, and members of the Committee on Natural Resources for their valuable views on my ministry policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2004-2005.  The report clearly appreciates the effort and achievements the ministry has made despite the very limited available resources.  Much more can be done if increased resources are availed to help us address the critical and productive areas in energy and mineral sectors.

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank the honourable members of this House for their comments, observations and criticisms.  I also want to admit that many of their concerns are also concerns of Government.  We would like as a Government to modernize this country by increasing power generation and coverage.  I know quite a number of colleagues are bitter that we are moving at a chameleon speed.  It is true we are not moving up at a desired speed, but this is due to the obvious reason of financial constraints. 

We have not sat back to lament, but what we are doing is to find a number of ways to address this critical problem. One of them was to open up the sector for private sector participation because now unlike in the past, when Uganda electricity board had a monopoly, a private company who want to distribute and generate electricity is free under the Electricity Act of 1999.  We have not stopped at that, the rural electrification being at the rate, which is one of the lowest in the whole world, Government has come up with a mechanism to attract the private sector to enhance rural power generation and coverage by providing subsidies and grants.  

In the last one week, Madam Speaker, I have signed two agreements with private companies, which are going to generate power where Government has provided huge subsidies. Kakira Sugar Works, which is going to generate power and put it in the grid, has been given a subside of up to 60 per cent of the total cost of the project in order for them to do this project and do it at an affordable price.  

Yesterday, I signed an agreement with one NGO, Kisiizi hospital Power Company who have been generating power for their hospital but now are going to expand generation to supply over 600 hundred consumers within the Rukungiri area. That company was given a subsidy of over 62 per cent.  

Right now there are a number companies which we are discussing, and before the end of next week many of the schemes which were of a big concern to some of my colleagues are going to be advertised for private sector participation.  In those projects again, we are going to provide subsidies to make sure that the private sector provides them.  

There is one specific issue, which was raised by hon. Muzoora that is regarding hydrology at the Kiira and Nalubale power stations.  It is true that the water levels – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am greatly touched by the statement made by the minister namely that they are using privatisation to ensure that power is generated as an additional factor.  Is the minister aware that the contents of the National Objectives of State Policy, namely XXVII(iii) direct any in-coming Government on how the energy policy should be dealt with?  I would like to quote this verbatim before I pause my question. “The State shall promote and implement energy policies that will ensure that people’s basic needs and those of environment preservation are met.”  How do you ensure that the people of Uganda who are consuming this power will not be manipulated in terms of electricity tariffs under the privatisation measure, which in accordance with this constitutional provision is almost an obligation that the state must ensure that the tariffs are affordable. 

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, MP Lubaga South, who is supposed to be an environmentalist and who has been a member and also at one time Vice Chairperson of the Committee of Natural Resources.  The hon. Lukyamuzi must be aware that first and foremost, Government of Uganda, the NRM Government, has got a comprehensive policy on energy.  This has been presented to the committee to which he has been a member for several years.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Lukyamuzi should also recall that when they were enacting the NEMA Statute there were sufficient safeguards which were put there with regard to infrastructure developments.  The only thing I want to add is that the ministry ensures whenever there is a project being developed it adheres strictly to the provisions of the NEMA Statute.  

With regard to the tariff, Madam Speaker, the hon. Lukyamuzi should also remember that when we were enacting the Electricity Act he was a very active member.  He made very good presentations, and among the things provided in that Electricity Act, is the Electricity Regulatory Authority, which among other things is responsible for regulating, monitoring tariffs and it also approves the tariffs. And if I can go back to my statement I said that Government is providing these subsidies for two reasons. One is to provide an incentive for the private sector to go into those areas, which due to poor economic consideration would not be viable and yet Government has got an obligation to provide the service.  Two, the subsidy is provided to ensure that the tariff is brought to a level, which is affordable.  

Madam Speaker, having said that I want to proceed to the issue, which I was addressing, the issue of hydrology at the Nalubaale and Kiira power station.  It is true that due to this long spell of dryness the water level has gone down.  It has gone down and of course when it goes down it has an impact on the power generation.  But I also want to say that apart from the water levels going down, our problem has been escalated by the regular breakdown of the machines at the Nalubaale power station, which is the main station.  Kiira power station is efficient and it picks water from Nalubaale power station, but because most of the turbines at Nalubaale are not efficient, whenever there is a slight variation there are badly affected.  I would like to proceed and say that Government has come up with a water management regime to manage the two power stations – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you know many members are not as knowledgeable as you on these matters, you allow them to listen.

MR LUKYAMUZI KEN: This is the last intervention I am making.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you sure?  You are a member of the committee.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister of Energy.  It is good the minister has admitted in the open that the level of water in lake Victoria and the Nile has gone down drastically.  If that is so, can she tell us what has caused the coming down of the water levels?  If not, as we speak now, if I may give data, the biggest volume of water which enriches the levels of water on lake Victoria is predominately convectional rain.  Is she aware that as a result of deforestation where Government has a hand the levels are going down day after day?  If so, what is she doing to alleviate the situation?

DR NKUUHE: My question is to do with the power generation by private companies.  I actually admire that policy, but I am wondering could the minister tell me – may be somebody has asked - ESKOM is actually a Government parastatal in South Africa, so what is the rationale of selling our own parastatal to another Government parastatal?

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Rt. Hon. Speaker though we have a collective responsibility in Government, I would like to say that hon. Lukyamuzi’s question I think has been wrongly addressed.  Since he is a member of the committee of Natural Resources, which committee addresses issues of lands, water and environment, he should have addressed that question when the Minister of Water and Lands were making their presentation to the committee in which he makes very effective contribution. 

But having said that, I also want to say that water level dropping may not be purely due deforestation, we all know that there is evaporation.  At least from the little geography I learnt, I know that conventional rain comes from evaporation of water, which water evaporates and goes and forms the cloud and comes back in form of rain, but I will not dwell into that further.  

On the issue of selling our parastatal to another parastatal; first of all, the company UMEME which is at the concessioned, the business of distribution is a consortium between CDC of UK holding 56 per cent and ESKOM of South Africa holding 44 percent. But Madam Speaker, the issue here is not whether you are getting a parastatal or a private company to manage the business for you; what we are after is efficiency.  

We all know the evils of UDCL and everybody has been looking for a way of curing these evils. We have tried several options but we have not succeeded. We have been crying for capital to inject in UDCL to expand coverage. Every MP wants the grid expanded to their areas but the government does not have the money to do it. So, when we advertised, these two competent parastatals, because CDC is also a parastatal of British government, formed the company, competed and we are satisfied that we are going to cure the problem which has been a cause of headache. And this is not new; in the past, when we had the Coffee Marketing Board (CMB) - CMB was a Ugandan parastatal but it used to trade abroad. So, I do not think there is anything wrong with a parastatal going to another company to do business provided they do what is required of them.

Madam Speaker, – (Interruption)  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the improvement on distribution of power through the new company, I am expressing concern on the matter of supply of power to this august House or the entire Parliament. Madam Speaker, you are aware we have experienced a lot of blackouts simply because the kind of power we are getting from UEDCL is the same level as it was 30 years ago. With increased demand for power such as air-conditioning that we are enjoying now, more computers, new elevators; why don’t you consider giving us a direct power supply with a transformer on our own compound here; so that efficiency of our equipment can be maintained? We are experiencing a serious situation. 

Madam Speaker, maybe you are secure, but some of us our computers are blowing up everyday – (Interruption)

MR MICAH LOLEM: Thank you hon. Colleague. I want to inform you that even Ntinda where our Deputy Speaker resides there is load shedding now and then. This is a very important person. She has to receive visitors everyday and you will find that Uganda Electricity Distribution Company disturbs our programmes by giving load-shading in Ntinda.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, as a matter of fact, I was coming to that point.  At the moment I was focusing on Parliament, but when we talk about individual members, it is not only the Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker but my neighbour, number two person in the country, the Vice President, Dr Bukenya, he and I always we were always experiencing blackouts everyday. Are you selling this power to Kenya or some other country or what? Can you please look into this matter of supplying power regularly in adequate amounts to Parliament and to the residences of the Deputy Speaker, the Vice President and hon. Aggrey Awori – (Laughter)  

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for their contribution because they are trying to send a point for improving efficiency, which efficiency cannot be improved without further capital injection. That justifies the reason for getting in these companies, which have got a bit of money to inject. 

I would like to assure this House that in the near future the concerns of inefficient supplies and power disruption will become history. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by commenting on Bujagali. Hon. Muzoora was concerned that how do you make a statement that government did not make a financial loss when compensations made. There were indirect losses by way of loss of GDP and these are normally estimates but there was no direct financial loss. I want to repeat this, because all the expenses, all the payment were made by AES Nile power, there was no payment by government. So to that extent Government did not lose cash directly. To the contrary, Government gained because all the intellectual properties, all the compensations, all those assets which were financed by Bujagali according to the Power Purchase Agreement, which we signed ceded to Government and they are now the property of Government – (Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the Minister is saying that the Government did not lose anything. To my recollection, the President with his entourage had to drive all the way from Kampala to go and launch the project consuming a lot of fuel, spending a lot of money on security. Have they recovered that money?

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is this amount of money which has been indicated in the report the US $ 50 million equivalent to all what you have enumerated – the compensation, the what and therefore, is the new value or new bid going to be less by this amount of money or equivalent to this amount of money which you say was spent by EAS on the site?

MR CHARLES ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wonder whether the ministry is taking care of the compensation for the people of Lira who were affected by power transmission from Lira through Apac up to Masindi? 

Secondly, following what has been going on, I am one of those who bounced in Jinja. We were there last night and this morning. I think it is now right for the ministry to change its mandate by adding on page 3 that the mandate of the ministry is to establish, promote the development, strategically manage and safeguarded the rational and sustainable exploration and utilization of energy and mineral resources for social and economic development.  

What I want the ministry to add is in some areas.  I am calling for the third time in this House about how energy in Lira and Apac has been neglected. We are always keeping the poles transmitting power to Gulu or to Kitgum. I put before the hon. Minister last year a request that let power be stepped down along Kitgum road where there are towns growing and people are living there; even the IDPs around these important townships have no power to help them to grind the maize grains which are always distributed to them.  

In Lira, we were honoured by the President’s private visit last week. However, what we always wonder about in Lira is that whenever the President is coming, power is put off the night before his visit and people are left in total darkness, either because Lira is very insecure nobody should be moving at night and then other endowments are cut off. We want an explanation to this. Yet when this power is coming back Televisions, radios and other gadgets are all damaged. The people of Lira want to petition the ministry, and even taking the minister to court for not managing this power properly. 

So, Madam Speaker, this is real concern in which where there used to be power and then along Loro road where there used to be power, Aloi there used to be power and polls are there, and then these places where there is power but it cannot be tapped. Where will this be done? 

We have been told of the rural development and some 185 areas have been accomplished since 2000 and we are not seeing Lira or Apac in this list, not to mention when you want to open a small-scale industry in this area. Just mere grinding, one cannot do it because the cost of diesel is so high that when you try to charge your customers, they always complain and yet power is in this country, other countries are importing it like Kenya are enjoying it better than Ugandans. I wonder what explanation the minister can give us.  Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Further clarification.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of energy.  Hon. Lukyamuzi you are a Member of the committee, you spend a lot of time with this particular Minister.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am seeking a clarification on behalf of the people of Lubaga south.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: No you spend a lot of time with this Minister.  Hon. Minister.

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, and the value of assets, is going to be evaluated by a competent-(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of order in respect to the remarks the minister has made namely, that Uganda did not incur any losses as a result of the pull out of AES. I would like to refer to-(Interruption)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, that was in the report of the committee. Please, and you are a Member of that committee; that is your report. You, Committee on Natural Resources; that is what you reported to us.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Why do I not accomplish my -(Interruption)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, you allow us to comment on your report. Minister of Energy - No, no, hon. Lukyamuzi, you make a report then you come and take issue here. Have you resigned from the Natural Resources Committee?  

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, on the assets left by AES, we have got a rough estimate that we have decided to engage a competent valuer to give us a scientific value. But what I can say is that when we are negotiating with new developers, that is going to constitute government participation, and for that matter the contribution of the new developer will be less by that amount.

On whether the Presidential travel and whatever was not a direct cost, I want to say that with these kinds of projects, presidential travel is not capitalized as a development cost; here we are considering development costs.  

Madam Speaker, on the compensation of the Lira-Apac line. If the compensations have not been finalized, they are in the process. This was a donor-funded line and this is one of the longest lines, which we have constructed in the last five years, which goes from Nakasongola, Masindi, Lira and Apac. 

So I would like to comfort the hon. Angiro that whereas we would like to do more in all parts of the country, as I said before, our problem is financial constraint. But on the step down, under the new concession agreement with the concessionaire, the first task he is going to do is to step down in all those new growth centres which have come up after the construction of the line. We will always be doing that as a first activity to make sure that all growth centres are all the time provided with power.  

Madam Speaker, on the Bujagali, I just wanted to confirm that there was no direct financial loss. 

Madam Speaker, I conclude by saying that, whereas we have not satisfied demand throughout the country, we have increased supply from where it was under one percent for 50 years to about 5 percent over the last three and a half years. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.  Thank you.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister has completed her statement, and the minister for water.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee on natural resources and nine colleagues who yesterday gave support by way of showing concern to activities and programmes carried out in my ministry.  

Madam Speaker, the hon. Okupa raised a number of issues one of which concerned illegal settlements in Teso wetlands. The Minister for General Duties in the office of the Prime Minister who now chairs the Inter-ministerial Committee on the Environment explained what government is doing comprehensively to tackle human settlement and also land for cattle as far as the Teso wetlands are concerned. I also gave supplementary explanation on what we are doing.  

However, I need to explain the US $ 169 million for irrigation. This money, Madam Speaker, is in the proposed ten-year investment plan on irrigation. My ministry has developed – has conducted a study and developed a plan which is before Cabinet now and this figure is reflected as what we envisage to spend by way of laying the infrastructure - dams and other irrigation infrastructure for areas with high potential for irrigated agriculture.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister, are you suggesting that the report of the committee was slightly inaccurate because one, what I noted was that you had provided US $ 169 billion first to rehabilitate the old irrigation schemes which probably could be obsolete now. Then you had provided money for demonstration centres, and money for training of extension workers. I do not see any investment there, so I do not know whether the committee understood your programme.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, the plan is a big document and the summary as reflected in the report of the committee touched only those activities. On top of those activities, we have got laying infrastructure in potential areas with high potential for irrigated agriculture and the money is US $ 169 million for 10 years. It is not for this financial year only.  

The hon. Justine Lumumba was concerned about land tribunals not being adequate in covering the Busoga area. Madam Speaker, this Parliament enacted the Land Act providing for a land tribunal in every district without an expenditure framework for it.  When we came to implementing, we found the 56 envisaged tribunals in every district could not be accommodated in the medium term. That is why we scaled them down to now 18, to be zonal, but as the financial situation improves, we are considering detaching Mbale and Wakiso from their sachets because of the congested business in those tribunals in the short term. But Bugiri has not registered congestion. So Bugiri is not one of those to be detached from the Busoga sachet in the short term.

On meteorology, I wish to state once again that our department for meteorology is dependable globally by all users of our advisories, be it agro-meteorological –(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, the Minister has not yet come clear on that. He has dodged to give us the criteria on the distribution of these wells, valley tanks and dams because this was the same question raised by hon. Okupa but he has dodged it. The criteria of distributing these valley tanks and dams is not even favoring us in Karamoja. How do you give somebody who has only 300 cows two dams and you give Micah who has 70,000 the same number of dams? Is it the right criteria?  So I wanted him to clarify; how are they distributing these valley dams and tanks?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, will you be touching that?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Yes, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, in my notes the hon. Okupa did not raise valley dams. I see water for crops, that we are providing water for animals but where is water for crops and what is this 169 million dollars targeting? These are the notes I took. 

But since the issue has been raised, Madam Speaker, I wish to draw the attention of colleagues to my policy statement on page 45 where in Annex (IV) I have a comprehensive list of valley tanks and dams constructed during the last financial year and the ones we intend to complete next year. 

The committee in its report also has attached a list of the same as Annex (IV) and the Karamoja region has got 16 whose cost is colossal, ranging between half a billion shillings to one billions shillings, each valley dam. These are very expensive undertakings by Government. One valley dam is one billion shillings and in addition we have - if I could explain these figures. 
 
In the cattle corridor, we have also accomplished the repair of Mabira Dam in Kashari at a cost of Shs 500 million and Kodukur, which was commissioned only last week at Shs 344 million. Fifty one others in the districts of Rakai, Sembabule, Mbarara, Kyenjojo, Luweero, Masindi, Nakasongola, Mubende, have also been done at a cost ranging between Shs 100 million and Shs 200 million each. These are valley tanks of capacity ranging between 6,000 metric cubic meters to 10,000 cubic meters. 

We are also in the process, this financial year, of designing 100 others in the northeast and northern Uganda as my statement indicates on page 26, “Water for Production Planned Activities”. 

We are designing for construction 100 others to cover the cattle corridor in the districts that are not covered previously in Annex (IV). This is our programme for water for production.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem, you have a policy statement, I am sure?

MR LOLEM: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you perused it?

MR LOLEM: Yes. Mine, Madam Speaker, is a criteria - that is the problem. In Karamoja we have three districts and there are some constituencies or sub-counties, which should not benefit from these dams. They are near Lekopeta, Meka, which is just near Kenya highlands and Matheniko near the desert; they are only giving them two, two plus somebody who has only 300 cows. What is the criteria? That is my problem because how do you give somebody who is near a constituency near Lira two valley dams; one valley tank and one valley dam and then you give somebody near Lekopeta, two.  The same like Micah who is in the desert, near Turkana, you give also two and how many cows does the other man near Lira have? He has only 300 cows and the other one near Lopekata, 400 but Micah who has 70,000 cows you give also two, the same like 300.  That is what I want. What is the criteria?

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the hon. Minister for the very useful information he has given us. I am very grateful to see that the Government is funding these projects for livestock. What measures are you putting in place for the shoddy work because every dam that is constructed is never done in the standard that is required? The Government is giving a lot of millions, now there is a project of irrigation, is there a committee you are putting in place? What measure are you going to put hon. Minister because we are wasting this money. Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Micah here is raising a very serious issue on the criteria followed, and I was surprised when the Minister was saying I did not raise this issue yesterday. I did raise this issue here. I remember I even quoted an Article in the Constitution where the committees have the powers of the High Court to summon. The third bullet on page 20 was saying that this information is only known to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and did not provide to the Committee. 

The Members went further to say that they were not satisfied with the distribution criterion. So, it is not only hon. Lolem Micah who is raising the issue; even the committee itself is raising it. I think the minister was just trying to dodge the question; just like we have seen hon. Bbumba dodge a number of questions we raised about the electricity distribution and how it is going to be handled. 

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, I have no intention to dodge any question because we are all here for the good of our people.  

Now I note that Upe County is not covered and I know that the criterion for sighting a water reservoir includes a number of parameters. A natural resource is the gorge there, what is the drainage system like?  This is, I do not know where Lola Kachati is it in Pian or Upe –(Interjection)- it is in Pian. Now, the District Development Committee, the Production Committee Agriculture, Animal Industry, Marketing Cooperatives, are the ones who sit to determine where in Karamoja to site a dam, and in every district. It is not done by engineers in Luzira or by the contractor; it is always the local people who lead the team around and they sit and agree that at such a place Kolo, Kayirong, Kulondwong, we shall put the valley dam. But now that Upe has been singled as missing, we shall take this up not this financial but in the financial year 2005/2006; Upe county.

Madam Speaker, at one time in Karamoja we had 72 valley dams, hand-dug by the Karimajong people guided by Government and animal production officers. I see it a good method of work to go back to hand-dug valley dams because, these maybe sustainable by involving the local people in the construction of these water reservoirs, ownership is enhanced. I also know that in Mbarara District Kiruhura valley dam, Masha, Nshwere were all and dug in the 1960s. The valley dams we have done mechanically have silted but Nshwere, Kiruhura, have been lakes since 1960 up to today. 

I thank the hon. Members from Karamoja this was hon. Aachila –(Interruption)

MR ABURA: Madam Speaker, I am again delighted to hear the hon. Minister saying there were some dams constructed in Karamoja numbering about 70, the figure is about 60 but they got silted too early. If you see one even when you are going to Katakwi, there was an experimental dam for the constructor. Since 1945 that dam is still functioning very well. These of Karamoja, which were constructed from 1947 to 1950 are all silted.  Is there any mechanical way because, the problem is the flood. When it rains you see as if it is porridge of clay; is there any mechanism of improving this? 

I know that the lifespan of dams in Karamoja will last only 10 years. If you are giving me more dams, I think you better make the better studies; how the water should come to the dams. Otherwise, just construct this year; after six years we shall not have another one. So, the problem is the soil, which is floating. So you need more scientific - is there any measure hon. Minister you can advise us?

MR LOLEM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the Minister is that he has talked about the 1960 dams of 1960 and you know in 1960s my constituency was not benefiting. If you remember in 1960 there was nobody representing my constituency, it was one person for the whole South Karamoja, and you know marginalization was there. so, that thing is not there in my constituency. But I request for a valley tank, I have two in my constituency but you know I have three sub counties. 

Let me tell you Madam Speaker, we transport cows to Kenya every month. It is my constituency that gives heavy bulls to these Kenya factories. I cannot penetrate other places because of this cattle rustling but since my brothers are on the other side of Kenya, so we transport there. But what I need is valley tank in Karita sub-county so that I give you more cows than taking them to Kenya.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister, I think the real question Members are asking including hon. Ochieng who has walked out, is that when you are making plans for this country, do you take into account the special features of different parts of the country? I think that is what hon. Members are asking, because they say the technology you are using for the rest of the country is not feasible for their places.

DR NKUUHE: Hon. Minister, I wish you could go to Ethiopia and see some of the things they are using.  They are using ox-ploughs and they have even designed something that can be pulled by - they call it dam scoops, which can be pulled by cows and donkeys. If you go to India, they are even doing better; they just broke a seasonal river so that anytime it rains the water is trapped there.  

Secondly, in Karamoja any time you put water supply the number of animals multiply. Are you taking care of that, because that can create more problems than you think you are solving.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think let the Minister answer and we move, I think the points have been made.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, the record of Hansard for today will help my ministry in changing our approach to water delivery to Karamoja. As I conclude on that matter, I request my colleagues from Nakapiripirit, Moroto and Kotido to provide an environment that will enable the field workers to do their work in the jungle and accomplish it.  We have had to abandon work, there has been vandalisation of machinery, our people have been killed in the field, ALFA company lost engineers in the field, please create a peaceful environment to allow government to deliver water in Karamoja. 

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the minister on the issue of the Karimojong providing an environment that is conducive for government to do work. As we speak now, Kabong town and the surrounding areas have totally been taken over by cattle rustlers and warriors who have totally become a nuisance. They are killing people, they are overrunning police stations, there is havoc. What can we do with people who have refused to really become orderly?

MR ABURA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, security is a vital issue in life. So far I beg to be challenged, where have the workers frustrated those who went to do a project, was there any? When you talk of a project like a dam, Karimojong themselves select youth called vigilantes to go and watch over the work when the constructors – where has it ever come up? Let us not tell lies in this House. 

In my area, Matheniko, we made a road. What we call a truck route, 150 people worked voluntarily, waiting for the constructors to come. Where was it? It was in Laboro County in 1999, where Kony burnt some of the vehicles, but no Karimojong has ever done – in Pian where there was a dam and they installed there a windmill, there was nothing,  there was no water; what people vandalized was a fence. Is that the whole of Karamoja? And as I talk now, all these projects of dams, I am the one who spoke to the President directly in 1999 and he gave us Shs 3 billion but I have never benefited. There is no dam in Matheniko now, the arid land with the semi-desert near the boarder, and we normally go and beg for water. We do not cross to other counties.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, given what the Minister of State for Internal Affairs has revealed to this House and given what we all know, which is also known by the MPs from the area we are talking about, is it in order for the honourable member to appear to be saying that all is well and that what is lacking is government intervention?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Abura, the Minister of Internal Affairs says that there is a very serious problem in Kabong and the surroundings. What do you say about it? Is there a problem in Kabong? Are you denying that there has never been interference with the work, the building of roads?

MR ABURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of Kabong, it was this year in early March when a Turkana and the people of Sudan, Toposa, came to Kabong to water cattle. So, there was no agreement between the local people. The fight there erupted because of water. The Turkana had come to water their cattle, the Toposa also were coming through the Kidepo Valley National Park. So, the local people of Kabong were trying to say, “you go back”. That fight took place in March and I think it was even recorded. It was not in the whole of Karamoja. If there is a problem in one area of Karamoja, does it cover the whole area?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, the Ministers responsible for Water and for Internal Affairs have chipped in rather casually two very important statements that the Karimojong must provide an environment so that the Government can complete projects in their area. I am saying these are casual statements because I would like the ministers to clarify what really the Karimojong should do to provide that environment. I thought that the fundamental responsibility of the Government is to provide security for people to protect their lives and property. 

If I understood the two ministers well, they are putting the burden on the Karimojong to provide security. What they are saying is that the Karimojong have guns, the Karimojong are killing themselves, and the Karimojong are raiding neighbouring districts, including my county Otuke, which has been a very serious victim of this; and government is just saying, “You Karimojong, if you do not disarm yourselves, if you do not want peace, it is your fault”. To me the fault is with the Government. 

The Government has failed to provide security to the Karimojong and instead they are busy going for gold in Congo, they are busy going to Sudan, but when it comes to Karamoja, they do not – and hon. Kabwegyere is very good at that. Always blaming people, including us from the North –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of order.

MR ATUBO: I know what he is going to say. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member on the Floor is in the Hansard many times complaining about the invasion of his area by cattle rustlers, actually cattle thieves, because we call them rustlers, which dignifies the act. Actually it is cattle thieving in the 21st century. Is he in order to say now that when you have a practice, which seems to be normal, of cattle thieving, that it is the duty of government to maintain peace in every corner where thieving is? This thieving seems to be really endemic and it is even not frightening the MPs from the area. 

Is it in order for the honourable member who knows the actual and endemic problem, which is not a problem simply of the government but of all of us including his own area; is he in order to appear to be saying the problem is simply of government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have presided over this Parliament when there are very severe exchanges between different members from different parts of the country on the issue of cattle rustling. So, we know that there is rustling in this country. I just want to know from hon. Abura, because he said that on a number of occasions he has talked to the youths and told them to guard the work and so on. Are you prepared to continue talking to the youths to guard the work, and all of you members from Karamoja, so that your dams can be dug?

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, there is only one thing, which I want. Some of these elders who are in this House here, I think some of them have not traveled to Karamoja. The hon. Minister, Kamanda, traveled with me one day to Karamoja and the environment was very okay. These are only incidents. When the incidents happen, there are methods to solve them. We have thieves in Kampala breaking into banks and everything, and that is why at times for us we move around and tell them “pole pole, do not do this”. So, sensitization must be there. 

I traveled with the honourable minister up to Kotido, and the place was okay. All these other dams, the 16 dams, there was nothing happening about disrupting the workers. In my constituency we even give them some meat, which we do not eat, we give them because they are from other places. We provide them with some necessities, rather than they using their money, because they came to give us some help. For two dams, Madam Speaker, how many goats have we killed and given to the workers? These are incidents, which elders like the Minister of Internal Affairs should not generalize. He should not generalize that Karamoja has given us a condition and we should protect the workers.  

The Ministry of Works has roads up to today going on, but people who are constructing the roads are okay, there is no problem. Things are going on well, but these are incidents. So, I urge the elders, more especially the Minister of Internal Affairs and Local Government, to use other words, because they have stayed in this place since 1932. They should use soft words on Karamoja rather than hurting us. These are elders, since 1928 up to now they are here, they should use soft words. Thank you.

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I am on record as complaining bitterly about the raiding of Otuke and other areas of Teso and so on. But I am also on record as having said that these Karimojong walk freely into our area because the Government allows them to do that. If the Government deploys effectively, the Karimojong do not come and if the Government disarms the Karimojong, the Karimojong would not be doing what they are doing. 

The Karimojong have guns because the inter-tribal or inter-ethnic groups fight each other and the Government just watches them. You see, these are issues, which are so fundamental in the way we handle the problem of Karamoja. If the Government does not have the will and determination, we are going to have those problems. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the minister please conclude on the issue of water for Karamoja, so that we can move on to something else? We have heard who does what and who does not do what.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam, lastly on water for production, yesterday while considering the report on Agriculture, a statement was made that water for production should make an about-turn and go back to Agriculture, from my Ministry of Water. I wish to remind colleagues that it was in the Sixth Parliament that this function was taken over by the ministry responsible for water resources. Now we have demonstrated our capability as indicated in my report and policy statement, that we are capable of delivering. We have got capacity to detect underground water; water as rain, surface water and we have got engineers and equipment for water delivery. That capacity is in my ministry, it could also be in the Ministry of Works. 

But as we know today, the line up: meteorology, water resources, construction of irrigation projects and infrastructure, they are in my ministry. If it is the recommendation of this House that the function goes back to Agriculture, so be it. However, Madam Speaker, my report is comprehensive. Over the last five years we have not only delivered more water points but we have also repaired those water points that had not been completed under Agriculture.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable minister for giving way. I did not get chance to contribute to this report, but I want to find out from the minister how they came out with these percentages of rural, safe water supply levels. Sincerely, I do not believe that in Mpigi District we have coverage at 81 percent. I do not know how you reached this percentage, Mr Minister, because –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What page are you reading that from?

MR MUTULUUZA: Sorry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What page?

MR MUTULUUZA: It is annex III of this report. They say that in Mpigi urban we have 25,459 and that the rural urban ratio is 6 percent. In Mpigi we do not have a single – except these days, well, there are towns like Kibibi and Buwama where there is scanty piped water. In the rest of the district we do not have a single town with running water, even in the town council itself. They say 75 percent of the water consumed in the town council is contaminated and you tell us that we have coverage of 81.4 percent? I do not believe that, Mr Minister.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, in the report of the sessional committee they made a revelation that Kampala has 803 springs. Out of that only one spring yields safe water. This means that the majority of people in Kampala, especially the poor, are consuming contaminated water full of feaces. Could we know from the minister what plans they have to ensure that the people in Kampala, especially the poor in the slums of Kampala, can really access safe water? Kampala has been very vocal in demanding for federo. It is this marginalisation, which is forcing many people to come out very vividly on the issue of federo. 

Secondly, there is an issue of land now. These property agents, recently we heard that Property Masters had closed down. Very many people have been cheated by these mushrooming property agencies. What is the ministry doing to protect the unsuspecting public so that they are not cheated by these unscrupulous dealers in land? Thank you Madam Speaker.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, if I could –(Interruption)

MR LUBOWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I very well know that in the decentralization set up the minister still has a hand in understanding what happens to the programmes in the districts. They have indicated their objectives, in some districts they want to get say 60 or 50 percent by a certain year. But what happens is that there is disparity in the various sub-counties. You find a sub-county at about 26 percent, while others are at 45 percent. But still when you send money to the districts, this money is distributed to almost every sub-county, giving a borehole per sub-county and not minding about closing the gap between those that are lacking and those that have more. Some are at 26, 24; while others are at about 60 percent. What about that concern? Do you have anything to say about it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, to be fair to me –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you said you had only one clarification and we finished it, and you are a member of this committee. Please, allow other people who are not members to contribute. Mr Minister?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, let me respond to the issues that emerged this morning. Regarding water coverage, we said water coverage in the country, annex III has been put in the report for the purpose of showing water coverage. Last week the Minister for Water, Col. Kahinda Otafiire, launched the Uganda Water Atlas, a huge book where existing water points per district are indicated and other segregated data about water is indicated. The population, and natural endowment in water resources are indicated. 

I, therefore, invite my colleague, hon. Mutuluuza that next week visit my office and we look at water coverage in Mpigi. We shall compare it to other districts, for example Bugiri complained yesterday, through the hon. Ochieng, and rightly so. Bugiri is at 29 percent coverage, while Rukungiri is at 92 percent coverage. When one goes to Rukungiri, you really see gravity water. In almost every village there is a tap within less than two kilometers, or a water point. Kabarole is also covered at over 85 percent; wherever you go there is water in the neighborhood. 

In Mpigi also we shall discover that there are shallow wells, there are protected springs, there are boreholes or even valley tanks that the people are using.  

Town water is another issue because we are negotiating a grant and a loan for Mpigi town. Next week we shall be able to get the justification for the figure of Mpigi being so high yet the hon. Member for Mawokota North does not think so.

Kampala is our concern, but in my policy statement I indicated planned activities for urban areas. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation has a social mission of extending piped water to even areas outside metropolitan Kampala, Kyengera and Nansana. We are now extending it to Bweyogerere up to Mukono and even internally in all divisions, in order to make it accessible to the people so that they do not use these polluted springs. These polluted springs can be used, but people need to boil the water.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order with reference to Kampala where I reside. The report states that over 800 springs in Kampala are contaminated, and it is only one that has safe water. Noting that water is life, is it in order for the honourable minister to postpone that important demand? This is a very serious point, which I want to raise on behalf of Kampala. Does he want us to die and collapse overnight?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, first of all the minister acknowledged that Kampala is a point of frustration for him because he has not yet been able to give you what you want. That is how he opened the statement. He is equally frustrated because he wants you to have water. What do you want him to do?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am saying with humility that noting that water is life, he is talking about postponing this to tomorrow and the other day. What solution of a practical nature has he got for Kampala as I speak now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what he is explaining to this House. He has many plans, which he is informing you about. Minister please, handle the issue of water.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Specifically on Kampala, about five water kiosks will be built this year, the water mains will be extended by 70 kilometers in Kampala, and the sewer line will be extended by 19.5 kilometers. We expect the new connections to be 12,000 this financial year and we are seeking approval of our budget estimates so that we deliver water to Kampala people and condemn and breakdown the unsafe water points. But those who are using the water from the springs are always advised to boil the water before using it.

Everybody supports the meteorology department but I was allaying fears of hon. –(Interruptions)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister in charge of Water, Lands and other related things that in the 1960s there was a pre-feasibility study done by the then Uganda Government to the effect that water could be piped from Majanji to Nebolola hill in a pipe that is 2 feet wide. This water could be pumped all the way to Tororo for industrial purposes and also for domestic use. Why is it that successive governments have abandoned this cheap programme?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, there is a cheaper source of water for Tororo. In fact Tororo urban water capacity is under-utilized. Only 42 percent of the capacity is utilized. There is idle water and because of that idle capacity we are now able to extend the water mains to the Malaba-Uganda boarder and across. There is still excess water in the Tororo water supply system.

MR AWORI: Maybe I was not clear on my first presentation or inquiry. What I meant is the piped water line from Majanji to Nebolola, with the destination as Tororo. The intermediate points, such as Busia, are the ones that need this water. 

Tororo as a destination was for the purpose of industrial use to soften phosphates, which were for production and industrial or agricultural use. So, when you talk about domestic consumption, you are dealing with less than 20 percent of my enquiry. I am talking about water for production and at the same time, as a subsidiary corner of it, for domestic consumption. Can we have that programme back? Do not talk about utilization of water in Tororo. 

As a matter of fact, you have a bigger problem in Tororo. Where you are drawing that water from, Malaba, is contaminated because on the Kenya side of Malaba they are emptying their feaces into that water. It is costing even more, it is dangerous; you check it.  

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, the extract of the Hansard on Tororo-Busia water supply will be utilized by my ministry to revisit plans of the past and also to find out whether Malaba water is not usable.  

Before a borehole is fitted with a pump, after boring, the water is tested for various parameters, tepidity, colour, odour, transparency, suspended solids, heavy metals, dissolved salts, electoral conductivity, micro-organisms and so on. When the equaline counts of micro-organisms, those that cause intestinal and other water borne diseases; if the count is below or above the world standards, that water point is closed. Tororo water is tested for all this and there is a laboratory at Tororo Water Works. 

My ministry has also got a mobile laboratory, which goes on testing raw water drawn by these water works so that there is a back-up on the figures that are always posted in the reports of every water works installation. So, it is not correct to say that Malaba water is unsafe. It maybe unsafe in the river but the water that is delivered to the people is safe, tested and proven to be so.

MR ANGIRO: Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we had a debate on this matter yesterday afternoon up to 7 O’clock.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, the hon. Aachilla spoke in support of the land survey training school at Entebbe being revamped. I am happy to report to this House that through the private competitiveness funding support by the World Bank we have secured US $20 million to computerize land records and also to rehabilitate and bring back into operation the Entebbe Survey Training School. The US $20 million is on a five-year project basis.

On the waters of the Nile, an issue raised by hon. Muzoora, this issue comes up almost every month. I wish to report to this House that the ten countries that co-operate on the use of the waters of the Nile are: Egypt, Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Congo, Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. They have their headquarters at an institution called the Nile Basin Initiative at Entebbe. Last November the East African community and other partner states agreed among themselves that no partner state should negotiate with any other party on the waters of the Nile unless they all act together.

Since the East African countries are part of the Nile Basin Initiative, negotiations for equitable use of the waters of the Nile are now going on. At the time the Committee on Natural Resources brings up its report on this subject, we shall report what has been agreed on by the partner states on the equitable use of this common resource.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am very conversant with the details of the motion, which was brought to this House, because I was presiding then. Apart from the equitable use of water in the future, what the people of Uganda want to know is what has happened to our rights, which accrued in the whole agreement? The rights of the people of Uganda under those agreements, those are public rights. That is what that motion wanted to know in addition to the future use. Where are our rights of the past and where is the money? That is what that motion wanted to know. So, the future is different -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Equally so, I would like to know this. We treat water as a natural resource. Do we have any protection under international conventions and rights of our natural resources, water being one of them; what are our rights under international conventions, for water as a natural resource?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, this subject is very complex. It involves indigenous rights of communities, sovereignty, international law, geo-politics; I could go on and on.  I am not competent as the Minister for Water and Natural Resources to interpret the content and the consequences of the 1929 Agreement, and even the letters. It is surprising that when Dr Kawanga Ssemwogwere was Minister for Foreign Affairs, a letter he wrote to his counterpart in Egypt was taken to be an agreement on the construction of Kiira dam. The hon. Attorney-General of Uganda is the competent authority to answer that question.  

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague, notwithstanding what he has warned us against, that we have to do some of these things. The utilisation of our water under certain conventions, I am sure you know that Kenya and Tanzania have defied it. Now they are taking water directly from Lake Victoria without consulting anybody. You can check with your counterparts in Kenya and Tanzania.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Hon. Awori has inside knowledge of the other states; I cannot comment on that. The Member for Masindi District, hon. Bintu, is concerned that government is not utilising ranch No 11. Madam Speaker, in 1990 government took a policy decision of restructuring ranches throughout the country namely; Ankole ranching scheme, Masaka, Singo, Buruli and Bunyoro ranching schemes and each ranch was restructured. This benefited many Ugandans. Originally the size of a single ranch was five square miles. During the restructuring, three or four square miles were curved from the ranch and subdivided further to benefit the squatters.
  
But in these schemes there were one or two ranches centrally used by the department responsible for animal disease control and animal husbandry. In Bunyoro Ranching Scheme is ranch No. 11, in Singo there is ranch No.16 and ranch No.18, in Kabula it is ranch No.7. Ranch No.11 in Bunyoro was not restructured; it is a land bank. Government has a plan of settling there the people who were evicted from the game reserve and the Nubian community that was displaced from many towns of Uganda who are now camped in Kibyama-Kigumba sub-county Kibanda, Masindi District. So, the people whom hon. Bintu is talking about are going to be settled by the relevant departments in ranch No. 11. Bilaterally, I will make available the timeframe and the details about this resettlement – (Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During the 2001 campaigns, these people were promised to be resettled as soon as possible. Now, it is 2004 and the minister is still promising that he will avail the plan. I wonder whether since that time to-date he has never come up with a plan and yet he even visited the place. And we are moving towards 2006 and we are still waiting. Possibly he will avail us the plan during 2006 so that we continue voting and then possibly 2010. I am seeking clarification; when are you going to resettle these people on that ranch and now that there are pastoralists who have settled themselves on that ranch? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think we need a general debate. (Mr Okupa rose_) Do you have a problem with those ranches?

MR OKUPA: A very big problem, Madam Speaker. I just wanted a clarification from the minister on the issue of ranches. There is a ranch in Kasilo, Abola ranch; we also have an irrigation scheme in Labwor in Mpingire. Can I know from you the status of these two issues?

MR KAKOOZA: More clarification on the same issue – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ranch is in Masindi.

MR KAKOOZA: I have a ranch in Kabula and I have a problem there. That option the minister is taking of transferring people, maybe he may include the leaders in those particular areas. In Kabula I have land scarcity and that ranch is there. Transferring people to those ranches without including the natives it may cause a problem. So, I would request that if that option is taken there must be wide consultations within those particular areas. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, yesterday the Minister for General Duties said he is chairing an inter-ministerial committee on general resettlements in this country. Do they include these people in Kabula? Do they include hon. Bintu’s people? What is the scope of this thing and how do the Members fit in?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, the inter-ministerial committee on environment is of 11 ministers chaired by the Rt honourable Prime Minister established by law. It is a committee of Cabinet and they handle environmental issues. Resettlement of people is an undertaking by many ministries. The lead ministry is that of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Lands we are always there, we are the baseline that is where you start. 

Resettlement policy also emanates from the Office of the Prime Minister. Local Government is a partner but is not a leader in resettlement. The ministry handling people, human affairs, social affairs, community development. Culture is also a player in resettling these people and that is why it is taking us a bit long to evacuate ranch No. 11. It is not vacant there are people there; you have to have a solution to their livelihood and also take care of the others. I can promise my friend, hon. Bintu, that as we talk, in Masindi there is a team working on a physical plan for ranch No.11 to accommodate the people she is advocating for.  

Magale is known as Magale market, I have been there I know it very well its population is more than 6,000 people.  Magale is in Bubulo.  Two weeks ago, my senior minister toured that area and following him a team of technical officers have studied the gravity flow system for Magale, for Bumbo, for Tubiro, Bugobero, Luwakaka up to Tororo. Although the construction is not built in the present financial budget, which we are considering, the plans and the investment for this project will be accommodated in 2005/06. That is where Magale will be accommodated. 

Madam Speaker, gravity flow is the cheapest way of delivering water. It is cheaper than a borehole, it is cheaper than pumped water in urban areas. So, we have the cheapest option for Magale and Bubulo County East and West – (Interruption)

MRS WONEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I did mention Magale specifically, basically the people of Mbale, Sironko and Kapchorwa are on Mt. Elgon where there is no shortage of water. As the minister has just said, I was totally shocked to find out that it is only 44 per cent water coverage on that mountain. What is the problem? He has just said, Madam Speaker, you were listening, that gravity water is the cheapest way that you can provide water. What is the problem?  Thank you.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Thanks to decentralisation policy! When Uganda was being administered and served as one unit, service delivery depended, in most cases, on the knowledge of the commissioners in Entebbe and Kampala. Areas without senior officers represented at the ministry headquarters lost out, and I think this is how Mbale came to lose out in spite of living in the midst of plenty. Now with decentralisation we are able to focus, for example, when Bugiri was with Iganga, Iganga was at 50 per cent but when Bugiri was curved away, we are seeing the real problem in Bugiri. Kitgum is at 45 per cent; Pader is at 29 per cent. When Pader was curved away, we are now able to focus.
  
Now, therefore, let us work with our district water committees to make the best use of the available natural resources. The Ministry of Finance is guided by the figures in the schedules – water coverage. For example, Rukungiri now already at 90 per cent should not get money for rural water for sometime because many people have been covered. Money should go to those areas which have 20/30 per cent coverage so that they come as near as possible to the national average of 58 per cent. That is why these figures are given.  

Now, even within the same district – within Mbarara District, which my colleague Guma my namesake is talking about, when you look at Bukanga and Isingiro, the coverage is around 10 per cent while Kashari is around 70 per cent. This is why the minister produced that atlas to atomise the problem and see where it hurts most and address that problem.  

Now on Kibaale land, my colleague and neighbour hon. Besisira expressed concern about the delay by government to solve the Kibaale land problems.  Madam Speaker, as we have all been following, Kibaale land problems are both historical and emerging. There are old problems but there are also new problems. Now, the old problems concern Mailo land. After the establishment of the Land Fund statutorily by Section 42 of the Land Act, so far 283 Mailo owners have surrendered their land titles, 101 have been paid and government has spent Shs 2.616,471,512. The area compensated so far is 21,260 hectares, about 10 per cent of the total area. Now the liberated area or land is being systematically demarcated in accordance with the said law to restitute that land to the people settling there now. The exercise has commenced in Kagadi sub-county, Buyaga County in a parish called Kenga. The process is slow because of succession problems.  

The owners: This land has not changed hands over 100 years. There is little transaction on the titles. Most of the owners who acquired it at the beginning of my century have invariably passed away. Even their successors have passed away. Now, we are in 3rd and 4th generation owners, and looking at the family tree, agreeing to who picks the paycheque takes a bit of time. We are soon coming out with a policy decision to give a definite deadline to the Mailo owners by which they should bring in their titles and we close the books.  

MR SABIITI: This is a very important matter. These people who have been paid have been paid because most of this land had already been occupied by different people. Now I am being made to understand that they are going to demarcate this land and allocate it. Now, what about those who are occupying that land? What is their status because we want a smooth exercise that will not cause conflict in that area? I am made to understand that there are plans to evict some people from the land where they are staying currently. So, may I know from the minister the fate of those who are already occupying land that has been acquired by government - it is now public land as far as I am concerned.  If it is public land, now where are these people who are occupying this land going to go? I would like him to explain this issue.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, it is not my intention to stifle honourable members’ rights of raising issues that touch their constituents. But I am very uncomfortable on the procedure we are adopting.  The Budget was presented; we had a whole week of general debate on policy issues. We are now considering reports of the committees as per the provisions in the Budget. But for the whole of this week we have patiently sat here and listened to a re-opened general debate. If the procedure goes on like this, considering that we still have so many other sectors to handle, when shall we finish the Budget process? I am not saying that Members should not raise issues, but really re-opening general debate at this stage is going against the rules, which we ourselves set. These are issues, which ought to have been raised when we were handling the general debate.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, surely the minister has made a statement on land and is trying to explain to Members of Parliament the policy being pursued in that particular part of the country. We are Members of Parliament not just Members of our constituencies. Now, is it in order for the Minister of Finance to divert this Parliament from discussing important issues that may cause problems in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members. This morning I had a meeting with the Speaker to really agree on how we are going to work because, we spend so much time on the general debate on the Budget and you raise all these issues from your constituencies. Then we go to the State of the Nation Address and you raise the same issues again. Then we adjourn to the plenary and tell you to go to your committees, and you do the same things there. Then you come back here four times to discuss the same matters. So, what I can say is that we are going to change the way we work because this kind of thing of just running around in circles is not helping this country. 
 
So, honourable members, we are going to change the way we work and I am going to call the Business Committee next week to discuss how to improve on how we work because, even our participation in the budget process from November was intended to help us internalise things early enough so that we do not have later debates. But it seems we are just continuing and continuing. So, I am telling you that next week, I am calling the Business Committee to discuss how to improve on handling of the policy statements, the Budget, the State of the Nation Address. Minister please wind up.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Lastly, on forestry. Water, carbon credits. Hon. Wonekha wanted to know what carbon credits are. Under the Kyoto Protocol, this is an international agreement where both developed industrial countries and developing countries have agreed to create a fund to be an incentive to developers who are using environmentally friendly technology. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I raised an issue and I wanted an answer from the honourable minister. Is it procedurally right for him to ignore what I presented because it was a very important issue which I think deserves an answer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of the issues which are really bilateral, you can handle them with the minister without having to engage the whole Parliament here.

MR KAKOOZA: I think, Madam Speaker, we need more time to internalise some things because we are on fundamentals of making the systems right.  The land policy is a concern to all Ugandans and it is very important. The way we do things and run fast before we internalise, we get a problem because the land problem is not in Kibaale alone it is countrywide. For instance, the policy on restructuring in 1994 many people lost lives in my constituency. So, if you say that you are going to transfer people and you do not include leaders, you do not rightly consult there is a loss of information flow from their respective ministries. So, we need to internalise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, you know the powers of your committees of Parliament, why do you not call this minister and take him to task in your committees? Can I direct him to meet you on Thursday? I am directing the Minister of Lands to meet hon. Kakooza, hon. Sabiiti, hon. Guma who else has a land problem, fine. That is a directive from my Chair. On Thursday you meet all those who have land policy issues. Move on.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, we were elected to come here and discuss issues albeit following some procedures. Matters of land, women in this country including government, have identified the present land policy to be one of the impediments to efforts to fight poverty. We want a precise, a comprehensive land policy; we are tired of dancing around.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, will you get it from here now?  Will you get that policy- (Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: We want a law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to get the land policy today?  

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, because we do not want to sing a matter over and over again, to sing about it year in year out. The land ownership in this country has been identified to be one of the problems that are causing an impediment to eradicate poverty. Hon. Kabwegyere cannot understand that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I told you early in the week that there are committees of this House, which are doing nothing. This is the work of some of the committees of this House. But there are those who have even never sat never produced a report, and the five years are ending. I told you that on Monday and Tuesday after listening to the reports of this House.

Secondly, you have failed to move motions on matters that are important. Those who have moved their bills we have given them time on the Floor of this House. You have not done enough in moving motions yet you expect the Speaker to sleep in this Chair everyday because of your inefficiency.

I have told you that there are two ministries, which did not satisfy us this time, that was, Education and Agriculture and I directed that they come back here and satisfy us on the issues, which we were not happy about. I have done the same thing with Lands. So, what is your problem? (Applause)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, let me clarify a matter on land policy. The recently concluded constitutional review exercise, the commission in their report reported that there is adequate law on land to manage, to solve contemporary problems. What we are lacking is land use plan for the country. How to zone the country for production according to its potential is either dictated by the soil type or other natural endowments. That is what we are lacking. Land policy per se is a component of land law. 

What is stated in the various land related laws constitutes the policy. That also is being brought together. What we are missing is land use policy and plan, zoning the country and the draft policy document is before Cabinet. The Committee on Natural Resources has been invited to look at the document and make their input. When Cabinet finally passes it, it will be tabled here in the House and make a public document for implementation and to guide development all over the country. This is the stage where we now are – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do recognise my honourable colleague as a person who was appointed to the Cabinet by virtue of the fact that he was one of those who were persuaded by candidate then and now President Museveni. In his Manifesto for election 2001, what was his position on land?  What did he do for you to persuade you to vote for him on a matter of land? What was in his manifesto?  Can you tell us? I did not vote for him but I was very clear on land. (Laughter)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: On pages 69 and 70 of presidential candidate Yoweri Kaguta Museveni’s Manifesto 2001, his vision on land matters is in consonance with the Land Act and other land related laws and that is why he was voted President of this country. We are implementing that policy and implementing those laws.  

Lastly, on tree planting. I was explaining carbon credits, that if the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development opts for hydro-electricity instead of thermo-electricity, the latter emits carbon dioxide and other green house gases in the atmosphere. The former is environmentally friendly while the latter is disastrous. Now, the former which is environmentally friendly gets money to support the project from that fund called Carbon Credit Fund.  This is the way to explain it.

Now, those of us who can plant trees on a large scale can also draw from this fund. The National Forestry Authority and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development planning department have a way of making this fund available to developers and the smallest tree planter is one who can plant five hectares of trees. That is the smallest investor that can access this fund.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I request colleagues to support my request for Shs 6.2 billion for recurrent expenditure and Shs 183.7 billion for development expenditure. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have anything to say?

12.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Umar Lule Mawiya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable members of this august House for the support they have continued to show toward the sectors.  

Madam Speaker, the concerns of the Members are genuine concerns which goes to show that they really have support for these sectors. I would also like to thank the ministers who are in charge of these sectors for the interaction we have done with them, they have been quite cordial, and also to ably respond to the queries and concerns of the honourable members. I am sure most of the concerns that were raised have been responded to. Others were observations made which have been very pertinent and which I think and I am sure that these sectors would take with serious concern.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to briefly inform the august House that my committee has about three petitions with it: One, is the petition on electricity tariff as presented by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and our report is ready for presentation. We also have another petition on Kibaale that was moved by hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki and Dr Besisira. This one is also ready with us and we shall present it in due course. There is another one on Karuma that was moved by hon. Otada. On this one, we are yet to finalise our interactions with hon. Otada and we shall report as immediately as possible.  

Madam Speaker, once again I would like to say that our committee has already embarked on a country-wide field visits in a bid to have our eyes and hands on various projects and activities as undertaken by these various sectors. I would like to once again call upon Members that once we reach you to accompany the committee in those various constituencies, please respond because you are part and parcel of these activities.  

Madam Speaker, as noted earlier, the ministries of Energy and Mineral Development and that of Water, Lands and Environment are key ministries in as far as the economic development is concerned. I would like to refresh the minds of the honourable members that the years that have gone by, you recommended here that these sectors be allocated enough funds if we are to trigger economic development in this country. 

So, once again, Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon the Executive to respond to the recommendations that have been made by the Committee and also those of the honourable members. These are good recommendations and we are all stakeholders. So, let them be taken with a lot of seriousness they deserve. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, once again I would like to call upon you to support the budgetary proposals for:

• Vote 012, Energy and Mineral Development, which is recurrent Shs 2,570,378,000 and that of the development expenditure amounting to Shs 57,377,640,000.

• Vote 017 Water, Lands and Environment that amounts to recurrent expenditure of Shs 6,262,343,020 and for the development expenditure of Shs 183,741,980,000. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you once again and I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee, the Committee, and all you Members. The House is adjourned to Monday at 10.00 O’clock. We have obviously failed to meet our projected deadlines. But during the course of next week, we shall find a way of meeting the deadline and also having an opportunity to touch on the matters, which have been uncompleted. So, we shall meet at 10.00 O’clock on Monday and I will advise you on how we shall proceed. But I think the next report will be the one for Local Government and Public Service.

(The House rose at 12.51 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 30 August at 10.00 O’clock)







 

    


