Tuesday, 29 August 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am sure by now you have all heard about the sad news of the sudden death of King Patrick Kaboyo of Toro which occurred in the early morning of Saturday 26th August, 1995, at his Palace in Kabarole District.  The untimely death of King Kaboyo has deprived not only the Toro kingdom but also the whole of Uganda.

King Kaboyo had already made remarkable progress in fostering the unity and stability of the people of Toro and mobilising them to develop their kingdom.  Let us all join the people of Toro and the bereaved family in mourning their King and pray the Almighty God to stand by them during this period of sadness.  Let us stand for one minute in memory of Him.

(The House stood for a minute.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 012 - MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND PHYSICAL PLANNING

PROGRAMME 01

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I have a few observations to make to Programme 01.  First on Item - Domestic Arrears.  This is a Global Item.  In other words, it covers all the Ministries.  As we shall observe from the Sectoral Committee, it is in arrears by about UShs 2b already and as I gather, according to the new Constitution, before Government acquires anybody’s money or property, he has to be paid in advance.  Now, I want to ask the Minister for Finance how he proposes to deal with this.  

Two; I wish also to point out that for a number of years, no money is voted for maintenance of Government Buildings.  I think this is a very serious omission.  If you can vote can vote money for maintenance of vehicles, and for maintenance of roads, how can you hope that Government Buildings will be maintained by nature?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, let me take this opportunity first of all to welcome the hon. member to this House.  Secondly, let me educate him that at this stage we are discussing figures  - the reality of the figures and accuracy.  The Debate he is trying to initiate should have come during the Sectoral Committee where he would have exposed that.

Thirdly, the new Constitution, nothing can be done until it has come into source and all what we know is that it will take us time to adjust it to suit in every Law within the Constitution.  So, what is in as arrears should not be prevented from being approved because it is helping to minimise what had earlier been said. Thank you.

PROGRAMME 02

PROGRAMME 03

PROGRAMME 04

PROGRAMME 05

PROGRAMME 06

PROGRAMME 07

PROGRAMME 08

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Ushs 3,806,155,000 under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

HEAD 112 - MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND PHYSICAL PLANNING

PROJECT NAME - CAPACITY BUILDING IN TOWN PLANNING

Digital Mapping Project, Masses Self-Help Project, National Shelter Programme, Malukhu and Awindili.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of UShs162,600,000 under Head 112 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and physical Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 016 - MINISTRY OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION

PROGRAMME 01

PROGRAMME 02

PROGRAMME 03

PROGRAMME 04

PROGRAMME 05

PROGRAMME 06

PROGRAMME 07

PROGRAMME 08

PROGRAMME 09

PROGRAMME 10

PROGRAMME 11

PROGRAMME 12

PROGRAMME 13

PROGRAMME 14

PROGRAMME 15

PROGRAMME 16

PROGRAMME 19

PROGRAMME 21

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 8,649,737,000 under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

HEAD 116 - MINISTRY OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS

ROAD MAINTENANCE IN EASTERN UGANDA - Mbarara, Ntungamo, Kabale roads, P.T.A. Roads, Iganga, Tirinyi, Mbale. Rehabilitation of major bridges, Classified Road Network Study, Highway Programme, Dry-Port Container Terminal Study.  construction of Kampala by-pass, Transport Rehabilitation Project - Main Roads.  Transport Planning Data-base, Transport Rehabilitation, Road Maintenance Project, South Western Road Maintenance, Malaba Border Post.  Road Receiling Unit, Up-grading gravel roads - Western Uganda.  Kampala - Jinja Road Repairs.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to brief this House the position of this resealing of Kampala - Jinja Road because I have seen that this road they are just digging each and every place of Jinja road.  Whether they are reconstructing or they are resealing, I do not know.

THE MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION:  Mr Chairman, there are two issues.  One; as to what is being done at the Jinja Round about.  That is a junction of water pipes.  But from there on the Jinja Road, it is resealed to strengthen this road.  The same happening in Malira where the resealed to strengthen this road.  The same happening in Malira where the resealed is being done to strengthen the work. 

ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman is it in order for the Minister for Finance who does not have specific knowledge of the conditions of roads to come and tell this House things which are not  -(Interruption)  

THE CHAIRMAN: He is in order.  Please proceed.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, thank you.  At a place between Mukono and Jinja - Mbarara. We heard of complaints from people in locality that there is a stone quarry where ground stones are being exploded and a lot of dust comes into the air and people have complained about the possible effect of this dust on human beings and animals.  Could the Minister tell the House what steps are being taken?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity first of all to give specific figures because - to alleviate the fears of hon. Abu Mayanja, that we incurring part of the expenses and the constructors are incurring part of the expenses because of the sorts which were in the earlier contract.   The figures are as follows:

Contractor: US Dollars - $2million

Consultant: US Dollars - $175,000

Client: US Dollars - $337,000

So, the expenses are divided.  So, as regarding the environment  -(Laughter and Interruption)

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, I would like to advise the House that what is going on there is serious environmental matter.  They have cautioned those involved and the environment people will soon be moving in to take appropriate action unless the medial action is taken as soon as possible.  We are aware of the danger and would like to stop it. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SEKIZIYIVU: Point of information. In fact the said quarry at Mbarara is in my Constituency.  Recently, some goats and cows were slaughtered and it was found out that the lungs were dry.  So, the RCs and the Local Community around are in fear.  They do not know what is happening to the human beings.  I raised this matter in our Committee for special services.  The hon. Minister for Labour promised to visit the place.  But for sure it is a serious matter.  Our people are dying and we were convinced by some of the technical member of the Ministry that the dust could kill someone after 15 years.

FOUR ACCESS ROADS TO KAMPALA

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, under this Programme, there has been a rumour that we are going to construct this Entebbe Road, first thing, through all these mushrooming big houses, and Ugandans are now worried, waiting for the Government to come out clearly indicating where the roads will pass.  Now most of these youngsters who have the houses were sent away.  Could the Minister come out and tell House where this road going to Entebbe will pass so that either we can continue constructing or stop.  Thank you.

MR MANZI: Point of clarification. I seek clarification because I understand that if you are in urban centre and you have a property in a wrong place and it is three years old in that area, the urban authority charges you -(inaudible) If you come up and say, you cannot then compensate what will that means, Mr Chairman?

THE MINISTER OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mutebi Mulwanira): I would like to clarify to the hon. member that City Council Licensing and Compensation are two different issues.  I would also like to clarify the hon. Member through you, Mr Chairman, that the question that has come up earlier on, the roads, of Kampala are already on the plans.  But we have got a menace of developers who assume that the fact that the road reserve is open is free space and because of the weakness of monitoring the development by the Council, we end up people encroaching on the road reserves.  At the end of the day they expect Government to compensate them.  

When it comes to Entebbe road, it has got a known width.  But many of the buildings you see now coming up, because somebody buys the plot.  Small as it may be, he/she assumes that the space between the actual tarmacked road and my plot can also be encroached upon so that I make my construction a little bit beggar than expected.  We are going to compensate for people who rightfully built properties in areas which we may encroach on if the road is going to be wider than earlier expected.  But if illegally you put your building in the road reserve, you expect minimum consideration or nil.

WATERWAYS, ROAD STUDIES

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of shillings 12,738,900,000 under Head 116 - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council be resumed and the Committee of Supply do report there too.  I beg to move.  


THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Council be resumed and the Committee of Supply do report there.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Votes 012 and 016 and Heads 112 and 116 and has passed them without Amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of supply be adopted.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON THE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY

MR ABOLA: Mr Chairman, I beg to present for consideration and adoption the Report of the Sectoral Committee on Trade and Industry on the Ministry Policy Statement.

The Report of the Committee has been circulated at the end of last week. The Committee made the following recommendations:

One; The Ministry of Trade and Industry must retain its role as a Ministry for all and continue to supervise Public Enterprises until they are finally divested and handed over to a new investor.

Two; The Ministry of Trade and Industry should remain because of the accumulated technical advise and information which they have.

Three: The Industrial Monitoring Unit which will handle implementation of the Uganda Investment Authority of the Registered Industries be set up in the Ministry of Trade and Industry immediately.

The Uganda Investment Authority should be reallocated to file directly under the Ministry of Trade and Industry for close supervision and direction. Ministry of Trade and Industry should handle all Trade differentiation matters related to Uganda -(Inaudible) African Caribbean Pacific and European affairs.  These were informed at the Ministry that the Minister of State is currently is to work together with Minister of State for Finance.

Finally, the machinery be established to link the achievement of the district staff involving Trade and Industry will Ministry Headquarters. 

Now, on Trade.  The Ministerial Policies Statement emphasises that the application of ACFODE as one of the major errors of compensation of the Ministry. With the assistance of the World Bank, the IDU, project studies have been commissioned to find a way of improving ACFODE potentials.  A few commodities like sunflower, fish-flower which were not being exported are currently being exported.  So, strategies to eliminate monopolies in the ACFODE activities were also being put in place.

The Policy Statement also outlined other things being pursued by the Ministry of Trade in its faithful exports.  These are listed in the Report. The benefits of find of these studies and programmes which have been put in place must be followed very closely by the Ministry to ensure that exporters benefit from these studies.

The Committee noted that the operation of Uganda Export Council have been to be abolished.  A levy on all imports which was on approval by the Government should be approved by this House.  A levy on all services for both imports and exports should be considered for Uganda National Bureau of Standards when they take over providing these services to importers and exporters at the end of this year.  Under Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the Committee noted that a lot of Progress has been made. The Bureau has tried to formulate national standards as helping to promote implementation and application of standardisation.  The Bureau has also worked on equality mainly for protection.  It was also pointed out in a Policy Statement that the Ministry was trying to correct some of the weaknesses in the Bureau through restructuring and strengthening so as to enhance its capacity to ensure that Uganda is not used as damping ground for sub-standard products manufactured elsewhere.

The Committee was also informed that the Government would soon assign shipment instruction of imports and pre-shipment instruction of exports through Uganda National Bureau of Standards.  This is because FGS which has been operating under an agreement. The Ministry, therefore, has taken the following action: 

They have hosted Industrial Review Mission which was followed by a visit by the Director General as a result of this, new errors of corporation in promotion of industrialisation and is now being explored.  For example, UNIDO is exploring the possibilities of strengthening the Uganda National Bureau of Standard.  Distributing machines for small-scale industries through local - assistance from the Republic of China.  The distribution was done through Uganda Development Bank. They have received facilities to have the industrial Research Institute from those of the Republic of China.  Now the Ministry intends to use this Institute to conduct Research and Development and to try to adapt foreign technology to suit local conditions.

In an effort to promote ACFODE the Research and Development Activities of the Institute will be integrated with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards.

However, the Committee noted that there is no provision in this year’s Budget to support this Policy and the Institution.

The Cotton sub-sector: The Committee noted that the marketing of cotton is now fully liberalized and a number of private sector players has got involved.  The Cotton Development Organisation has also been established and started operating in October, 1994.

These two phases taken by Government has brought a lot of benefits to the players in the cotton industries.

For the Union, liberalisation has given them the chance to exercise their potential fully, especially Lint Export.

Cooperatives have been able to export their lint directly to the International Market and they try to mark better prices for what they produce.

The liberalisation has also stimulated competition which results into higher prices at farm gate.  For example, the season which has just ended the price and now by Coffee Development Organisation was shillings 270/= per kilo.  But the farm gate prices raise between shillings 250/= and 450/= per kilo of seed cotton.

Now due to liberalisation, all seed cotton produce has been bought and paid for in cash. Now previously, the farmer has to look for market.  Today they buyers pick the cotton from the farmers stores.

The Committee was happy to note also that the Coffee Development Organisation is now in place.  They have established.

The volume of seed distributed is small and all cotton producing areas have complained about this.  For instance, Lango Region needed over 1000 tones of seeds.  But we were only provided with only 700 tones.

Kazinga Channel always plant about 500 tones only.  Registration of Company in the Industry has been and as a result has led to sunflower purchasing and started seed cotton for which the industry will pay heavily.  There is serious shortage of pesticides.  Those available are very expensive for the ordinary farmer.  Of the many companies registered, no individual farmer.  Now player has come forward to invest in cotton production which is the most battle elements in the of the cotton industries. It is, therefore, recommended that Coffee Development Organisations must ensure that of seeds by restricting the buying of seed cotton in areas and truly to improve that seeds have reached every farmer.

Two; the farmer should be provided with high yielding seeds in order to improve on - and distribution must be timely.

The Ministry of Agriculture should avail farmers with pesticide and start all the services. Government should identify an intermediary through which farmers can access great facilities for cotton production.

The Coffee Sub-sector; the Committee noted like in the case of cotton, that liberalisation of the Coffee Industry together with the Coffee Boom has a lot of benefits to different players in the industry which include increase income to the farmers arising out of the high prices due to competition.

Three; There is increase production of coffee on sambas which has been left out before liberalisation.

Four; The Government has been looking for crop-finance. However, the move has also created problems in other areas in the industries.  The scramble for coffee as a result of acute competition as a result to the raw coffee being bought leaving poor quality for the export.

Two: the lesser fair licensing policy has quality standards. At the same time, UCD has been unable to control them.

Three; when Uganda Coffee is lacking the uniformity in quality as a result of too many exporters involved in trade.  On the side of Arabic, some coffee which have long established their names in the market such as Bugisu are beginning to doubt due to poor handling by exporters who lack the facilities and serious handling of such coffee.  

The Committee, therefore, recommended that in order to have a stable liberalised coffee industry, registration should be admitted to those with the capacity to export that in terms of the capital processing facilities and power.  UCDA should be empowered by law to prosecute those buyers who spoil the county’s image by buying and exporting wet coffee.  Certain firms should not be allowed to deal in the trade up to the firm level when they have been registering as exporters.

Now the tobacco industry; the tobacco industry of late has been getting a lot of problems because BAT, when they came back signed a ten year agreement with the union.  Now, this agreement in case of West Nile and in North come at the end of this season. Now the North Kigezi we have the agreement ending in 1996.  Now after the signing of this agreement, BAT now proposes a different method of operating if and the from the union societies and very large section of tobacco farmers themselves.  The following areas are certainly not agreed upon by BAT and the farmers.  Now BAT proposes to register farmers every session through the assistant district commission. The farmers are expected to willingly and individually contract to grow tobacco with BAT’s assistance, and provision.  BAT will limit a number of farmers, the reason for this is that there is a limit to availability in expand to corrupt in put, and that provision could be in success with local farmers.  The farmers, therefore, on the other hand are saying that they belong to this specialized tobacco cooperative society.  They do not see why BAT should select some farmers and leave others.  The propose that BAT give a quarter of the kilo of each grade they are prepared to buy in each area, and the societies themselves will agree on how that quarter should be produced.  The farmers maintained that should some of them reach directly BAT, they will be denied society facilities like storage and  the farmers said that the maintenance of the present union as the most, they see this as the most effective ways of increasing their bargaining power.  

Now crop input, BAT proposes that all crop in put should go directly to the farmer instead of going through the union and societies before they reach the farmer.  The farmers continue to contend that this is where BAT has cheated them in the past.  Farmers’ money would be that, that crop for in put which prices are determined single handed by BAT.  Even when there are cheaper inputs in the market.  Some of such inputs were over supplied and all the supply never used, all at the excess of the farmers.  On the extension factor BAT wished to maintain its extension factor while the farmer feels that the extension factor should not be incorporative in the structure of BAT.  Rather farmers - all societies should request for such services on agreed terms on BAT.

On participation, BAT proposes that ten farmers that are representative representatives on grade facilitation so as to be able to protect farmers’ interests.  Now the farmers think that the unions and societies with the assistance of UCA should hire the services of private professional suffers at the time of marketing.  Where the goods are not from the BAT classifier, and those cooperative the tobacco a question should be left for the farmers to solve to any winning buyers. First determination BAT maintain that in the tobacco market, it is the buyer market, farmers nearly take the price.  Now, the farmers feel that it is necessary that they are provided with the cost of producing a kilo of tobacco and other crops. The committee had a meeting with the management of BAT on this matter, this issue was also discussed with the minister of Trade and Industries and the matter is still being followed by the committee and only involved in the interview with a hope of finding a just and fair solution.

The cooperative movement; now the ministry’s policy and cooperative movements has no say, they will continue with the restructuring the cooperative movement so as to make it more efficient, competitive and accountable to the membership.  The ministry also intends to sensitize members of the cooperative movement on their right and obligation and equip them with necessary business skills.  The committee noted that in order to achieve a programme known as the cooperative reform and evaluate programme has been put in place.  This programme has been running for two years now, its main interest is the development of self-reliance viable, sustainable and competitive cooperative societies operating democratically and member control organization.  

In addition to the there are other programmes also put in place by the ministry that is the National Grant Programme.  Now under this programme the unions have been provided processing facilities, stores, business machines, livestock projects and agri businesses.  They also provide the credit scheme which is being implemented by the Uganda Cooperative Bank.  The old seed production PL 480 vegetable oil monetisation programme funded by USAID is also in place through this Programme Uganda Oil seed processors at was formed to promote oil seed production as a strategy to develop for capacity to run local in the country.

The committee observed that the cooperative movement will continue to play positive role in the production and marketing our crops particularly coffee, cotton and tobacco.  We were happy to note that the ministry has established a monitoring unit, which spells out crop enough researching of the union’s to foresee any problems that might arise.  The ministry is also finally solving the problem of union indebtedness, after getting approval from Parliament last year, through a programme of. So far ten unions have completed the process required under the programme and have been ranged that release. These are Lango and Bukedi cooperative unions.  The big problem which government has actually now not yet resolved and which seriously affect the union’s concern is the question of completion of the whole office.  This matter has been brought before this House several - every year, and it is a pity that nothing has been done about it.  The committee is appealing to government to seriously look into this matter and compensate these people.  

Small-scale industries; the committee resolved that the policy of this sub-sector remain unchanged. Because last year a report on the Assistance that is being small-scale industries up to the time the committee was looking at the Ministry’s policy statement and the ministry is performance to discover that not very much had just been done to assist the small-scale industries. But they continue to exist, they continue to expand, and they only problem is that when these small scale industries become bigger they move out and leave other smaller people to come up again. So the programme that is continued and requires a lot of careful study by the Ministry of Trade and Industry. 

Now on the African Trade Development Fund, there are a number of premises in the country which are being looked after by the ministry.  Now these premises were established from the late 1950s to the beginning of the 60s to assist the African businessman to come to the business.  It was under a programme called African Trade Development Fund.  Now these premises are scattered all over the country, there are there they are being looked after by the Ministry of Trade and Industries.   The ministry collects money from these properties but of course as you in the consolidated funds.  The unfortunate part is that no funds no provision is made in the budget nor any other source of funding to renovate and maintain these premises. It is the view of the committee that; Number one; Government should try to review its policy towards giving money to look after these premises while at the same time it is an area where privatisation should also be considered in that the government should try to divest itself from these premises which are scattered throughout the country.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the Minister of Trade and Industry about the small scale industries, especially in regard to establishment of small scale industry estates in all the towns - all the districts in this country. Some of us who come from the centre far away from Kampala we have problems in marketing our produce.  For example, in Gulu and Kitgum we produce a lot of simsim, we have to carry this simsim to all way from Kitgum to Kampala and you find buyers here who keep on tossing these people around at the same time you leave your simsim here you have to travel a number of times to come and get payment from Kampala.  If there were these small-scale industries where we can put our little machines to produce oil could not  - the Kampala people come and buy oil.  Our farmers would not -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point procedure.  Mr Chairman, as a point of procedure, I thought you would allow the chairman to finish his report and then we continue to debate it.  Because if we do it like this we would not be able to go anywhere.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Only that I give him a chance to explain. Go ahead, please.

AN HON. MEMBER: What I am saying is that if there are these small scale industrial estates where we can produce some of these small items we waste time on the way and farmers because their produce does not come here and go quickly in Kampala.  I would like ministry of trade and industries to clarify to this House when they will put this policy in place and assist Ugandans.  And also, Mr Chairman, Kampala is now completely congested you want to put an industrial estate there is no land that there are lands in up-country town.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: We will have to answer that in the committee stage. 

MR ABOLA: I was on African Trade Development Fund, and reported that the committee recommended that these properties be divested.  On the provision, the current estimate, the recurrent estimate for the Ministry Vote 009, totals Shs.2,125,183,000 compared to Shs.2,552,373 which is provided for in the Financial Year 1994/95.  Now after this amount UShs 830, 941,000 is allocated for the three institutions namely, Uganda export promotion council, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, then Management Training and Advisory Centre.  Now, this leaves the Ministry with only Ushs 1,294,815 which is 30 short of the requirement of the Ministry.  And you recall that other arrangement which was agreed upon to assist these other institutions under the Ministry have not been honoured and therefore, these institutions continue to share from whatever vote is provided for the Ministry. Under the revolving budget, estimates, last year while presenting the policy statement of the ministry, the minister lamented that no funds were made available for equipping the Uganda Industrial Research Institute in food technology and surroundings at Nakawa.  The position has remained the same this financial year, the construction was completed and bills were handed over to government in October last year, there is therefore, need to find ways and means of equipping the institute.  The buildings are there very beautiful in Nakawa, but there is nothing in them at all.  Now we will get the evolvement fund being the budget circular called from the ministry of finance and economic planning as instructor  officers to make submissions but however, it will be recalled that last financial year the regardless of instructions, the ministry budget was 210,000 for purchase of motor-vehicles and furniture and were never provided for.  The ministry made extremely permission this financial year with the hope that the ministry of finance and economic planning will consider the request, however the request has not been considered, and the committee appeals to the ministry of finance and economic planning to review this position.  These establishments were approved and officers are appointed and are working.  It is therefore, important that they are provided with what they should get as their entitlement. We therefore, looked at some of the development budget provisions which was our plan in the report.  This is mainly to give clarification on some of the items which appear under development budget.  Because -(Inaudible) see the programme head without giving the details of the component of that programme, and these are outlined in this report.  

I, therefore, would like to recommend that for the House approve a total sum of Shs.2,125,184,000 under Vote 009 for recurrent expenditure and Shs.33,423,100,000 under Vote 109 for development expenditure for the Ministry of Trade and Industries.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr Chairman, I thought this is the time before we move in to the committee stage to make firm observations on policy for the minister or the chairman to make some responses.  In this connection, i would like to request the minister responsible for Trade and Industry to tell this House and therefore, tell this country what has happened to the textile industry.  So, you may know you may not know but I was once Minister of Industry -(Laughter)- and when I left that ministry we were producing textiles at the APM in Mbale, we were producing textile at Nytil in Jinja, and we were producing Jute bags in Tororo. At the moment, I have the information and I know that we were not producing any textile at all, and yet we say, our economy is improving. Can the Minister tell us, tell this House and tell the nation what has happened to the textile industry in this country and what he is trying to do to revive it, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR TUMUBWEINE MANZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to inform the hon. Member who was holding the Floor, that one we know he was a Minister of Industry and we also appreciate that he was a good Minister.  However, by creating political appointment in various industries in the country created a situation of over - employment and therefore the industries could not actually perform because they were borrowing resources in order to pay for labour.  By the time the National Resistance Movement came into power, most of the industries had more than five times the employment label they should have had, and therefore, they were dying a natural death.  Therefore, when one hon. Member to come and say that he had industries, actually they did not exist they were target papers. (Laughter) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Many times I have been asked by the local people what is going to happen to the primary societies since the unions have been privatised.  May be, I would like -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

AN HON. MEMBER: I mean under the divesture policy. Most of these ginneries are supposed to be sold off or disposed off but we have the primary societies.  So I would like to get some clarification or education from the Minister.

MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Richard Kaijuka): Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like of take this opportunity to inform my good friend hon. Tiberondwa and the House that it is true many Ugandans know that hon. Tiberondwa was a Minister of Industry.  I want to remind him that while he was a Minister of Industry, the groundwork for the destruction of industry was prepared.  (Laughter) And the very ably established how this used to happen.  

One; my NLEM knows that much as I tried to help him from Uganda Commercial bank providing working capital.  I want to agree with first of all with hon. Tumubweine that industries just went on and employed large number without regard to the cost effectiveness of the industry. Two; government established a method where lots of them depend on government subsidy.  In other words, Minister of Finance continued to provide funding here in, here out year and year out.  Three; industries continued to depend on allocations. My Friend Dr Tiberondwa knows that without the chit things, you would not be able to get some sodas or beverages from some of these industries.  So, what he sees is a deliberate review of policy, there is no doubt about it, by government.  The government recognised that although we were having these industries the question we addressed was, at what cost were these industries being produced! So, it became unattainable, unsustainable from a government point of view.  So, we had to deliberately address the bigger question, how do we move forward, and it was a simple answer for us; it was the way forward can only mean privatisation of these industries.  So, what you see is a temporary retreat, deliberately at that, before we embark on major revamping and rehabilitation of these industries.  

I will give you an example of NYTIL. Yes, it is true, you may see no textiles on the market, but it is because we have had to rather than continue subsidising, and that is after the government, in fact, within the last seasons had pumped in almost a billion shillings trying to subsidise operation, and it could not just be sustained! We decided to handle the workers and in the meantime handle those who have answered our call for privatisation.  The information I have is that the Indonesian group which is due to take over NYTIL is, for example, proposing not only to take over NYTIL and operate at the levels at which it is, but within the next five years, according to their business plan, they intend to invest in the region of about 30 million dollars, and not only - we are not just tackling about doubling production, within another five years NYTIL should be able to export fabrics to the tune of well over 30 million dollars, and at the same time play significant role in terms of increasing employment and in terms of increasing our budgetary revenues.  So, it is a deliberate effort, I am afraid, this government does not panic, it only looks at a situation, accepts what has to be done and so to the Ugandans I say, please, be patient when these industries are finally revamped you have nothing but to rejoice.

Let me move on and inform my distinguished lady, the youth representative, that I am afraid unions have not been privatised, and so societies -(Interjections)- if I may take this opportunity to inform here and the House, that the position of societies and unions has not changed at all! In other words, people will continue to operate under the auspices of societies and unions.  What has happened is that unions in the coffee sector and cotton sector have had to re-examine their operations vis-a-vis their past indebtedness.  So, what you see, for example, in cotton industry where this House was involved in debt forgiveness, we have had to restructure and the unions themselves have had to restructure to the extent that we have ended up.  

The latest information I have is that because of this restructuring process and new business plans unions on their own have had to end up retaining about 15 ginneries out of the 39 or 38; so the rest of 23 are due to be privatised so that you have a revitalised sector where you have co-operatives and unions that are making money instead of being seek unions, and we have made them more dynamic than they will ever imagine.  With those pieces of information, I hope the House can rest assured things are being well handled.  If I may end up commenting on the industrial estate, and that is a question that was raised in terms of small-scale industries.  First one of the most active sectors we have in this country is the small-scale industry.  So, if it is wrong on a part of anybody to say that nothing is being done.  The difference here is, instead of having a government organised operations, these are in the hand of private individuals, and I think, the Members here from their villages right across the countryside will bear witness to this, that wherever you move, if you are looking for bicycle repairers, you are talking about making of poultry baskets and what have you, it is dynamic in everything.  

Government has, however, deliberately worked on a strategy where we identify appropriate cite in different urban centres, and that is a job our ministry has had to do with the district urban centres.  We are deliberately getting these cites, we are working out on a strategy where will establish deliberately industrial estates, we do recognise, however, that we have problems of funding, we have a study in place and we have also had discussions with Indian Federation of Industry where from a private sector angle these are those private sector people who have promised that they will undertake some of these projects and at the same time we are continuing to look for funding.  But as a strategy we think if we could in medium term have a deliberate intermediation as a government so that we can focus in different areas, it would create not only an enabling environment, but create a good atmosphere for new comers to embark on small and medium scale industries.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 009 - MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY

(Question proposed.)

Programme 04

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: On Programme 04, I would want a clarification on sub-programme 1080 - traveling and transport on persons abroad of UShs1,058,000 what that would entail in terms of sending anybody anywhere outside this country.  Because, even if it was only sending somebody to Nairobi and you buy a ticket and you give him per diem, that looks too small to maintain anybody for any time for any cause. If this programme was not necessary, should we not have deleted it or increase it to a reasonable figure?

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Tumubweine and the House that yes, we do concur with his observation that this provision appears inadequate, but fortunately for us in the directorate of cooperatives and marketing, we intend to get co-sponsorship, and therefore, we think we can live with it much as it may be a tight budget.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

Programme 08

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, I have got the same question about traveling and transport of persons abroad; I do not know whether it is the same answer that under Bukalasa, Tororo colleges, traveling abroad will be UShs1,300,000 and that there will be some other sponsorship.  But if that is the case, have the funds been secured?

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I am afraid we do not have any definite commitment as such, but I wanted to assure the House that we have got very many friends in the cooperative world and you can rely on us, when it come to getting to sponsorship and invitations.  Sometimes they do deliberately invite us to participate in these conferences.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 2,125,193,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Trade and Industry be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

HEAD 109 - MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY

COTTON SUB-SECTOR MTI

MR ELYAU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  On cotton sub-sector, I want to find the truth; people really are willing to grow cotton, but can the minister assure us that seeds can be available next year, as early as January? Because for me I have not been able to plan because seed was not time.  Please, can you make sure that the country has seed now especially, to those ones who are growing cotton.  We have been so poor but we are getting some life.  Can you clarify?  Thank you.

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to like to assure my hon. Friend that seeds were relatively available, you appeared late; but I want to assure that most of the obstacles in the cotton sector are genuinely and deliberately being tackled to the extent that any serious farmer will have no difficulty in getting seeds by the next planting season.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to assure my Colleague, hon. Elyau that the shortage of seeds was not a deliberate attempt to frustrate the farmer, rather the farmer produced too little seeds; we distributed all the viable seeds that were available to the farmer, and he should be reassured also that the people of Kalaki would not require the seeds in January; the people of Kalaki would rather get their seeds in April and plant effectively.  So, really what we are saying is that the CDO is very serious and committed, but because we are reviving a crop which had gone down the drain we had to generate some seeds first, and whatever little seeds that were available were actually given out to the farmer.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs1,319,800,000 under Vote 109 - Ministry of Trade and Industry be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Richard Kaijuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr R. Kaijuka):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Votes 009 under Head 109 and has passed them without any Amendment.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr R. Kaijuka):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session. We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Assembly rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 August 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

 




