Tuesday, 29 August 2006

Parliament met at 10.21 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you.  There is something rather personal, which I want to share with you. In 1999, when I became Deputy Speaker, Parliament recruited Moses Matovu.  He had failed to get fees to complete his A’ Level. He worked as an Office Attendant and managed to improve himself when he got some money. He undertook a course for a diploma in computer studies. He completed his studies and qualified for government sponsorship at Kyambogo University, where he graduated with a degree in computer studies.  

He continued to work with me because he did not want to lose his job. Last year, he managed to get a first class degree. He was the best in his class. All this is in spite of the circumstances under which he came here. On Sunday, he left for Netherlands for a Master’s degree. That is what happened in my Office and I found it prudent to share it with you. This is an achievement for the entire Parliament, which I thought I should put on record. We wish him well!

10.25
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for your communication from the Chair especially as you have highlighted what happened under the programme well promoted and enhanced by the government. This is popularly known as “bonna basome.”  What “bonna basome” means is not that we take it to only primary schools. It means that all Ugandans have the opportunity under the present government to continue from where they left, regardless of the circumstances. They could catch up and access educational facilities and programmes. 

Therefore, building on your communication, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to colleagues in the House and outside to encourage all our people, not only young people but even adults to go back and improve their qualifications. What this government has done so well is to increase the opportunities for all Ugandans to access education at any given level. I would like to record my congratulations as a Minister of Education to that young man and again to say there is room and opportunities for all Ugandans to go back to school under the slogan “bonna basome.” I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

10.27
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join the Minister of Education to say that what you have said is a very good example of what many people have gone through. I would like to encourage all those Ugandans who have not been able to go through the formal channel of education to try their best to improve their status.  

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because during the campaigns, the opposition used that to tarnish my name. They alleged that I was a tea maker at one of our embassies when in fact I was not because they did not read my records. However, I would like to tell them openly that if I did so it was not very strange because we even have a record of one of our presidents who once worked in a cemetery. Therefore, being a tea maker is very important because he can even poison his boss.  If I managed to do a good job like that, I think it was worthwhile. 

I encourage the opposition to talk about issues not non-issues, as was the case in Masaka, where I was accused of being a former sweeper of an office, a tea maker, things which I considered very silly and primitive. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, I was made to understand that Agriculture had small things, which they did not agree on. They suggested that we start with Social Services. In fact, the copies of the reports are just being worked on. I suggest that we deal with Social Services before Agriculture.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With due respect, some of us depend on what we read. Is it procedurally correct to discuss papers, which have not been circulated?

THE SPEAKER: That is an open question. I do not understand in respect of what? This Social Service, for instance, the reports were available yesterday.  I had my copy, even though I do not know how I got it. I have already addressed that. I think I had skipped one item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT TO SECURE CREDIT OF SDR 30 MILLION FROM IDA FOR THE PURPOSE OF FINANCING THE MILLENNIUM SCIENCE INITIATIVE PROJECT

10.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  I beg to lay on Table this paper on IDA credit of SDR 30 million for the purpose of financing the Millennium Science Initiative (MSI) project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the document be handled by the Committee on National Economy. They will subsequently make a report.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND 
APPROVAL OF:

1)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/06;

2)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES FOR REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/07.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/07

THE SPEAKER: Prof. Anokbonggo has raised the issue of not having received a copy of the report. He doubts if he will be able to follow. Yesterday, we had mentioned the Committee on Agriculture but I was given indications that there were some few things, which the committee wanted to settle. However, personally I had a copy of the report of the Committee on Social Services and I thought that Members also had those copies. The chairman of the committee said he would be ready to present the report early today.
 
That is why I thought that maybe Agriculture needed some more time, so that we deal with the report, which was ready. I did not know that you did not have the copies. In fact, the Minister of Education was supposed to go with donors – is it to the North or Luweero? But she had to cancel the journey because her report was being presented today. If you did not get a copy, I suggest that the chairperson gives enough detail to enable you follow. Otherwise, if we have to suspend in order for Members to get copies, I see a problem. We need to clear these reports.

MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the report for the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has already been distributed. Therefore, why don’t we start with those, which are available?

THE SPEAKER: No. You see, even yesterday it should have been presented. But I got those indications and that is why I had to change. The Order Paper indicates Social Services and not Agriculture. However, if the position is that Agriculture is ready, then please present it so that we clear it. In the meantime, Social Services should get prepared so that we do not lose any time. 

10.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Deusdedit Bikwasizehi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This report was ready yesterday. We corrected all the mistakes and presented it for photocopying. However, the machine broke down and we had to run copies from outside. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.    

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I have the honour to present our committee report on the policy statement for the ministry for the financial year 2006/07. The Committee on Agriculture reviewed the policy statement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its semi-autonomous bodies (Vote 10): the National Research Organisation (NARO)(Vote 142), the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) (Vote 152), Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) Vote 155 and Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) (Vote 160).  I will try my best to summarise.

The committee held discussions with the Minister of Agriculture and the staff as well as the Managing Directors of Uganda Coffee Development Authority and Uganda Cotton Development Organisation. We met the Executive Directors of Diary Development Authority (DDA), NAADS and the National Agricultural and the Executive Director of PMA as well as the Director General of NARO. 

In addition, Members attended a two-day workshop, which was organised by the ministry to have a deep understanding of the agricultural sector. 

The mission of the ministry has not changed. It is to support the efforts to commercialise the agricultural sector including value addition. The specific mandate of the ministry is to support, promote and guide production of crops, livestock and fisheries. This is done through the provision of services, which are primarily focused on resource-poor farmers/fishers folk.

The ministry’s mission is in line with PEAP and PMA objectives of commercialising agriculture and eradicating poverty while at the same time ensuring quality of food to all the people of Uganda.

The sector’s role changed from direct involvement in service delivery to transforming the sector by ensuring that an enabling and conducive policy and regulatory environment as well as essential physical infrastructure are put in place and maintained. The details of the objectives are indicated on page 2. 

The key points in which the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was active during the year include:
(i)	Expansion of geographical coverage for the NAADS programme.
(ii)	Implementation of development programmes for both the specific commodities that are targeted under the strategic exports intervention and for livestock and disease control.
(iii)	Support to improved production and productivity of both crops and animals.
(iv)	Improvement of food and nutrition intake of the people
(v)	Drafting some policies and related legislation.
(vi)	Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry’s regulatory services.
(vii)	Operationalising the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) Act. This is the law we made on research.
(viii)	Supporting the overall implementation of the PMA.
(ix)	Participating in East African Community activities for agriculture.

The performance of the last financial year:  
On page 4, we outlined the budget performance for the FY 2005/06, which totalled to 93.3 percent. It should be noted that the performance of the sector was 93 percent and not 100, because of less releases to MAAIF development budget, which performed at 80 percent. The other agencies under the sector performed satisfactorily well with the exception of NARO, which under performed. It should be noted that these extension releases over performed at 109 percent, which provides evidence for supplementary expenditure.

Supplementary expenditure during the year 2005/06:

The supplementary expenditure during the FY 2005/06 was Shs 0.61 billion, which was spent as indicated on page 5. The physical activities, which were performed as indicated on page 5 to page 11, were made in the priority areas, which were earlier indicated on page 3.

Ongoing activities: 

All activities, which were performed in 2005/06, will continue to be performed in 2006/07. The planned activities for 2006/07 include pursuance of Rural Development Strategy (RDS) with specific reference to agricultural production and agro-processing. On the issue of rural development strategy, the committee wondered whether this is not a shift from PMA, which pursues similar functions like rural development strategy. 

The specific activities are indicated on page 12 to 13.  On page 14, we have the budget for 2006/07. On page 15, we make observations. In reference to table 2, which is the budget for this year, it should be noted that the budget allocations to the agricultural sector have reduced by Shs 2.41 billion, an equivalent to 1.6 percent from the budget of 2005/06. This has largely reduced the budget for MAAIF, which has experienced a 20 percent reduction.  In all, the agricultural sector share total MTEF resources has fallen from four percent of the total budget in 2005/06 to 3.5 percent in 2006/07. 

In addition, the increase of the budget allocation for the district extension services is a welcome gesture since it has been a major source of supplementary expenditure during the previous financial years. NAADS roll out to more districts attracted an increment of Shs 11 billion in 2006/07.
  
The committee observes that while CDO and UCDA are autonomous agencies under the sector, they have been allocated votes. It should be noted that most of the activities of these two bodies have been decentralised under the sub-county development programme, which is steered by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The ministry’s budget reduction of 25 percent arose due to a massive reduction in the domestic development budget as seen in the table. This implies that counterpart funding for development projects as required under the existing project funding arrangements will stall, because this is where the counterpart funding comes from.

Similarly, project funding under the donor component is projected to reduce by Shs 2.8 billion that is six percent in this financial year for the ministry.  

The non-wage budget for the ministry is projected to reduce by 19 percent this financial year. This provision excludes Shs 1.46 billion to cater for domestic arrears, which had accrued, leaving a balance of Shs 5.53 billion, which is inadequate to enable MAAIF and its semi-autonomous bodies to execute their mandate.

NARO has registered a modest increase this FY of 0.5 percent. However, donor contribution to NARO grossly reduced by Shs 7.9 billion, which is 60 percent. In order to stimulate agricultural research, the Government of Uganda contribution towards the development budget has been increased by Shs 8 billion, which is 87 percent to mitigate the reduction in the donor contribution. The committee appreciates this positive response by government.

NAADS budget will increase at the district level by Shs 11.2 billion, that is 41 percent in 2006/07 due to the planned roll out to 16 new districts and 173 new sub counties, making a total of 63 districts and 517 sub counties covered by the programme countrywide.

Similarly, it should be noted that the administrative budget for NAADS secretariat increased by Shs 4.86 billion this financial year.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

•	The committee observes that the agricultural sector is characterised by both very low production and productivity. This one can be exemplified by the fact that when you consider a crop like coffee, at one time we were exporting about 4 million bags of coffee but now we shall be lucky if we get 2 million bags.  Cotton production lowered from about 254 bales to 102,000 bales. Therefore, the committee recommends that comprehensive strategies and programmes be put in place to boost both production and productivity.

•	The committee welcomes the ministry’s effort to put the development strategy and investment plan for the sector in place. This has been the concern of the committee for the last three years. The committee was convinced that this would be the way to attract more funding for the sector. The committee further recommends that funding of the sector be increased so that the sector can realise the plan.

•	The committee has observed with concern that the ministry is losing its vital infrastructure and land through encroachment. One such infrastructure is the Livestock Experimental Station (LES) near Entebbe Airport. This station serves as a holding ground for both imported and exported animal. This property also has a vaccine production plant. At present, Civil Aviation Authority has already encroached on a big chunk of this land despite infrastructure and if you go upcountry some brand for the ministry like what used to be mechanisation workshop and some agricultural land like ranches is also being encroached on. The committee here by recommends that the ministry secures all its vital infrastructure and land by surveying it.

•	The return of water for production to the Ministry of Agriculture has been an issue of concern. It should be noted that the ministry has a fully-fledged department of farm development. Among the function of this department are: land planning, irrigation, soil and water conservation. There is even manpower in place which is managing the existing irrigation projects. Irrigation is directly limited to agricultural production. The committee strongly recommends that water for production be returned to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

•	It has been observed with concern that various projects and departments of the ministry are scattered in different parts of Kampala and Entebbe. NAADS and PMA are housed on Lumumba Avenue in Kampala, Vegetable Oil Project is down here on Parliamentary Avenue, Coffee Development Authority is on Entebbe road and others. The Ministry of Agriculture headquarters is housed in Entebbe. The committee recommends that for ease of coordination in collaboration, the government should find a home for the ministry in Kampala. This will go a long way to reduce the costs of renting by these various units of the ministry. 

•	The committee has also observed that livestock diseases like FMD have become rampant in the country. There is need to put both adequate resources and strategies to curb the problem of livestock diseases. The issue of controlling livestock diseases has been a concern of the Committee on Agriculture for some years. In order to curb this endemic problem, the committee recommends as follows:

a.	Government commits adequate financial resources to procure adequate vaccines and drugs.

b.	Emergency funds for purchase of vaccines and drugs be shifted from the Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to avoid the unnecessary delays in responding to abrupt epidemics.

c.	Government reactivates the vaccine production plant at Entebbe. This will be a long way to bring to a sustainable source of the vaccine and costs will be reduced in the long run. 

d.	Government re-centralises the functions of Animal Disease and Vector Control as well as regulatory services. These should not be decentralised.

•	Under the strategic intervention programme, government undertook to provide free cotton seeds to farmers for planting. The cost of purchase, dressing and transporting of these cotton seeds amount to Shs 5.725 billion. However, only Shs 1.2 billion has been provided in this budget. Cotton is a vital crop for small-scale farmers and it is grown in about two-thirds of this country. The committee recommends that funds be provided to fill the gap of Shs 4.252 billion.
	 
•	Like livestock industry, the crop sector is also threatened by diseases and pests. Banana Bacterial Wilt has continued to spread even to major banana-growing areas. Coffee Wilt is still with us, just as Cassava Brown Streak, which are also spreading. When this cassava disease attacks the crop, the tubers become rotten and this is a challenge after Cassava Mosaic. This disease is already in the districts of Wakiso, Luweero, Mukono – in fact, farmers near the Prime Minister’s home have had that problem. The committee recommends that adequate financial resources be put in place to control and contain the spread of the pest and diseases in crop sector.

•	The committee has observed that one of the major causes of low productivity and production is the continuous use of the hand-hoe and other rudimentary tools. The committee recommends that government takes serious steps to address the issue and to introduce appropriate technology to boost production and productivity. 

•	In passing the Uganda Tea Growers Repeal Bill, which we did last year, Parliament recommended that government puts an appropriate policy and programme to promote unexploited tea potential in the country. This has not been done. The committee further recommends that an appropriate policy and programme be put in place to address the issues of increased production and processing in this vital sector.

•	The committee has also observed that due to pressure, NAADS roll out has concentrated more on geographical coverage to new districts than within the district. This has resulted in situations where two parallel extension services, that is, the traditional extension services and NAADS have had to operate in one district. In order to have an impact, the committee recommends that NAADS first rolls within the district before rolling to another district.

•	The committee observed further that poultry industry is one of the most important industries in terms of nutrition and income generating activities. This holds for both local and exotic birds. The committee recommends that the ministry takes serious steps to promote the industry by addressing the issues of breeding, sexing and feeding.

•	The committee appreciates the strategic intervention programme for selected exports crops like coffee, tea, cocoa and others.  The committee further appreciates the efforts taken to clear the accumulated arrears. However, there are some outstanding arrears, which amount to Shs 5.0 billion.  The committee recommends that appropriate funds be put in place to offset these arrears. 

•	One of the most vital inputs necessary for improvement of agriculture is research and development. In order to have sustainable research, there is need to recruit and retain good scientists. The committee recommends that government address the issues of improving the remuneration of these scientists so that good scientists can be recruited and retained in this vital sector.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, it should be noted that the theme of this year’s budget is enhancing economic growth and household incomes through increased production and productivity. It is needless to say that agriculture is the main source of employment with over 80 percent of the population depending primarily on it for its livelihood.  However, with a decline in the funding, the sector may not be able to achieve its planned activities this financial year.

As already noted, the share of the agricultural sector in the national budget has dropped from four percent from last year to 3.5 in this financial year of 2006/07. Nonetheless, the committee would like to request this House to consider the budget as indicated below:

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture: Shs 63,850,312,700 
•	The total recurrent expenditure is Shs 7,938,177,000.  
•	Non-wage recurrent expenditure is Shs 5,530,000,000 (excluding arrears).  
•	Wage recurrent expenditure is Shs 2,408,177,000. 
•	Domestic development expenditure is Shs 7,076,000,000
•	Development partners’ contribution is expected to cover the balance of Shs 48,836,135,700.  

Vote 142 – NARO: Shs 25,388,920,800 of which,
•	Non-wage recurrent expenditure is Shs 2,840,000,000. 
•	Development partners’ contribution will be Shs 5,348,920,800 
•	Domestic development expenditure Shs  17,200,000,000.

Vote 152 – NAADS: Shs 9,809,020,000 of which,
•	Non-wage recurrent expenditure is Shs 4,459,020,000. 
•	Domestic development expenditure is Shs 5,350,000,000.  

Vote 155 – Cotton Development Organisation. This is a new vote: Shs 1,200,000,000 for recurrent expenditure.  

Vote 160 – Uganda Coffee Development Authority Shs 577,000,000 (recurrent expenditure).  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be adopted. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report.   

11.05
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Beti Kamya): Mr Speaker, I am privileged to present to this House the Opposition’s policy statement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF).  Also at the same time, to present to this House, but more important through this House to the voter, the Opposition’s sector policy which we are sure is better suited to lead this country out of chronic poverty, disease and ignorance that are the hallmark of the NRM government.
  
First, we must thank the Minister of Agriculture for presenting what we believe is government’s best. Although unfortunately looking at it, this best is not likely to drive Uganda to achieve the broad objectives of PMA to increase household incomes, food security and employment.
  
Five Members of the Opposition, including myself, sit on the committee of MAAIF and we fully participated in scrutinising the ministerial policy statement. Our committee’s able chairman who has just presented the report presented a fair view of what transpired during our sittings, but we need it to be known that we were scrutinising government policy, which draws its strength and mandate from the President’s manifesto. Therefore, we did not think it was adequate forum for us to present and to push the opposition’s alternative policy, especially where we significantly differ from that of government.  

The purpose of this presentation, therefore, is to fulfil our mandate and obligation to table alternative policies in the management of this country. We are confident that we shall show this House and the world at large that the opposition is more compassionate about the plight of the 38 per cent Ugandans who live in chronic and abject poverty, basically because of poor, inconsistent and unresearched government policies. The opposition has better alternatives.

Mr Speaker, we will take you through the highlights of government policies. We looked at the mission statement as was read by our able chairperson. We also looked at the policy objectives as laid out in the policy statement. It was on the basis of these objectives that we looked at the priorities for funding that were set by government during this financial year. The opposition generally supports these objectives although we would emphasise them differently and tie them to specified targets, defined performance indicators and monitorable period.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we note a lack of consistency in planning and targeting by government. It must be amply recognised and emphasised by the NRM government that agricultural development is a slow and often painful process that can only achieve results through consistency, patience and long-term commitment to clearly defined goals, targets and objectives. This reality unfortunately, is not reflected in constant shift in policy positions by this government and the total lack of concern for continuity. To be able to understand this statement, we need to look at the sector objectives for the FY 2005/06. These are laid down for those of you who have my document on page 3 – [Hon. Members: “We don’t have copies.”] - Oh, I am sorry about that. I thought they were distributed. I am sorry, as hon. Bikwasizehi said, there was a breakdown in the facilities of Parliament. However, I assumed that we had enough copies for all of you, honourable members. They will be availed to you in the course of my presentation. On page 3, for those of you who take notice -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that you just highlight the main features of your report. When they get copies later, they will study the document on their own. Just give us the highlights.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The sector objectives and the priorities for funding of 2005/06 are on page 3.  Nowhere in the 2006/07-budget proposal, do we read a statement on the extent to which the sector objectives of 2005/06 were achieved. What MAAIF report as achievement of objectives is a report of activities in the ministry’s work plan. This is certainly not an achievement of the ministry’s objectives. 

For instance, some of the achievements reported are: servicing and repairing of staff vehicles, paying of due salaries, procured services and repaired vehicles, which is repeated, I suppose, for emphasis. Mr Speaker, how can all that be reported as achievements against the objectives of increased productivity in agriculture, food security and integrated support to farmer groups! 

I am aware that arising out of our discussion during the Public Service and Local Government Committee report, most Members in this House believed that the format provided by the Minister of Finance does not require them to provide an assessment of the achievements of sector objectives. However, that is not correct because under Section 6 (2) of the Budget Act, a policy statement must reflect the extent of the achievement of the objectives.

Honourable members, Uganda’s tax payer expects to know from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries whether after spending their hard earned Shs 148.84 billion last year, agricultural productivity and food security increased, whether community information system is in place and whether metrological services have been strengthened. That is what they paid the Shs 148 billion for and those were the sector objectives of the year 2005/06.

In the opposition, we had great difficulty understanding what the NRM government means by the word “achievement”. This is because more than half of the ministry’s policy document contains a long list, as hon. Bikwasizehi listed from page 5 up to page 11, of what they termed as objectives of the year 2005/06. At the end of it all, they conclude that the sector grew only by 0.4 per cent crashing from a growth of 4 per cent the previous year. We, in the opposition, assert that a government that cannot distinguish between an objective and an activity to achieve that objective has no business being in government. (Applause)

We looked at land use and as was emphasised by my honourable chairman, it is now common knowledge that the agricultural sector employs 80 per cent of Uganda’s labour.  However, this contributes only 31 per cent of GDP. Clearly, this is a disincentive to production, rendering 9.5 million Ugandans to live in abject poverty. In the 1960s, Uganda registered very rapid economic growth, the basis of which was well attended-to agricultural sector. The sector Often got as much as 20 to 26 per cent of the national economy.  This situation is no more and in the past 10 years, the sector has been receiving about 3 per cent of the national budget, sometimes a quarter of which has never even been dispersed. 

Mr Speaker, looking around the world in other countries, those that are close to Uganda like Ghana employee 60 per cent of their population in agriculture and the sector produces 37 per cent of their GDP. A country like Brazil, which produces the world’s most coffee and cassava, one would imagine that most of their population is employed in agriculture. However, only 20 per cent of the population of Brazil is employed in agriculture and generates that 7 per cent of that country’s GDP. 

High-income countries, like the United States and Belgium employ only 1.5 per cent of their population in agriculture and the sector in turn produces or generates only 1.5 per cent of GDP. Clearly, there is a direct relationship between the number of people employed on the land and the wealth or in the case of Uganda the poverty of a nation, and for obvious reasons. Mr Speaker, we ask ourselves, where is the government long-term plan to get pressure of the predictably diminishing land whose returns anyway the world over is very low?

We looked at the budget and we were mainly concerned about the concept of value for money.  Under Section 2(3) of the Budget Act, a ministerial policy statement is required, among other things, to show whether policy objectives are short-term, that is, by the end of the financial year, mid-term or long-term, the purpose of which is to enable the monitoring and evaluation of the performance against set targets. It was not possible to establish using MAAIF’s ministerial policy statement of 2005/06 the degree of achievement of the objectives of the previous year because they did not have a time line as required under the Budget Act. We can, therefore, only assume that the objectives were not achieved basing on the reported sectoral growth of 0.4 per cent.

Similarly, under Section 3 of the Budget Act, the ministerial policy statement is required to show what has been achieved or not achieved during the previous year. We have received a revenue and expenditure omnibus report during our committee.  We saw an omnibus report of revenue and expenditure, but as we all know, omnibus business lacks precision, transparency and is a smoke screen for corruption. It was, therefore, not possible to establish under this report whether the taxpayer received value for money under MAAIF during the financial year 2005/2006.

Mr Speaker, the first budget of the NRM party is very revealing. Of the locally generated revenue, Agriculture, which provides livelihood to 80 per cent Ugandans, was allocated only 0.58 per cent; Water and Environment got one per cent; Health got 1.6 per cent; while State House and President’s Office got 6.2 per cent and Defence a whooping 13 per cent. This means that while the NRM government’s priorities of Defence and State House are guaranteed against any disruption by local revenue, poor agriculture is flippantly left to the whims of the donors and this situation is not acceptable.

MAAIF is confident that if during the financial year 2006/07 they get a budget allocation of 146.58 billion, amounting to 3.5 of the national budget, the sector will achieve its set objectives.

In addition, growth in the agricultural sector was reported to be only 0.4 per cent during the previous year, having dropped from four per cent the previous year. The question I want to pose to this House is, how will 3.5 per cent of the budget lift the sector from last year’s 0.4 per cent growth when four per cent of the previous year’s budget sent the sector crashing from four per cent growth to 0.4 per cent growth? 

Mr Speaker, during the budget speech, this House was informed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the lower than expected growth during 2005/2006 was due to the energy crisis that wreaked havoc in this country, and that sounds like a reasonable explanation.  Except, that agriculture is the sector that least uses energy. Does this House realise that had it not been for the influence of the poor performance of the agricultural sector, the national growth rate would have been much higher than 5.3 per cent that was reported?
  
In the case of cotton whose production dropped from 258,000 bales in 2004/2005 to 102,000 bales last year, MAAIF reported prolonged drought and poor prices as the cause of the poor crop performance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I had requested you to really summarise your statement, but it seems you are reading.

MS KAMYA: I am not reading, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am following you.

MS KAMYA: I will summarise. Mr Speaker, I beg you to realise, I know that you do, that 80 per cent of the population of this country are desperately listening to me to understand how they will get out of this. I beg you to understand that the agricultural sector is the main sector and allow me a little more time, but I will not take more time than necessary.

THE SPEAKER: But do not read. I think you can summarise the highlights. Otherwise, with the constraint we have as I explained yesterday, if you have to read this document word by word, it may not be possible.  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I beg for your indulgence because we recognise that we did not have enough time and we agreed that we would have four sectors presented. Among them is agriculture. Therefore, we beg for the indulgence of this House. There are many other sectors where we will make summary statements the way we did yesterday and the House can proceed.

THE SPEAKER: No. We appreciate the importance of this sector but you can summarise. I know she is capable of doing that. So, please do that.

MS KAMYA: I will summarise, Mr Speaker. I am on Page 8, of 12 pages and I assure you I am going to summarise them. In the spirit of wishing to summarise, I will turn to the opposition’s alternative policies. Within the above context, in order to increase household incomes through agricultural output and productivity, the opposition proposes the following policies:

The medium term goal:

The opposition would like to set agricultural policies that will increase per capita income of this country from the current US$350 to US$1,000 and reduce the level of poverty from the current 38 per cent to 20 per cent over a period of ten years.  

The opposition believes that the challenge facing the agricultural sector and through it, 80 per cent of the population of Uganda who depend on agriculture demands critical re-examination of the government’s commitment. We propose an urgent review of funding commitment to the sector and that of the existing policies, goals and strategies. 

We looked at the land use and recognised the intricate and inseparable link between land and the well being of peasants and rural communities.  Accordingly, we would like to see initiated transformation in the use of land through a national land use policy and legislation that will encourage people to ease pressure of land by promoting rationalised settlements, land tilting, environmental improvement as well as long term renting or re-leasing of the land. 

The opposition demands a comprehensive review of the current PMA to make it a truly focused sectoral plan rather than a framework. We would like to have clear goals, targets and identified priorities. 

Agriculture in development: 

The opposition recognises that in the immediate future, Ugandans must embrace agriculture, as the country’s engine of growth. Agricultural development is critical for rural transformation. We, therefore, urge government to identify farming development models for various agro-ecologies and socio-economic situations and set transformation goals and targets for each specific model.  

On enhanced production, the opposition will press for measures to drastically increase the production and quality of traditional crops like coffee, cotton and others. I have already given you an example of Brazil but there are many examples coming out of Brazil. For instance, being the world’s biggest producer of cassava, they have legislation, which requires that at least 20 percent of cassava flour be used in the production of bread. What support did MAAIF give to the millet bread initiative and why did government impose tax on beer made from local sorghum? We need to promote the use of agricultural produce in our every lives in a modernised manner.

Pests and Disease Control: 

With 3 million herds of cattle, Botswana earns US$200 million per year from export of beef and dairy products. Tanzania with 12 million herds of cattle earns about US$100 million and from the same trade Kenya with 19 million herds of cattle earns about US$ 150 million annually. Uganda on the other hand, with 7 million herds of cattle earns zero from this sector out of exports because the animals and their products are diseased. Therefore, they are banned from the international market including Rwanda, which used to import Uganda’s milk. 

Clearly, something is wrong with the priorities of the NRM government because they know all this but they just do very little to promote and exploit it. We in the opposition will fight to ensure that government funds the livestock sector adequately, builds national capacity and competence for severance and control of pests, develops a more vigorous regulatory machinery and many others. 

In the interest of time, you will find the details in the document, which I will lay on this Table.  The opposition recognises the risks of bad weather, unpredictable world commodity prices and the extent to which these factors undermine agricultural development. We wish to see instituted measures to protect farm prices through crop insurance commodity markets, cooperative unions, national food and commodity reserves, warehouse reseed systems and other price-risk managing mechanisms.

Food security: 

To address the national shame of food insecurity in a land of high agricultural potential, the opposition vigorously advocates for the support efforts to develop a national food security strategy in line with the objectives of the Constitution. We must pursue regional trade policies that promote local food production and export and we must promote formation of national commodity-based organisations that could federate into regional umbrellas in East Africa in order to benefit from NEPART facilities. 

The opposition would like to see urgently put in place policies at a savings programme to promote the saving and investment culture among Ugandans as well as launch a national campaign to transform the mindset of Ugandans currently poisoned by the Movement’s monocracy and free money gift to all ideology towards hard work, honesty, patience and commitment to long term development as critical pre-conditions for transformation. 

Mr Speaker, I have only three minutes to retire. It cannot be over emphasised once again that this country depends on agriculture yet the sector continuously receives the least attention from government in terms of funding. As a consequence, the sector recorded the least growth of 0.4 per cent, which literally translated means that while 20 percent of Ugandan’s population grew at 5.3 per cent, 80 per cent of the people of Uganda just slipped back into poverty from the rate of 4 per cent to the rate of 0.4 per cent last year even before calculating the 4 per cent annual population growth. These statistics scream no equity and must be corrected, but only the innovative progressive and compassionate policies of the opposition can do this.  

In conclusion, yesterday in this House I decried people being happy and prepared to live with poor performance as in the case last year. I have listened to my colleague the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture crying and crying things and then at the end of the day he proposes that we pass this budget as was presented, which will do very little to address the issues that he raised here. 

The opposition strongly objects to the passing of this budget in its present form on grounds that it will not address the real needs of the 80 per cent of the people of Uganda. If Shs 1408.85 billion allocated last year managed to crash from a growth of 4 percent to 0.4 percent, Shs 146.5 billion allocated this year will do even worse. Therefore, let us not pass this budget in this form. Let us prove that we are in charge of the national budget. Let us all insist that government allocates a minimum of 10 percent of the national budget to this sector in tandem with the Maputo protocol or show cause why this is impossible. 

If this honourable House found it convincing to approve an expenditure of Shs 101 billion for State House and President’s Office last year, this House should find it convincing to allocate the most important sector, that provides for the livelihood of 80 percent of Ugandans, 10 percent of this budget. 

Honourable members, I appeal to your sense of duty and love for your constituents not to turn the budget exercise into a mere formality but into a great opportunity to achieve the best bargain for our people. I lay on the Table the opposition’s alternative policy for the sake of One Uganda One people, truth and justice, peace, unity, reconciliation and justice for all. (Laughter) I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Agriculture on the opposition side. Having heard the opposition’s side, we shall accept some few contributions and see how we proceed.

11.36
MR JOHN ARIMPA KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the shadow minister. I have a problem with recommendation number four, regarding the return of the water for production from the Ministry of Water and Environment. I think this issue should be critically looked at. The ministry or the department in charge of planning, management and supply of water should house this water. Otherwise, the Minister of Industry will recommend that water for industry goes to the Ministry of Industry. Water for health will go to the Ministry of Health. 

Therefore, my proposal is that water should be left with the ministry in charge of water for its planning, management and supply. I know the ministry is concerned about water for irrigation and water for animals. These people will produce in bulk and then you can carry on with your irrigation activities. The ministry will not irrigate but you will do the irrigation. I thought that recommendation has a problem and has got to be looked at. 

I would like to thank the ministry for responding to the problem of FMD. In Mbarara District, we have so far received 31,000 doses. I thank them very much. However, I would also like to request for more because out of the 120,000 doses which we need for the animals in Mbarara District, we have received only 31,000. This is good but we need more if we are to control FMD.

Lastly, I remind the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that the biggest resource they use is land. One of the biggest problems we have in this country is total degradation of land. Therefore, in addition to all the activities you are doing, you should incorporate conservation of land. You should strengthen tree planting, discourage people from cropping up to the river banks. You should take an interest in the management of the degraded lands because the biggest asset you use is land. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.39
MR KATENDE SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I would like to thank the Minister of MAAIF and the Committee on Agriculture, as well as the shadow minister for the submissions made on the policy statement on agriculture. I have only three comments. I am concerned about the rate of the rolling out of NAADS. As we may all be aware, NAADS is responsible for giving out extension services to the farmers and there is not a single district in Uganda - if you think of Kampala, which does not need these services, you can imagine that this programme started more than five years ago. There are districts where NAADS has had many achievements. For instance, in Soroti productivity and marketing services have increased through the activities of NAADS. However, there are districts like Kiboga who have never had an opportunity of accessing this programme. 

In addition, this rural development scheme will depend so much on agricultural activities, with a lot of input from NAADS. The good suggestion from the committee is that we should go on rolling within the districts, which have those activities to cover the sub-counties. However, that denies the other districts an opportunity, like Kiboga, which do not have even one sub-county considered. NAADS is one of the areas, which require more funding. One could even equate it to the energy crisis because even if you had energy for agro-processing without the actual agricultural production in some of the districts, then it would not make sense. I know the resource envelope is limited but all efforts should be made to see that NAADS programme rolls out to as many districts as possible. 

Concerning NARO, the technology on production comes out of NARO so that NAADS takes them to the clients. However, I note that last year the Seventh Parliament passed the Act on NAADS, which means that other than the public funded NARO, which we had before last year, NARO now operates at the levels of public and private research universities. This means that the activities are now going to spread even to more areas of operation and even the programmes are going to increase. I note that on page 14 of the budget, NARO’s budget has stagnated between 2005 and 2006 at Shs 25 billion and yet in addition to those research activities, there is a new area of competitive research grants, which have to be shared out between those institutions of public and private universities. 

I wonder whether the minister is able to guarantee or to assure us that a total of Shs 70 billion expected from the donors will meet the requirements on the competitive research grants, as well as the other research and development activities which are at the national and zonal research institutes. There are six national research institutes, the public funded NARO and seven zonal research institutes in addition to the requirements from universities for these research funds.

Lastly, my comment is on the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO). I note that in the table on page 14, CDO is getting only Shs 1.2 billion and yet there is a large requirement for seed planting.  I request that Shs 4.5 billion supplement be passed because without that, cotton will not get seeds. Yet there was a drop in the production as it is seen from 204,000 bales to 102,000 bales this year. However, I would like to note that the drop in the production of cotton was mainly due to drought and therefore, the suggestions on availing water for irrigation is really very important.  

Another area where CDO could be helped in helping the firm to get prices would be for the relevant ministries like that of trade to exploit the potentials of value addition rather than selling our lint in raw form. Considering cottage industries, spinning and textile manufacturing would help to plough back some of the outcomes into the price fund.  

Finally, I thank the committee for the work done and the Minister of Agriculture. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.45
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for presenting this wonderful report, which is in line with the NRM manifesto of “bonna bagaggawale.”  In particular, I thank the committee for having recommended the rolling out of NAADS in districts where they are operating, because that has been affecting me. NAADS is in Kabarole and yet in my constituency, they are operating in only one division, where they have really done very well. 

I would like to focus on the commercialising of agriculture. I should have anticipated seeing a relationship between the Ministry of Agriculture and that one of Micro Finance. This is because a lot of money has been earmarked per sub-county, which is about Shs 50 million for micro-finance. I am sure agriculture is one of the key sectors where our peasants are going to benefit from, using this money. 

Districts carried out what they call geo-ecological zoning for agricultural merchandise, showing which agricultural merchandise could survive in which area. This was a very good arrangement, although those of us in municipalities have a problem of land. All the same, we do not despair because there are some agricultural enterprises, which we could still carry out on a small piece of land and get some reasonable profits. For instance, in Fort Portal Municipality we were advised by the NAADS team to carry out agricultural merchandise like fruit growing, poultry, piggery and zero grazing. These are projects, which can be accommodated on small pieces of land.  

I recently attended a function in Makerere University where a new degree programme was being launched. This is Bachelor of Science in Land Use and Agricultural Productivity Management. I perused through their electives and cores and I did not see that bit of micro-finance and agricultural productivity. I remember advising the coordinator of that programme Dr Twaha to include this very important aspect of micro-finance and agricultural productivity. I even requested him to scale down that programme so that maybe they could offer it at lower levels, including certificate for our peasants so that they really get that idea of micro-finance and improve their agricultural productivity.  

Another important issue is phasing out the traditional extension services and replacing them with NAADS. I will need some clarification from the minister. I understand this NAADS has duration and a life span. What happens when NAADS phases out completely? What will be the fate of the extension service worker after that time? Otherwise, I would like to suggest that the traditional extension service is somehow integrated within the NAADS activities so that when NAADS phases out eventually the traditional extension service takes over the work of NAADS.

Finally, I would like to thank the shadow minister for agriculture for the very extensive report she has given. However, I get a bit disturbed because a doctor should diagnose and then treat. You do not diagnose and leave the patient to die. It is a good report for it has pointed out some salient issues, but it has not given us the way forward. When I look at it closely, it is really in line with our vision in NRM “Prosperity for All.” It is in line with that but she only needs to be patient until we are there. 

We do not have to skip ladders. We are Ugandans and we have lived here. We know where NRM got this country from and we should really not be so much of pessimists. For instance, on page 4 of her report she says government cannot distinguish between an objective and an activity. She seems to suggest that our government has no business and government should not even be in place to run the affairs of this country. I think this is just generalising and it is not for the good of this country.

Otherwise, I thank her for that report and call upon her to continue giving us the way forward and joining government efforts in improving the household incomes of our people as we offer everlasting solution to the poverty in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.50
CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise on three points. My first concern is on irrigation. I would like to combine it with technical development related to agriculture production. The biggest problem, which I see in the agricultural sector and in many other sectors in this government, is that we lack linkages. The report does not show the linkage between agriculture and other departments like marketing and cooperative and water for production. 

Much as we say let water come to the Ministry of Agriculture, we do not see any serious plan that they have in the department of agriculture to utilise the water. Deriving my argument from the point of linkages, we need to look at irrigation on a small basis for households. 

In 1994, when I worked as a field officer of gravity water in Kabale District, we ran a very expensive irrigation project in Mparo where the whole community was served with water. It was a very successful experience. Yet, we do not have even a small project of that nature anywhere in this country. If it existed, it could be by the untrained agriculturalist of our countryside.  

Mr Speaker, the other point I would like to raise is about lack of development of appropriate technology for the agricultural sector. Today, when you travel along our roads, you meet big lorries carrying matooke, milk, cows and many other items to Kampala. This reduces employment and is burdensome. We should have a relationship where we are processing up to some minimum level at the point of production so that the milk in Mbarara could be transported when it is already transformed. 

Carrying these hooves and horns to be thrown here in Kampala should be done away with, just as carrying all these banana peelings to Kampala when we actually need the manure back in the production areas.  Therefore, I think we should look at that aspect so that we improve on the quality hence addressing the issues of “bonna bagaggawale”. 

When I look at objective number one on the first page, it only talks of the poor farmers but agriculture must bend on the rich farmers who have had a lot of experience and investments. Therefore, we need to have a linkage between the poor and the rich farmers. In the recent past, we have been listening to investments like Metha in Jinja whom we are giving more land. 

We also talk about Bidco in these areas. All these should be willing to help the poor up coming farmers. I think I would be happy to see a linkage between those successful manufacturing farmers and the private sector for the other lower cadre farmers to transform themselves especially getting from the indirect services.

Mr Speaker, the other point I would like to raise is crop diseases.  This country is ravaged by many crop diseases and nobody seems concerned. They were mentioned in the report but I know we have many officers both political and in the civil service sitting idle. I think we have a department of disease surveillance in the Ministry of Education. One time, while meeting the president, I mentioned that maybe we could be under a biological attack because the rate at which these diseases are inflicting our precious crops is alarming. I suggest that we find ways of stopping the transportation of diseased crops so that the control is effected.

I am concerned about the way the objectives are presented. It has been raised through all the reports and definitely in the first case we are told that the format is like this.  I would propose that the format of reporting to this honourable House be changed. Unless we change, we are not going to have a report in this form that gives us the specific, measurable indicators against targets. Therefore, I propose that we introduce at least two sheets that are reported in the form of a logical framework, which has the capacity to show us all the reporting that is SMART. 

One more important point is that, we have made many recommendations on all reports but we do not go ahead to make the necessary financial adjustments to fit our recommendations. We make recommendations and yet pass the budget the way it was presented.  How do we cater for those recommendations that we make in the budget? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the problem of passing the budget as presented involves a constitutional aspect. As Members of Parliament, you lament about inadequacies of funds given but when we made the Budget Act and put different stages of budgeting, the first stage was in April to May. That is when we made recommendations to the President or the Minister of Finance for changes. If he does not take the recommendation, then it is too bad. At this stage, the committee cannot say, “Now, cut from State House and give Works.” There is a constitutional hurdle. 

It is a good idea and maybe we have to change the Constitution so that we address that issue. Therefore, other than lamenting, there is nothing we can do. Otherwise, if we do not pass the budget we are saying, “Even the aspirin which you have, do not give that patient because we do not have enough medicine” and yet we may survive on that aspirin until such a time when we get a better medication. 

Therefore, even if the committee said, “No. Increase the money or don’t” the Constitution would not allow that.
 
11.58
MR CHARLES OJOK OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for presenting a fairly well analysed report as well as the shadow minister of agriculture for having agreed openly that most of the committee issues as raised were a true and a fair reflection of what transpired in the committee proceedings. Apart from the obvious radical position that she has presented to the House, I thank her.  

I would like to seek some clarification from the minister in connection to the vaccines. I am also happy to note that the committee in its report has rightly observed that both the livestock and the crop sectors are threatened by disease in this country. It is against that background that I would like to seek clarification from the minister in connection with the vaccine, for example, for Rabies or FMD. What I understood from the district where I come from (Katakwi) is that, the ministry supplies some of the vaccines to the districts but on cost recovery basis. 

I seek clarification from the minister on what vaccines they supply under that arrangement and what the charges are to the farmers? This is because my experience is that, there is a bit of resistance from the farmers on the amount of the money that is required by the veterinary officers after vaccinating the animals.  

I have two other observations to make, Mr Speaker. I am equally concerned just as the committee has observed on the encroachment of the land of the Ministry of Agriculture. They have mentioned the land at Entebbe where their vital infrastructure is located. However, I would like to observe that yesterday we the Members of the National Economy Committee were in Entebbe on an official visit and the Civil Aviation Authority raised this same issue of land. They are thoroughly convinced that the ministry should begin to consider other options concerning where to place some of the investments or infrastructure that they would wish to have in that place. This is so that the land at Entebbe can be given to the Civil Aviation Authority. As a matter of fact, they are currently undertaking an expansion programme specifically to accommodate CHOGM as well as prepare for the future strategic importance of the airport in the country.

Lastly, the committee has observed that they would like emergency funds to be availed to the ministry. I am just wondering about this because a lot of issues have been raised as regards the meagre allocation of resources within the budget for agriculture. I am surprised that we want to ask for emergency funds for the Ministry of Agriculture, yet in the first place my understanding of emergency funds would be as a result of an outbreak or disaster that has struck the livestock or the crop sector. 

In which case, therefore, it would be very difficult just for Minister of Finance to get some money and let it lie in the Ministry of Agriculture. I would rather that we allow this emergency money to lie in the Ministry of Finance. In case there is due need, then the Ministry of Finance will respectively be asked to avail the funds.  

With those comments, I would like to commend the committee’s report and support that this House approves the budget. Thank you.  

12.04
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am really disappointed because from the report of this ministry, we ought to realise that agriculture in this country is in a crisis and it should be handled that way. However, the way the report has come out does not indicate this degree of urgency. Mention is made of crop and animal diseases but you do not see an urgent move to handle them as a matter of crisis. It appears this country has given up on small-scale farmers although we believe they are still the backbone of this country’s economy.  

You do not see this budget helping the small farmer to come up and produce for export because actually this farmer is the real investor who is going to help this economy improve. However, I do not see it coming out here. It appears that we look at the budget, pass it and think things will work themselves out.

As a person who comes from Masaka and who has economic activities in Wakiso and Mpigi Districts, I do not see myself in this year’s agricultural budget. Masaka is the biggest producer of coffee but nothing is provided for the development of coffee. One of the most interesting things I have found in this report, as regards Masaka, is on page 6(t). 19 hectares of abandoned tea gardens were rehabilitated; 12 hectares in Masaka and seven in Mubende. I am ashamed that we feel like mentioning this in this Parliament when this country has so many estates and we mention only 19 hectares.  

Surely, no mention is made of coffee. As regards coffee, Masaka is the biggest producer. We talk about nine wet processing machines, which have been installed but none in Masaka.  

On the next page, 20,000 certified organic coffee farmers have been registered. Of course, thanks be to God but only in Bushenyi, Nebbi and Kapchorwa with nothing in Masaka. Why are you encouraging the people of Masaka to produce coffee if you are not going to help them out with it and this can be said of Mpigi, Mukono and other districts as well? It appears we have abandoned supporting agriculture as an item with export potential. 

Finally, why doesn’t this country export beef?  Why don’t we work towards that? Shall we continue producing meat just for our consumption and be satisfied with that? Surely, we should do something about agriculture as an economic aspect and something that we want to encourage to help everybody develop. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.08
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): I have a problem that I would like to be addressed by the minister concerned. I always marvel when prices of items are being determined by the forces of demand and supply like coffee, vanilla and milk. However, I am wondering why government normally has a hand in determining the price of cotton. Can the minister concerned explain this? 

Secondly, I wonder what the minister who drew this budget had in mind because having realised that Shs 148 billion did not help us, he goes ahead to give a further Shs 146 billion. What factors does he hope to change so that this Shs 146 billion will help improve the economy through agriculture?  Thank you very much.

12.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2004/05, there was provided to this House information to the effect that Ministry of Agriculture was going to modernise landing sites. Three of the landing sites due for modernisation were actually in my constituency; that is Mulondo, Bugondo and Kagwara. Three years down the road, those landing sites are worse off and unfortunately money had been allocated to this exercise. I would like to know what happened to the commitment and the money that was allocated for the modernisation of landing sites. 

I expected new structures on those landing sites but what I see now is not the new modern structures but more activity in terms of chasing the local fishermen from those landing sites. They are always arrested and ferried and I do not even know who is in charge of the business on the lake. You see these people being ferried as far as Kamuli then Members of Parliament are called to talk to the police and have these people released. 

I also thought that with the modernisation of landing sites, there would have been a component and indeed last financial year the minister told us on the Floor that there would be a plan to help develop the capacity of the fishing community and at that time we were very concerned about mugongo wazi. We were saying that all the fish is being taken somewhere and people no longer have fish to feed their children. As a result, they do not get intelligent children like myself. You know those days we were brought up eating fish. 

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, there has not been any activity, and indeed when the shadow minister for agriculture talks about discontinuity, I see the discontinuity here. I had expected that this report from the committee would have brought on board information concerning where the money went, what is being done and what problems we have had in the modernisation of the landing facilities. It is a pity this is not visible here and I hope that somebody probably the ministry will be able to help us.

I come from a district that is really praised in terms of the success of NAADS and it is true that we have NAADS in Soroti District. However, I think what we need to concern ourselves with is clarity. Where do you draw the line between NAADS and the traditional extension services? There seems to be a lot of confusion as the very people, who should have been giving the farmers traditional extension services, under the traditional extension arrangement, are the very ones who have formulated the companies that we now pay and get services from. 

Besides that, as a community in Soroti, it seems that a lot of money goes into monitoring under NAADS than actually the provision of services to the people. I will give you an example. There is a farmer in Soroti who is visited year in year out. If you find Pajeros parked in front of this man’s citrus farm, you would really wonder how much the Ministry of Agriculture has put into developing this farmer. Unfortunately or fortunately, this was a farmer who existed even before NAADS. Also when you look at the plots whose improvement is attributed to NAADS, some of them are the size of this hall yet still Ministry of Agriculture has the guts to send five Pajeros to monitor a groundnut plot this size. 

We have argued that instead of spending so much money on monitoring, since farmers have an idea of improved seeds and practices, why don’t we inject capital so that these people are able to acquire improved tools and better seeds? This is because the cost of monitoring is 100 times more than what we actually see there.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there has been a comment by the committee chairperson to do with traditional inputs. We are still concerned and it is a very big concern to the agricultural communities in the Lango, Teso and Acholi sub-region who have been depending a lot on agricultural inputs produced by a company called CYMCO, which used to be housed in Soroti. Unfortunately, CYMCO was sold off during privatisation. We asked government to give us a fall back position but up to now nobody knows whether we will continue to have those agricultural inputs. I would appreciate it if government came clear on this matter so that together we are committed to improving agriculture in this country.  Thank you.

12.16
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Mr Speaker, in all multi-party parliaments, there are issues, which are by partisan, and when it comes to debating these issues, Members of the parties across the divide talk with one common position. I believe that the issue we are debating now is one such issue. Whether you are Movement, Opposition or Independent like me, I think the issues pertaining to agriculture are so dear to the majority of our people that this Parliament must speak with a common voice and must be seen to act. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I think we must overcome fear. How come the honourable Minister of Defence is so fearful? I think we must overcome fear and call government to order because during the entire post independence period, the National Resistance Movement is the only government that has given agriculture the least budget allocation. Even the government of Idi Amin Dada did a tremendous job in as far as providing for agriculture and improving the lives and conditions of our farmers is concerned.  

Mr Speaker, by the statistics which have been given and which have been confirmed by the chairman of the Agriculture Committee and by the opposition shadow minister on agriculture, it is very clear that we have seen a decline of funding in agriculture. It is also clear that the country’s spending priorities are misplaced, and I think that this Parliament should help government and the President to refocus expenditure on those social and economic sectors which can stimulate productivity for the majority of our people.  

Mr Speaker, I am wondering what has happened to the programme for the mechanisation of agriculture? What has happened to the projects of production exports? What has happened to all moves to revamp the cooperative movement that was destroyed by the National Resistance Movement?

Mr Speaker, I have heard somebody talking about bonna bagaggawale. I think there is no better way of implementing this programme than spending more on the sector in which 80 percent of the people depend. Bonna bagaggawale does not mean money gifts to the population. I think it is about strategic spending in those sectors that affect the majority of our people, and I think it is in the interest of the opposition and in the interest of Movement MPs to hit the goal of the shadow minister of agriculture. For the first time in the history of this Parliament we should revise the budget allocations for the Ministry of Agriculture.  

Mr Speaker, even if it means bending the law we should do it for the majority of our people, after all was it not this Parliament that bent the rules for the sake of one man having several bisanja? We can do this for the majority of our people and I think, Mr Speaker, you can guide us on how we can go about this constitutional hurdle and jump it. Bend the law for the sake of 80 percent of our people! We need to have reallocation for this strategic and very important ministry. I want to thank you.   

12.21
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report of the Committee of Agriculture is a record of Parliament and, therefore, it would be important that its contents reflect the thoughts of Parliament. On Page 4, concerning NAADS, there is a table of budget outturns where Shs 24.75 billion is said to have been excluding donor contribution. The fact of the matter is that, NAADS is actually supported nearly wholly by donors, except that the donor funding goes as PAF budget support.  

It is important for us to acknowledge this fact and not to misrepresent it as if the donors are doing nothing. In fact, there is a donor group on NAADS and they meet every year to review NAADS. I think the committee should really acknowledge that fact because if somebody gives you something, you should acknowledge it.

On Page 7 it is said that 85 percent of NARO crop research outputs are used by NAADS and NGOs. I think what the committee meant was that 85 percent of the technologies that NAADS and NGOs are promoting originate from NARO because there is no way you can evaluate outputs that you have not come across. I think that is probably what the committee meant.

On Page 10, concerning livestock, there is a report of 1,265 million samples of milk and milk products collected and analysed. I think the committee chair should look at the actual figures because this is not plausible under our circumstance. What that means is that, you are taking 34,000 samples every day; just think about it. Secondly, we do not have the capacity to analyse such a large number of samples. Check that figure so that the record of Parliament is correct. It also means that if you are taking 100 ml of milk for your samples, every day you are using 34 litres for analysis on milk.

My last point is on the statement of the committee on page 11. The committee noted with concern the introduction of rural development strategy, which may be a shift from MPA. Unfortunately, the committee does not explain its concern. Is it a concern to protect PMA? Because, Mr Speaker, following the last debate on MEHTA in the 7th Parliament, Parliament actually resolved that MPA be reviewed because as it is, it cannot deliver their desired goal for agricultural transformation in this country. 

When I was looking through this, Mr Speaker, I was very glad to see the Second Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kajura, coming through the door. This is because on that day, he stood up opposite where I stood and made a commitment that government would come out with a clear response on the revision of PMA. Since he is here, I hope he will get an opportunity to tell us what has been happening since the 7th Parliament. 

The committee again lamented - I just wanted to let them know that in places like Acholi, Lango, Teso and Bunyoro where there are vast pieces of land, you can actually produce many crops without hoes or even tractors. Presently, I have 300 acres of maize and I use herbicides to clear the land and plant. I would like the committee to think beyond hoes and tractors, considering that we can now use this vast land as peace is returning. Thank you very much.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of funding for NAADS, it is true that the monies that support the NAADS project are mainly from the donors. However, this money does not come directly to the project as donated money. It is brought through budget support and it should be understood that budgeted money is a total of monies from generated revenue, collected revenue, loans given to the government and from donors. Therefore, we cannot exclusively say that it is by donors. It is brought as a basket fund from the budget. Concerning the rest of the figures, we shall let you know. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.27
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, after a very hard struggle to catch your eye as it was not easy. Secondly, I must thank the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture together with his Members and the minister concerned for presenting this very elaborate report that is gearing us towards the development of this country.

I have a few comments to make especially bearing in mind that the Ministry of Agriculture has many other factors that back it especially in Uganda where we mainly depend on nature as a source of getting our results out of agriculture. I happen to be a Member on the Natural Resources Committee and I believe that in this country, agriculture mainly depends on nature. There must, therefore, be a close link with the nature of this country. 

I would love to get from the Agriculture Committee the relationship between agriculture as a sector in which over 80 percent of Ugandans depend and nature as we depend on it very much as well. I happen to have toured the meteorological department in Entebbe under the Natural Resources Committee and there were several complaints that that department is very poorly funded yet to the best of my knowledge, the department of meteorology and that of climatology contribute a lot to our agricultural results. 

Quite often, this department has misled our peasants in this country. At times they say the rains will be too little and they will come late and the following morning, the whole Uganda receives a lot of rain. This is a situation that is very paradoxical. This means that actually they do not have the proper gargets to tell us actually what to expect. On mere announcement, it might sound like a very small matter but in the entire country when one starts planting in November it is like you are planting at a loss because you know that heavy rains normally begin at the end of September and by mid October the rain peaks are so high. 

Therefore, I would have loved to hear that there is that coordination and that agriculture is very interested in this department being funded since they co-exist.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would have loved to hear that some money has been put aside for the marketing process. I will actually allude to some of the departments, organisations and banks around that have a marketing department. If they are giving out loans they have staff that go around soliciting for market. 

Much as we are producing, we should produce to market. In Uganda, we do not produce in big quantities but we still lack the marketing facilities for the little we produce. I have been Vice-Chairperson of Kasese Farmers Association for over ten years and have attended seminars on agriculture. Therefore, even though I do not belong to the Agriculture Committee, I know the problems that peasants are facing. You will say plant pineapples of this size then the following month the importers of pineapples will say no, we have very small families so we cannot buy that size of pineapples. 

We are always faced with those intricacies in marketing and I would have loved if the chairperson had provided for a fund to ensure that what we produce will be marketed. That is how we will be able to enforce and implement our manifesto of “bonna bagaggawale” which basically depends on agriculture.

Mr Speaker, I am sure that every Ugandan, especially those in the west, know that we have very energetic people who are ready to produce agriculturally. However, we have a problem of land shortage. I am not saying that Parliament has the powers to expand Uganda in terms of land as it was created once and for all unless we invaded another country, which is against the law of international human rights and security. 

However, there are certain areas especially in Kasese District where we are always scrambling over land and not only in Kasese but even in Kibaale and other parts. I would have loved to hear government taking a position on how we can utilise these energetic and ready to produce people who are landless. I think what can legally hinder Parliament is only to change a man into a woman and vice versa but for the rest we can do it as Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

12.35
MS GRACE TUBWITA BAGAYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the committee for the report. I rise on the point of the ministry’s plan for construction of ten fish landing sites. This issue has been raised for a long time and even in 2003, I remember Rwampanga was one of the landing sites that were going to be constructed. Up to today, nothing has taken place. 

Another issue is that, I do not know whether the ministry is aware that there are some people who are always on the lakeside intimidating the fishermen. They always call themselves Wembley officers and they go there and confiscate their fish saying that they are catching immature fish. Their whereabouts are not known, but they really intimidate these fishermen.

Another issue that I am concerned about is the fishnets that are used to catch the so-called immature fish. I want to find out from the ministry whether they have any way of controlling these fishnets that are on sale. Are there some control measures to make sure that the fishnets that are on sale are the ones that can be used to catch fish of standard size? It is really painful for these poor people who after catching their fish are told that that is not the required size yet the fishnets they are using are on market. I do not know whether these fishnets are made in the country or not, but they should be of standard size because these fishermen at times do not know the sizes of the fish until they have been caught.

Another issue I want to raise concerns the officers. One time I had a problem in my constituency where the fisheries officer always used to confiscate people’s fish yet when they confiscate the fish they do not burn it there and then but end up selling it somewhere else. This at one time caused a lot of riots and bloodshed in the constituency. I would like the ministry to take it up as a serious matter and ensure that we protect our people. Let substandard fishnets not be on sale and let the fisheries officers also do their work properly instead of doing it in a corrupt manner.

Also concerning the criteria used in selection of districts that benefit from the NAADS programme, it is long since Nakasongola District benefited. One time we wrote a letter requesting NAADS to come to the district but nothing has taken place. Today when I was reading the list of districts that were considered they were mostly new districts. However, Nakasongola is also a new district yet it has never been considered. What criterion is followed in selecting these districts? We need to know so that our people can be informed. Whenever they ask us we fail to answer them. 

I am happy to note that the ministry is planning to promote water for production. However, I also want to know the criterion that is going to be used in selection of the districts that will benefit from the starting phase of this programme. We have some districts that are needy and suffer a lot especially during the prolonged drought like Nakasongola District. We want to know whether these districts will benefit from the first programme.

Lastly, concerning the promotion of production for commercial purposes, we know that our people cannot use hoes to produce at a large scale. I would, therefore, suggest that government makes sure that every district gets a tractor. With this, the farmers who can afford can come and hire it at the district headquarters instead of going to another district far away. Hiring tractors in districts where farmers want to do large-scale farming is always very expensive. (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give information to the honourable member holding the Floor that just a week ago, I put an advert on our notice board informing Members that we have a source where we can buy brand new tractors at a cheap cost to help our farmers in the constituency. However, I did not get any response. I support her because when you talk of doubling agricultural production using your hands and a hoe it will not work. 

Not until we mechanise our agriculture, we will not be able to double agricultural production. I, therefore, support her and please if – for Members the cost is about Shs 35 million and yet we are borrowing money up to a tune of Shs 150 million. Why can’t we start with all Members of Parliament buying a tractor and helping our farmers? Thank you.

MS TUBWITA: I would like to thank the colleague for the information. It is good but what I am suggesting is that, government first buys and gives to the districts then Members will supplement on that. We should not take it that Members should play the role of buying these facilities thereby doing government work. I think it is better when government first plays its role then Members can just add on to what government has done. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we still have three other reports to handle. Since we are all stakeholders in this sector’s concern and I see here a list of 15 people who have made contributions, I think it is high time we got responses from the minister concerned so that we finish this report before we go for lunch and handle the other one after. We shall continue debating the workings of these ministries. 

12.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for your contributions. First, I want to thank the chairperson for the report and also the shadow minister for agriculture who is my colleague.

First of all, I want to say that both the committee and the opposition have made the same diagnosis but the problem is in the recommendations. The committee is asking government to address those anomalies and the opposition is quoting figures and is dissatisfied with the way government is moving. 

Before I handle specific questions, I would like to respond to the view of the opposition, particularly page 1, paragraph two and page 3, paragraph two because that is where the matter may be put to proper understanding. It says: “First, we must thank the Minister of Agriculture for presenting what we believe is government’s best. Although unfortunately looking at it, this best is not likely to drive Uganda to achieve the broad objectives of PMA to increase household incomes, food security, employment and promote sustainable management of natural resources.” 

If you go to page 3 it says, “It must be amply recognised and realised by the NRM government that agricultural development is a slow and often painful process that is only achieved through consistency, patience and long term commitment to clearly define objectives, goals and targets.”  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, government is trying but I think we must say that our budget is not ad hoc. We must remember that we are donor funded and as long as we still enjoy this facility, which is a result of inability to generate our money, we are sometimes forced to move at a speed that is not of our making and other times we may not choose where the money goes. 

Against this background, I would like to thank the committee and say that we have listened to all the concerns that have been raised and we are going to look into them. Also concerning the issues raised by the opposition, we are going to move forward and see what to do about them. Let me go to the specific questions and issues raised.

Hon. Kigyagi, Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality, mentioned something about water for production. This is something that government is addressing to see whether water for production is returned to where production is and the argument is whether it should go to functional management or whether to deploy resources at functional level. This all depends on whether we are looking at efficiency and effectiveness. 

When somebody sells shoes, should the same person sell socks and laces so that people do not move around wasting energy? That is another argument. I want to confidently inform members who are debating on where water for production should reside, that government is handling this and soon we shall come out with a paper.

Concerning the FMD vaccine, yesterday government responded and we want to thank Parliament for passing money for this vaccine. Unfortunately, we are receiving the vaccine in batches and that is why we have sent you 31,000 doses. Before you finish those we are going to give you more because we are receiving them every week and by so doing we shall cover the target area.

Concerning land for use, I see that we need to integrate land management and I want to tell you that we are moving very fast concerning that. (Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the minister has acknowledged the dispatch of vaccines to Mbarara but we know that this disease and many others, which require similar intervention is countrywide. May I know what amount has been sent to other districts or if not, can we get assurance that appropriate actions are being taken to dispatch similar vaccines to other districts and that measures to control other diseases are also being taken? 

This is because if the disease is only controlled in Mbarara then because of cross border movement of animals these same animals can cross to graze in another district thereby contracting the disease again. However, I appreciate the steps you are taking, as they are positive and assuring to the farmers. Thank you very much.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member. First of all, I want to say that we have not only received 31,000 doses but close to a million which we have dispatched to areas in the cattle corridors and other areas where we think there is a threat including the border with Sudan. If it is the wish of this House, at the end of the exercise, I will come and report to you how we have administered them. We are spreading and I have been interacting with most Members from the affected areas to help give me an independent report from our broken chain of command so that we can address that. 

Concerning other vaccines and disease control mechanisms, I am going to address them in my response because several Members have raised this issue. Hon. Serunjogi from Kiboga wishes that NAADS would spread to as many districts as possible. However, the ministry has a different strategy, which is that it is not wise to spread thinly and make no impact. Rather, it is wise to spread so as to make an impact without compromising efficiency and effectiveness. 

The drop in cotton production is attributed to several factors that have been captured in the policy statement and in the report. (Interruption) 

MR ROBERT KASHAIJA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. A few days ago, I was in the western region and I met a cross section of farmers who were complaining that the district veterinary officers have informed them that every farmer should pay Shs 2,500 for every animal he owns. I would like to know what that money is being paid for because I understand we approved something like Shs 4.5 billion to purchase that vaccine. I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member, but this question has been asked and I am going to respond to it. I want to go in the order of the questions so I would request Members to hold on then if there are other issues that I haven’t touched they can ask.

Mr Speaker, hon. Serunjogi raised the issue of value addition. Certainly, value addition is the way forward and we are encouraging it. Government has already capitalised UDB with Shs 20 billion to actually address issues to do with this.  

The honourable member for Fort Portal Municipality does not see a clear link between micro-finance and agriculture. We are trying to address this and the experience we have had so far is that, most banks are very reluctant to offer agricultural loans because of the first failed experience. However, government is in advanced stages of finding a way of linking micro-finance with agriculture. 

He also talked about abolishing extension workers in favour of NAADS, which is risky because NAADS is heavily donor-funded. Actually, I think you are fearful in case the donors pull out of this. We are not really abolishing extension services. Rather, we are seeking support from donors to carry out these services. If you have 20 cows and somebody gives you two more, you cannot refuse the two because an addition is always good. Government is doing everything possible to make sure that extension services are not frustrated.

Hon. Ngabirano from Rwampara mentioned the lack of linkage between agriculture and other sectors. I wish you had come out very clearly because we are working as a government. As a result, we are not isolating activities from other stakeholders and ministries that are involved in issues that are crosscutting like veterinary, agriculture and trade. We treat the animals while they take care of the game and tourism. We deal with hygiene of meat from farms while Ministry of Health deals with what transpires from the butcher until human consumption. We are working together and if you think that there is no satisfactory linkage then I welcome you to my office so that we can address the problem.  

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, on that point, I think the honourable member wanted to know how you relate with other organisations in collaboration with agriculture, for example, we have Uganda Export Promotion Council. We export agricultural produce from this country and the minister should have been able to give us a percentage of what you have exported out of this country because if you are promoting agriculture then you should know that. 

When you talk about agriculture you only mention cotton and coffee but we are talking about rural farmers and what they grow. For example, we export things like Okra, Dudi, Kalera and hot pepper, which have got markets outside this country. I thought the minister would have stressed this because these are the things that a farmer in the village can grow and within three months she earns something.  

Mr minister, when somebody asks what your relationship is with these other organisations we want to know, for example, people are growing pineapples and taking them to Dubai and Southern Sudan. When we talk about enhancing economic growth and household incomes, you know that 80 percent of the farmers in this country are in the rural areas but they are not able to grow the commercial produce that you are talking about.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, for your contribution. Through your contribution, I want to re-emphasise what I said earlier. We are working as a team and we are collecting data concerning whatever is done in other sectors. Both reports have to some extent shown the constraints and the successes but I want to assure you that we have linkages with sister organisations and much of the data that is in our policy statement is derived out of this collaboration.  

Since the issue of disease control and FMD has continuously come up, let me put it to rest. The policy of government is that, the FMD vaccine is free, CBPP vaccine is on cost sharing basis, Rabies vaccine is free and Rinder Pest vaccine is free. However, we decentralised and had a problem when we sent the first batch of vaccines to the local governments. We were not ready to facilitate the veterinary service staff to administer the vaccine so we agreed that every farmer should pay Shs 200 per animal so that we can vaccinate these animals and save this country from the catastrophe befalling the national herd. 

The Contagious Bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP) vaccine is for cost sharing but this time around we asked our donors- this is an epidemic and because of our own laxity here, we have got an influx of over 100 heads of cattle. The donors have put a restriction on the disbursement of this particular vaccine because they are the ones funding it. They allowed us to give it free and so we told the veterinary people to charge Shs 200 to recover their fuel and operational costs.

Honourable MP for youth, I would like to inform you that I don’t believe in those farmers that you say you met. I have personally been at the district headquarters and interacted with the Chairman LCV. I have also interacted with you in my private capacity outside this House and told you about the policy of government. We have even issued a press release so there is no body charging Ugshs 2500. 

However, there are some farmers who upon realising that government was delaying in delivering this vaccine took it upon them and imported it at that cost. Therefore, if you meet such farmers like for example Mulwana who did that, that might have been the cost. The government policy concerning FMD is free and we have not come to this House to present a contrary policy.

The hon. Member from Isuku also talked about vaccines and I have clarified on this. He also said we should forego the land facilities at Entebbe, forget about water and coordinate. Let me first handle the issue of the facilities at Entebbe. Our colonial masters thought it wise to put a quarantine holding ground at the airport because we deal in livestock and game reserve so any animal coming in or getting out must be observed for some time to ensure that we do not export or import diseases. Actually the rhinos you saw being offloaded have to be held there and observed by veterinary officers for a while to ascertain that they are free from disease.  

Secondly and most importantly, the site is very strategic because not only is it near the airport but it is also surrounded by water and therefore reduces the risk of any animal moving with the herds that are expected to enter the country. It is very shameful that people export cows from here and observe the milk in Kenya only to export them to South Africa as Kenyan cows when actually they came from Uganda. 

I agree with the committee therefore that if we have to shift the facilities that exist then we must quantify them first. We have a vaccine plant that costs millions of dollars, a hatchery next to none in the region, a laboratory, which costs about $ 2 million not to mention training grounds. What is very funny is that when people see grass over growing at that farm they think no activity is taking place. Let me assure members here and those who went there without our knowledge that there is activity going on.  

We have shifted from open grazing and we now have a tractor there that cuts the grass to feed the animals. This is because open grazing these huge animals compacts the soil and the grass does not grow very quickly. Actually much of the bush that you see growing is cut and made into foliage.  We have 400 animals on that bay.

I want to inform you that we are targeting to stabilise the production of milk and meat in the country. We are going to stabilise production by providing foliage during the period of scarcity and drought. We have already trained farmers in this technique and we have veterinary and production officers out there teaching farmers what to do.  We have identified seed growers in the central region who have regular rainfall and do not keep a lot of cattle. They can produce grass that can be very important to other areas, which are drought stricken.  

Hon. Kawanga said that there is a crisis that you do not see us addressing. I want to tell you that government through collaboration with some donor groups is working very hard to improve the beef industry.  If you have been observant we have started closing some of the illegal slaughterhouses that do not meet the required standards and we are telling those that are conforming to upgrade.  

As we speak we have a project where we have farmers in Kenya studying about meat handling and DANIDA is supporting us. We have already identified people to put up one abattoir here in Kampala and another one in the western region. This also goes to answer the issue of animal rights and improvement of meat quality in Uganda.

I want to assure hon. Members and others who raised issues on beef that it has been unfortunate but government is already addressing the issue of the broken chain of command that was brought about by decentralisation. We are going to decentralise our field staff so that we are not barred from international markets because the exportation of beef requires that one maintain –(Interruption)

MRS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for your presentation. These issues were raised when the sector committee was looking at the policy document for the financial year 2006/2007. However the Minister is telling us so many other things that are contained in the sector policy statement for this year. I would like to know from him how much longer we have to wait for those other promises that he is talking about. The people of Uganda want to know right now how they will be saved during this financial year. I thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Actually I am not bringing something new. If you look in the policy statement - and I am glad that the committee captured most of these issues - the programmes are there. They may not be receiving adequate funding but we are moving ahead. 

What I can confidently tell you is that we are shifting and regulating with the resources available to government and dealing with the milk and beef industry. We may not get there very fast but I want to assure you that we are on track and very soon we shall invite you so that we can share our experiences with Members of Parliament especially, the Committee on Agriculture so that we can move together without having hunches here and there.

Hon Alaso, concerning landing sites, my colleague hon. Mukisa is going to answer you. About extension workers, I have already answered that. 

Hon. Latigo and hon. Bikwasizehi handled the donor-funded aspect but let me explain about the samples. We are now using machines that use micro volumes. For instance, using mill microns we can get 2000 samples a day. We are not talking of 100mls or 1,000,000 litres of milk, no. And by the way we are testing various products from outside and comparing them with ours. For instance since the outbreak of FMD, I am glad to inform you that the quality of milk on the shelf now is good because we have stopped the movement of cans for long distances. This was the primary cause of adulterated milk. Some of our milk now is better than imported milk.

The hon. Member from Busongora North mentioned land problems. As a ministry we can help you manage land for agriculture and we have competent people for that. However what we cannot do is dish out land because we do not own it. Another ministry not Agriculture will answer the problems of the landless.

Honourable MP for Nakasongola, I want to thank you very much for the issue that you raised about the landing sites. I will hand it over to hon. Mukisa to answer.

Finally, Mr Speaker I want to thank the House for appreciating the problems of Agriculture. We are very hopeful that we shall use this budget efficiently and effectively. We beg for your support and where you think we should be informed please do not come here and ambush us. Our offices are open. My colleague from the opposition, you are free to come and share your experiences with us. I thank you very much and beg that the House approves our budget and the report of the committee. 

1.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairman of the committee and my colleague the minister on the opposition side for her presentation. For the benefit of my colleagues on the opposition side I will introduce myself because those on the government side know me because of the way we meet in our caucus. My name is Fred Mukisa, I represent Bukoli Central in Bugiri district and I am Minister of State in charge of Fisheries. This is my second term.

About the question from my colleague hon. Alaso concerning landing sites on Lake Kyoga, our consultants are doing the designing as these landing sites have got to be constructed under the Fisheries Development Project. I would like to assure you that this financial year we will start on the first ten. There are 30 of them all over the country. I do not have the names right now, but some on Lake Kyoga will also be included. 

By the way I also have a lot of interest in Lake Kyoga because everybody seems to be talking about Lake Victoria but we also need to look at some other lakes, especially Lake Kyoga which has very many districts around it.

Concerning capacity building, we are trying to get some fishermen to rent our training school in Entebbe but apart from that we are also planning to ensure that the fishermen themselves control the sector. We started on the formation of what we call Beach Management Units and it was started here in Uganda as a reaction to the fish poisoning. This has now been accepted all over the region and adopted regionally in Kenya and Tanzania. 

The idea here is that we hand back this sector to the fishermen. However to do that needs a lot of teaching and sensitisation. We are in the process of doing that and it may take a bit of time but that is what is happening. We are going to use a combination of training the fishermen who can afford and also the formation of Beach Management Units. These are elected units of fishermen and it will go a long way in controlling migration on the lake because migrant workers are never successful workers. 

We shall also register them, know where they are so that they control their areas. I am sure this will also go a long way in controlling fishermen being harassed on the lake. I must admit that I have heard a lot of complaints about fishermen being harassed. I think this is an issue that we have committed ourselves to solving because if we have too many people deployed on the lakes we may have a problem. 

Apart from addressing it as a ministry, we would like Members of Parliament to help us identify who these people are and to participate in sensitising the fishermen in their areas so that they know their rights. Certainly there are some people abusing the lake and we admit that. They are called Mbao tatu. In Swahili Mbao tatu just means timber, one at either side and one on the bottom. These are actually dangerous to the fishermen themselves because a strong wave can overturn this thing. 

Let us work together in handling this. Certainly there are some people who go to the lake and mishandle people. We should address this collectively. Lake Kyoga has been notorious for people being arrested from one district and taken to another and I am aware of that. We are going to handle it and I would like to be freely involved in this.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister.  I would like to know what time you are talking about. I appreciate that you have just assumed responsibility over the ministry but even last financial year, consultancy on landing sites was going on. I am not quite sure what the lifespan of that consultancy is supposed to be, whether it is a three-year consultancy to design the landing sites or a four-year one. I have no idea. I would appreciate it if you gave a commitment.

Secondly, it would also be good to know from the ministry who these people are. We cannot have a whole population or community of fishermen on either side of the lake continuously harassed, arrested and their money taken from them. The only thing you hear every other time is something is being done. Then two days later you get a telephone call that, “Honourable members, 20 of your people have been ferried across the lake”. Who are these people?  Do we still have a sector in the fisheries department that ensures that there is order on the lake? What has happened?  Has somebody taken over the lakes so we can ask them what is happening with the fishing community?

MR MUKISA: Thank you very much, my colleague. The answer to the question, “Who are these people?” is that we have official people that we assigned that work to and they are fish guards. However, like my colleague said here, the centre has more or less not been on the ground because of decentralisation. Some of our local governments also have their people and some security organs were also invited to assist. They have not done the best job but we shall handle it. Please, this is already being addressed and I am moving in.  

You also asked who these consultants are. I shall make this information available. Let me assure you that the first ten will start this financial year.  

Concerning illegal nets, people being harassed and nets being burnt, I would like to give you this information.  Any net below four inches is illegal on Ugandan lakes. We have informed the Uganda Revenue Authority and where they can they impound them on the border. In spite of this however, they are still smuggled in and the people who sell these nets know whom they sell to. If they do not know you, they will not sell it to you and they do not give any receipts. This all amounts to criminal dealing.  

THE SPEAKER: I think you should bring a formal question to the minister so that he can get a detailed answer. Please, continue.

MR MUKISA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will give further information that nets below five inches are illegal on Lake Victoria, but acceptable on other lakes.  

Then we have Kokota, which are very destructive because they destroy everything. These are made locally and that is why when we find one, we destroy it. Actually the people who make them do so intentionally with a criminal mind.

THE SPEAKER: Is this information passed on to the people concerned? Do they know it?

MR MUKISA: Yes, they are aware and that is why I am giving it to Members of Parliament. We have been holding workshops and we are going to continue holding these workshops –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. member, as I told you we will have time to debate the policies of these ministries.  This policy came in respect of the budget. We shall have time to go in detail and the committee is free at any time to requisition the services of ministry officials to come and explain to them and then to make a report. You cannot really exhaust all these inquiries during this session.

MR MUKISA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think those are the questions that came up and I request that our budget be passed so we can proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, subject to the observations made, the prayer was that we adopt the report.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I want to assure you hon. Members that if you want more time on this, we shall definitely have it.  Now this brings us to the lunch break. When we come back we shall deal with Committee on Social Services. We suspend the proceedings to 2.30 p.m.                                            

(The House was suspended at 1.31 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.37 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow me to welcome to Parliament the distinguished guests in the gallery who are honourable members of the East African Legislative Assembly. You are most welcome –(Applause)- and we thank you for what you are doing in Arusha. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES 
ON THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/2007

2.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (NRM, Mr James Kubeketerya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the sector ministers are not here but you can proceed and read the report.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am sure they are on the way and each of them has a report. This is a report on the Committee of Social Services. In accordance with Article 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution and in compliance with Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee received, examined and discussed the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministries of Health and Education and Sports for the financial year 2006/2007.

Mr Speaker, concerning the Ministry of Education and Sports, we looked at:
•	Vote 013 	Ministry of Education and Sports 		– headquarters
•	Vote 135   	Education Service Commission
•	Vote 136   	Makerere University
•	Vote 147 	Mbarara University of Science 		and Technology
•	Vote 138	Makerere University Business 		School
•	Vote 139	Kyambogo University
•	Vote 110	Uganda Management Institute
•	Vote 149	Gulu University

For Ministry of Health we considered-
•	Vote 014	Ministry of Health – 
			headquarters
•	Vote 134	Health Service Commission
•	Vote 161	Butabika National Referral 			Hospital
•	Vote 162	Mulago National Referral 
		Hospital 
•	Vote 163 –173 Regional Referral Hospitals (Arua, Gulu, Fortportal, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira and Mbarara)

Mr Speaker, on Ministry of Education and Sports the major achievements for financial year 2005/2006 are seen on page two. Most important amongst the achievements is the appointment of a taskforce management committee to kick start Busitema University, which comprises of the vice chancellor, academic registrar and a university secretary.
Concerning the key priority areas and budget resource allocations for financial year 2006/2007, the overall MTEF provision for the education and sports sector is Ugshs 720.81 billion that is the rightful figure according to the Ministry of Finance figures which is Ugshs 85.1 billion higher than last financial year 2006/2007 which was at the level of Ugshs 635.72 billion. 
Out of this, Ugshs 480.53 billion is for wages and Ugshs 158.02 billion for non-wage recurrent. Ugshs 84.26 billion is for development of which Ugshs 47.05 billion is domestic and Ugshs 37.21 billion for donor project development.

The Ministry of Education and Sports provided to the committee a breakdown of the sector budget for the financial year 2006/2007 indicating a share of each of the sub sectors in the ministry as indicated in the table below.

•	Primary sub-sector is 60.4 percent amounting to Ugshs 435,531 billion
•	Secondary is 20.5 percent amounting to Ugshs147,611 billion
•	BTVET is 5.3 percent amounting to Ugshs38,193 billion 
•	Tertiary is 12.1 percent amounting toUgshs87,240 billion
•	Others was 1.7 percent amounting to Ugshs12,235 billion

The total is 100 percent and the other total is Ugshs720,810 billion.

The primary sub-sector policies and priorities are laid down on page two. However most important in as far as this is concerned is that the primary sub-sector enhanced one of the priorities which was teacher’s salaries up to Ugshs 200,000/= and this was achieved this financial year.  

Also most important is the phased implementation and roll out of Pupil Identification Numbers to the remaining districts which will be undertaken. This will provide government with a realistic number of Universal Primary education (UPE) pupils enrolled throughout the country.  The current enrolment is estimated to be 6.8 million children.

The committee observed that despite the large amount of resources being injected in UPE, the declining completion rate of UPE is alarming.

The committee recommends that Universal Primary Education be made compulsory. That is government should come up with a legal framework that will make UPE compulsory. 

The committee also noted that the funds for School Facilities Grant (SFG) have been suspended this financial year. Government will not construct more classrooms this financial year 2006/2007. The explanation given to the committee was the SFG funds have been used to increase teachers’ salaries. Exceptions have been given to only 24 districts and you can see this from annex two which has sparse population and high pupil to classroom rations.  

The committee recommends that SFG funds be reinstated to complete structures already started.

Mr Speaker, the committee was concerned with the delay in payment of primary teachers’ salaries, which has persisted despite government’s commitment to pay by the 28th of each month. The ministry’s response was given as follows:

•	Payrolls for teachers are controlled at district levels.
•	There is continued creation of new districts, which sometime leads to delays in processing the payments.
•	The ongoing payroll cleaning exercise in Government.

So, the committee recommends that prompt payment of teachers’ salaries should be considered as a key priority and the ministry should address all the constraints to enforce and comply with the 28th deadline set by government.

The committee observed that the increment of Ugshs 200,000 given to primary teachers is inadequate given that PAYE scientifically reduces it. The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should liaise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to increase the threshold for PAYE to at least Ugshs 235,000 to make the increment a reality as earlier recommended by Parliament in financial year 2003/2004. 

The teachers had a complaint that PAYE has affected the Ugshs 200,000 and they end up with something less. So, the committee was trying to make an earlier recommendation we had made in financial year 2003/2004.

The secondary sub-sector policies and priorities:

Under the secondary sub-sector, the Ministry of Education and Sports will address the following priorities in the financial year 2006/2007.

One of them is that of increasing equitable access to secondary education by implementing the Universal Post-Primary Education and Training (UPPET).

Construct 41 CD secondary schools, in each of the 41 sub-counties without any form of secondary schools. So you can see Annex 3. In addition, government will pay Ugshs 47,000 per term per student enrolled in the selected private schools in sub-counties with only private schools as tuition fees while Ugshs 7 million as a threshold will be given to each government secondary school. In addition, Ugshs 29,400 will be paid per term per student enrolled in these schools as tuition. 

Mr Speaker, here I would like to add that the 41- according to Ministry of Education was – these are sub-counties that totally do not have either a private school or government school. And according to the ministry, they are beginning with those sub-counties that have private schools; they will be paying Ugshs 47,000 per term per student.

The ministry will review the secondary school curriculum and the curriculum content shall in the interim be reduced from the over 40 subjects to 22 subjects and out of which a school may only choose 14 subjects. Here, the ministry told us that some subjects could be merged and this is expected to enhance efficiency and cost effectiveness.

Observations and Recommendations:

The committee observed that the implementation of Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET) causes a lot of challenges to the education sector in this country similar to those that faced the UPE that will need serious address before it takes course. Consequently, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should involve Parliament at all stages of the implementation of UPPET. 

In addition, the committee recommends that UPPET should be made compulsory and government should come up with a legal framework to implement this.

The committee was further informed that there will be no government grant aiding of senior secondary schools this financial year. Instead the ministry will construct 41 public secondary schools in sub-counties without any form of secondary school to cater for the senior one pupils under UPPET. We shall have two classrooms, an administration block and a multipurpose lab and sanitation facilities to begin with the next financial year.

The committee recommends that the construction of these new schools should be expedited to make them ready before the February 2007 academic year intake begins.

Although government has made UPPET a priority, the increase in the post primary school sub-sector budget is inadequate to implement it.

The committee recommends that UPPET be allocated more funds to enable it commence next academic year. The current budget provisions to the Ministry poses a great and significant challenge to embark on the programme.

The committee further noted that despite government policy of making science subjects compulsory at secondary school level, most schools in the countryside did not have science laboratories and the attendant science teachers to handle them.

The committee recommends that as a matter of urgency, the science teachers should be recruited and the lab equipment provided so that no student is disadvantaged.

Mr Speaker, whereas the Ministry is planning to recruit additional 2,000 teachers this financial year for secondary schools in order to address this shortfall resulting from the implementation of UPPET, the committee recommends that recruitment should be expedited to enable them access the payroll to avoid past scenarios where teachers never accessed the payroll in time.

Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET):

The ministry plans to construct, rehabilitate and equip 61 health training institutions using funds from European Union funding project. A list of the proposed institutions will be availed to the Parliamentary Library for implementation

The committee fully supports the Ministry of Education and Sports on this endeavour and recommends that other similar institutions in sorry state should also be considered for rehabilitation.

The committee noted with concern that failure of Islamic Development Bank (IDB) project regarding the construction of Polytechnics. The Government of Uganda further informed the committee that IDB has failed on its part to disburse funds despite the fulfillment of all conditions.

Mr Speaker, if I may add here, this loan was passed in 2001 and this is what we are talking about; the one for polytechnics. The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda should consider financing this project using locally generated resources given its importance to the economic development of the country or source for alternative donor funding.

Education Standards Agency (ESA):

The committee observed that there is some laxity and lack of effectiveness in the supervision and school inspection owing to the limited resources and lack of legal framework for education standards agency.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should strengthen supervision of primary and post primary education institutions and the inspectorate arm of the ministry. For example, Education Standards Agency should be adequately funded and government should come up with a law to strengthen and empower (ESA) to carry out its mandate. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, ESA has not been fully constituted in as far as the legal framework is concerned. That is why it has not had much budget given to it because there is some legal implication.

The National Council for Higher Education: 

The committee noted that during the financial year 2005/2006, the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Act, 2006 was passed to give more powers to the National Council for Higher Education. However, due to the inadequate funding, the National Council for Higher Education has no sufficient staff. It has a level of only 38 per cent, to execute its mandate. The committee recommends that the capacity of National Council for Higher Education should be enhanced through increased funding to the council so that it may regulate higher education standards and management in the country. 

The committee was informed that National Council for Higher Education has embarked on a project of defining minimum courses of study and so far five areas are being handled and they are Mathematics, Economics, Social Sciences, Human Medicine and Basic Sciences. The committee commends this project and recommends that all universities both public and private should adhere to these requirements to ensure quality in higher education. The committee also recommends that all public universities should have adequate qualified teaching staff to handle their academic programmes.  

The committee also learnt that National Council for Higher Education granted interim authority to four proposed universities to enable them develop their projects and these are university projects at the planning stages and they include- as seen on page 8. The committee supports these projects, as they will supplement government’s effort given the ever-increasing demand for higher education.  

Busitema University:

The committee was informed by the ministry that the arrangements for the opening of the Busitema University in 2008/09 will continue since the task force management team is already appointed and the university will have the following camps: Busitema, Arapai, Nagongera, Kaliro and Jinja Tourism Institute. 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Busitema University should be allowed to begin next academic year 2007/08 since they have sufficient infrastructure to begin with the two faculties and the focus should be on the agricultural programmes, which already have sufficient infrastructure and staff.

Visitation Committee:

The committee was informed that a visitation committee has been appointed to look into the problems and challenges of public universities in the country and the committee commends the appointment of the university’s visitation committee, but recommends that the report of this committee be tabled to Parliament as soon as it is ready.  

Government Sponsorship:

The committee was informed about government plans for the implementation of the withdrawal of government sponsorship from welfare of students in public universities that is accommodation and maintenance. However, the Minister of Education clarified that this policy will not be implemented this academic year, but the withdrawal will be in a phased manner and that the effective date and entire modality is yet to be discussed. Consultations with stakeholders were ongoing to draw up the implementation strategy. The committee recommends that before implementing this policy, Parliament as a key stakeholder should be adequately informed and further recommends that Makerere University should avoid communicating critical policy changes prematurely.

Makerere University:

The committee noted with concern that there are delays in processing academic transcripts and the certificates and the university has submitted that they have now developed a new computer programme called Academic Record Information System (ARIS).  That will solve this problem especially for current students. The committee recommends that the university shall clear the backlog as the implementation of the ARIS programme commences.  

The committee noted with concern the low completion dates at post graduate level in some faculties especially in the humanities, that is Arts and Social Sciences, where students spend close to four years before graduating even when they have submitted their dissertations. The committee recommends that the university should carry out comprehensive reforms in the postgraduate school to streamline the teaching and supervision of postgraduate studies. 

The committee noted that presidential pledges to Makerere University, made in 2001 amounting to Ugshs 6 billion of which Ugshs 2 billion was for rehabilitation of Lumumba Hall, Ugshs 2 billion was for rehabilitation of Mary Stuart Hall and Ugshs 2 billion was for the perimeter wall are long overdue.  

The congestion in lecture rooms:

To decongest rooms, the university council approved in 2005/06 academic year that intakes into the university be reduced by ten per cent each year until optimum levels are reached. So, in 2005/06, 15,943 fresh students were admitted, while 12,988 students have been admitted for the academic year 2006/07. Construction of more lecture halls and lecture theatres and the library is ongoing. The new library will be accommodating 5,000 students at ago. The committee welcomes and supports these developments and recommends that Makerere should only admit students they can effectively cater for.

Appropriation of aid:

The committee was also informed that the university from appropriation of aid has estimated to raise a total of Ugshs 41.6 billion for the financial year 20006/07, an average of 54 per cent of this remains at the faculties or units where the students are registered and the balance is used for all university recurrent and development activities not provided for within the government submission. The committee recommends that the university should always submit its report of appropriation in aid to Parliament in time as per the Budget Act in order to keep Parliament informed on the way the huge amounts are expanded or are spent.  

Makerere University Business School:

Mr Speaker, during the financial year 2005/06, the committee noted that MUBS had no library and recommended that the ministry avails funds through internal re-allocation for MUBS and this financial year 2006/07, the ministry has earmarked Ugshs 0.5 billion towards the kick starting of the library construction for MUBS. The committee appreciates this move and recommends that the construction should begin without further delay, as it is long overdue. 

MUBS status:

The recent high court ruling that declared MUBS as a fully-fledged University vis-à-vis the known affiliated status, may require the Ministry of Education and Sports to address the implications of such report ruling. The august House needs to be updated on this subject by government as soon as possible to avoid interruption of the academic programmes.

Kyambogo University:

The committee was informed that the university faces serious under funding and difficulty in financial year 2006/07. The university worked out the non-wage budget of Ugshs 9.7 billion, but the government ceiling is Ugshs 5.1 billion.  Furthermore, Kyambogo University has just undergone a restructuring process that was necessitated by the merger of UPK, UNISE and ITEK and the restructuring has led to a financial obligation of Ugshs 978 million to manage the redundancies and this amount is not provided for in the budget for the financial year 2006/07. The committee recommends that government should provide funds to Kyambogo University for the restructuring costs to mitigate the merger problems that have faced the university since its commencement. 

Staff unrest at Kyambogo; the committee was informed that following the court ruling on Kyambogo lecturers’ case, a probe committee was instituted by the ministry to look into the matter. The committee recommends that the report of this committee should be submitted to Parliament within 14 days from now. 

Mr Speaker, why the committee came up with this one is that before we started the budget process, the minister made a statement and she wanted to be given some time and we feel that a lot is going on. So, the committee feels that the minister should make a statement on this, if this report is ready, before we can begin tackling the issues on Kyambogo University.
  
Gulu University:

The committee was informed that the university faces a major problem of accommodation of students; even government sponsored students have to find their accommodation and the university is expected to pay them their living out allowances at the beginning of the semester which is rather difficult since the releases delay. It was also noted that the Italian Government through the University of Nepals is largely supporting the medical school in Gulu University.
 
Uganda Management Institute:

The committee was informed that UMI is now another degree awarding institution recognized by law under the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2002 as amended and the visitor has already appointed a Chancellor for the institute. The committee appreciates this development and recommends that UMI should continue to offer this specialised training to all institutions including other public universities like Makerere University and the like. 

The committee was further informed that in order to take services nearer to the people, the institute is to begin a phase to phase programme in various regions beginning with Mbarara, Lira and Mbale in the financial year 2006/2007. The committee welcomes this idea and recommends that other regional centres should also be established to enable many people access this specialised training offered by UMI. 

Mbarara University:

The committee was further informed that the biggest challenge facing the university is to prepare to shift to its permanent site and in addition the university needs Ugshs 420 million to compensate the former owners of the University Inn who are threatening to sue the university. The committee recommends that MUST should be assisted in fulfilling these funding gaps.
 
Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the sports sub-sector has remained under funded and the committee was informed that the Ministry of Education and Sports has now established a fully-fledged department of sports and additional funds have been allocated to the sports sub-sector. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should operationalise the approved sports policy.

Budget proposals for financial year 2006/2007:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg that this House do approve a total of Ugshs 217,567,007,000 of which Ugshs 148,987,045,000 is for recurrent and Ugshs 68,579,963 is for development including donor support as the total budget required for the Ministry of Education headquarters, Makerere University, UMI, Gulu University, Education Service Commission and Kyambogo University for the financial year 2006/2007 as follows:  UMI recurrent- Ugshs624, 000,000 and development –

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, what you can do - because we are going to repeat these figures when we prepare for appropriation, that is after we have gone through the committees, I will read these in detail. What you can do is say, “In summary, the details are here and the summary is this.”

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  For recurrent, we have Ugshs 148,987,045,000, then for development it is Ugshs 68,579,963,000. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

Like we could see on page 13, the first table, I think that one I have already mentioned, but I would like to add here that the preliminary budget outturn indicates that the overall health sector budget excluding donors performed at 91 per cent. This under performance is attributed to under performance in both recurrent and development budgets below the target by five per cent and nine per cent respectively. 

The over performance of Mulago Hospital’s recurrent budget was as a result of a supplementary budget of Ugshs 1.5 billion for drugs and other sundries and Ugshs 150 million received as supplementary budget for food for patients and internal doctors. The shortage of staff was attributed to payroll cleaning and staff.  

The achievements, Mr Speaker are many. Now in terms of malaria, we have case management like you see on page 13. I would like to add here that the proportion of children under five years receiving prompt and effective malaria treatment within 24 hours of fear onset has risen from 7.3 per cent in 2001 to 60 per cent in 2005. In addition, the case fertility rate has decreased from 4 per cent in 2001 to 2.7 per cent in 2005.

In vector control and internal residual spray and insect treated nets, Mr Speaker, the government waived taxes on insect treated nets and anti- malaria drugs. And the ministry received a total of $ 41.5 million out of the approved $ 193 million and part of which is met for procurement of the IT ends. 

It is also observed that the percentage of households having mosquito nets has increased to 2.3 of the rural households; 159.9 of the urban households have at least one net and a proportion of pregnant women sleeping under a mosquito net has increased from 13.1 per cent in 2001 to 31.6 per cent.  

Mr Speaker, a model of indoor residential spraying (IRS) system with ICON is being established in Kabale District, and let me say it has been established in Kabale District in the South Western part of the country and the ministry has developed the indoor residential spraying and treated nets policy including DDT introduction. An environment impact assessment for the use DDT and its reintroduction has reached final stages.

On reproductive health, Mr Speaker, the ministry has continued to handle the Emergency Obstetric Care (EMOC) and this plan was rolled out and consolidated in 20 districts like mentioned on page 14. The adolescent health strategy was completed and integration of malaria, prevention of mother to child transmission of HIV and family planning was implemented.

On human resource, Mr Speaker, in financial year 2005/2006, the Health Service Commission recruited a total of 598 health workers and the recruited cadres included four top executive positions. I will not go in details; everybody has that on page 15. I would like to add that a list indicating the name, cadre, date of posting and deployment centre was provided to the committee and a copy will be availed in the parliamentary library for information of Members.  

Infrastructure and medical equipment and construction, Mr Speaker, 19 x-ray machines were procured under ORET, one project and installation is on-going in Budibugyo, Itojo, Kambuga, Kagadi, Abim, Atutur, Entebbe, Iganga, Kawolo, Kayunga, Mubende, Kiryandongo, Kitagata, Kitgum, Moroto, Nakaseke, Nebbi, Pallisa and Virika hospitals. In addition, 11 ultra sound machines were procured and installed in the following hospitals: Abim, Atutur, Bundibugyo, Iganga, Kayunga, Mubende, Moroto, Nakaseke and Pallisa.  

Theatre equipment for Obongi Health Centre IV were procured and in addition a generator and furniture for Jinja Hospital was also procured. Construction and equipping of health centres in Kamuli and Kisoro districts, that is four hospitals, 21 health centres, three District Director of Health Services offices were constructed and equipped and in addition 53 Health Centre IV theatres were equipped and a list of Health Centre IV theatres that were equipped is attached in Annex 5.

Mental health units have been constructed at Arua, Kabale, Hoima, Gulu, Soroti and Fort Portal.  Rehabilitation of Mbale and Fort Portal hospitals is on going and in addition, the rehabilitation of water supply, sewage for Nakaseke Hospital was completed. Construction of a new theatre, staff houses and a generator at Kabongo hospitals were completed. Upgrading of Lyantonde Health Centre and construction of incinerators at Mbarara and Masaka hospitals is near completion.

The priorities of Ministry of Health in 2006/2007 Essential medicines and health supplies; the availability of essential medicines and health supplies will remain critical to ensure successful completion of the United Nations minimum health care package at all levels. Although the ministry issues guidelines on the procurement of EHMS to ensure availability, drug stock outs have continued to occur in many health units. The committee was informed that the ministry will continue with the credit line modalities to avert this situation.  

Mr Speaker, on reproductive health again, reproductive health will be a priority this financial year and the funding for reproductive health is Ugshs 93.5 billion translating to 24 per cent of the entire sector budget. In addition to enhancing improvement of reproductive health services, the sector will focus on rehabilitation and equipping of theatres at Health Centre IV and high health facilities to make them more friendly and promote the utilisation of health facilities for safe deliveries.

On human resource, the health workforce for active health service delivery, the construction of staff houses especially in hard to serve districts in order to attract staff will remain key and this will also focus on improved remuneration of health workers.  

The committee was also informed that the ministry will workout a streamlined policy regarding the need for further professional development and balance it with the need to retain an adequate workforce for active service delivery.  On malaria, I am sure Members have that.

Infrastructure development and equipment:
 A number of radiology equipment will be procured under ORET II project and installed in the following hospitals; Anaka, Atutur, Kapchorwa, Masindi, Moyo, Mityana, Rakai, Yumbe, Gombe, Nkozi, Hoima, Lira, Fort portal and Gulu this financial year.  

Rehabilitation of regional referral hospitals:

A total of $5 million is required to complete the rehabilitation of each of the 13 regional referral hospitals and this financial year Mbarara and Mbale are to be rehabilitated at a cost of $10 million.  The sector will therefore need an extra $55 million for the remaining hospitals.  

The committee was informed that load shedding had negatively impacted on the operations of these hospitals. The hospitals are now depending on the use of generators yet they have inadequate funding to enable them purchase the necessary fuel. The committee strongly recommends that all the 11 regional referral hospitals should not be subjected to load shedding.

Observations and recommendations:

Mr Speaker, on essential medicines and health supplies, while the ministry has issued guidelines on drug procurement, 50 per cent of the primary health care funds are strictly earmarked for drugs.  These guidelines are sometimes abused in some districts. The committee was further informed that drug stock outs are at times as a result of delays by the National Medical Stores to deliver the necessary commodities in time and discrepancies in the referral hospital.

The committee recommends that the ministry should ensure that integrated support supervision is strengthened to oversee proper drug utilisation and accountability in closer observance of the existing guidelines instituted by the ministry. The ministry should further strengthen National Medical Stores to increase their operational capacity to meet the increasing demands of a growing population. 

In addition, the ministry should consider the possibility of introducing special labelling of public medical drugs to curtail any possible leakage into the hands of the private practitioners. In addition, the ministry should review the criteria used for funding the drug budget and take into account other factors such as level of disease incidents and board migrations among others rather than population size only. 

Now, in as far as this is concerned, Mr Speaker, it was because that previously the ministry would look at the bed capacity before they would apportion funds for that hospital, whereas there are other hospitals that are near the borders which require more drugs than the bed capacity.  

Status of the Global Fund implementation:

Mr Speaker, following the alleged mismanagement of the Global Fund, a commission of inquiry was instituted to investigate these allegations. The committee was informed that the commission completed their inquiry and submitted a report to His Excellency the President. The committee was further informed that the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development is currently managing the Global Fund and a care taker, Ernest & Young, was appointed to temporarily do work which the disbanded Project Management Unit or implementation unit was doing. 

In the meantime, the work is to design a long term management arrangement for the Global Fund and the total amount of money received so far is Ugshs 3,308,517, 742 of which Ugshs 544,198,21 was for AIDS control programme, Ugshs 18,84,000 was for TB and Leprosy control programmes and Ugshs 1,91,977,850 was for the malaria control programme.

The committee recommends that the findings of the commission of inquiry be communicated to Parliament and recommendations be implemented urgently, and a possibility of integrating the activities of the fund into the existing structures be examined to harmonise its implementation.

HIV/AIDS:

Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that during financial years 2005/2006, 70,000 people were initiated on ARVs or ARV treatment including over 1,000 children. In addition, HIV testing and counselling have continued to be scaled up with over 300 centres established in the country to provide HIV counselling and testing services. A list of the VCT centres was availed to the committee and a copy of the same to the parliamentary library for information of Members. 

Despite these efforts, the committee noted that there are few testing machines across the country, and where they exist the location had not been made public for people to access. So, the committee recommends strongly that funding, additional preventive and control measures be increased and a focus be towards enhancement of advocacy and awareness to ensure that HIV/AIDS reduce significantly and to ensure that those who are negative remain negative.

Infrastructure and equipment:

The ray machines, radiological and diagnostic equipment – okay radiological- the committee noted that many of the regional referral hospitals and health centres lack functional medical equipment and diagnostic facilities, many of the existing X-ray machines were obsolete and non functional and in some cases with no technical staff to operate them in regional hospitals. For example, many of the available X-ray machines were installed over 40 years ago. In Fort Portal Regional Hospital, one out of the two existing X-ray machines available was installed in 1957 thus it is 49 years old now. These equipments not only pose risks but also increase the cost of maintenance. You can see annex 6 about the X-ray machines. 

The committee recommends that ministries should come up with the costed plan to replace all the old X-ray machines, radiological and diagnostic equipment to avert the dangers that are already posed by these equipments to patients.  This plan should be urgently funded within the mid term budget of the sector beginning financial year 2007/2008.

Regional referral hospitals:

The committee observed that many of these regional referral hospitals were constructed more than 70 years ago; for example, Hoima (1910), Jinja, Lira Soroti and Masaka (1927), Gulu in 1934 and Arua in 1937. This is a clear indicator that these structures are already dilapidated and the population has since exploded. Thus, there is inadequate space in many of these hospitals given the increasing number of patients and the scope of services now provided leading to increasing flow cases. 

The committee recommends that a comprehensive plan to over haul these structures be thought urgently to relieve pressure on the meager resources due to the high maintenance cost.

Health Centre IVs:

The committee commended government’s effort to construct and equip these health units but was concerned about the delay of operationalising them.  The committee noted that although a number of equipment had been procured, many of them are still lying in health units uninstalled or non-operational due to lack of technical manpower.  The committee further noted that most of the existing and the newly constructed health facilities do not take into account the needs of the people with disabilities. The theatres and wards are not disability friendly at all. This has not only marginalised the PWDs but also posed a danger to their health.

Mr Speaker, this was a scenario that was both within the Ministry of Education and though nothing has been said on Education, the request by the committee was that as the ministry intends to provide education to the people with disabilities, some facilities should be put in place to enable them learn science, especially the disabled. Then the other one was to ensure that they provide training for the teachers to teach the specialised pupils or students.

On health, here the committee recommends that government speeds up the operationalisation exercise to ensure that these facilities are put to use. In addition, the committee recommends that government should ensure that both the existing and the newly constructed structures take into account the needs of the people with disabilities; that these are adhered to before approving such construction plans in future.

Mulago Hospital:

The committee, Mr Speaker, was informed that Mulago Hospital Complex is a National Referral Hospital mandated among other things to handle complex cases referred to it. So, the committee observed that despite its status, Mulago Hospital has been receiving too many cases of PHC nature hence running like any other hospital has led to over congestion. 

The committee further noted that Mulago drug budget has stagnated for over five years, while the required funding amounts to Ugshs 23 billion, the allocation has remained at Ugshs 5 billion only. This is less than a quarter of the required funding. Each financial year, Mulago Hospital has been surviving on supplementary budgets. This has greatly impacted on its operation negatively over the years. So, Parliament has been recommending that Mulago Hospital drug budget be given adequate funding to avert persistent stock outs.

The committee wishes to reiterate its earlier recommendation that Mulago Assessment Centre be allowed to access power funds to enable it handle the many cases it receives since they are of PHC nature. I would like to thank the doctor for the treatment given. 

In addition the committee strongly recommends that Ugshs 1.5 billion approved supplementary budget for drugs for Mulago Hospital during the financial year 2005/2006 be reallocated from programme 9 under this Ministry of Health headquarters to enable it procure essential drugs and drugs for complicated cases this financial year.  

The government should explore the possibility of allowing Mulago Hospital complex to spend the non-tax revenue collected by it and limited to the consolidated fund at the moment.  

Mulago Heart Institute:

Mr Speaker, the committee noted with disappointment that the institute is closed, under funded and lacks required equipment to enable it operationalise the open heart surgery. The committee observed that diseases that affect the heart are on the increase yet the institute cannot be able to handle them. As a result, many patients have been referred abroad where they pay huge sums of money for treatment.  

The committee was informed that Ugshs 6 billion was required to operationalise the open heart surgery and to equip the cardiac cauterisation laboratory of which Ugshs 4 billion is for the procurement of the equipment, while Ugshs 2 billion is for legends and other consumables. The committee commended Mulago for having begun on a training programme for staff, specialising in heart disease and surgical operations.  

In South Africa and India, the committee was informed that currently only closed heart surgery could be done at the institute. The committee recommends that government should find Ugshs 6 billion this financial year being the amount required to fund the procurement of the required equipment and other consumables for the heart institute in order to save the huge amounts currently spent on heart cases referred abroad.

Mr Speaker, on human resource, the committee commended government on its efforts to improve the welfare of health workers through enhanced pay rise. However, the committee noted that the attitude of many of the health workers is still very poor. The Ministry of Health attributed this to lack of proper guidance while training these lower cadres such as nurses whose training is now under Ministry of Education and Sports. 

The doctors who supervise them while on training belong to the Ministry of Health and demand allowances for this additional responsibility. This creates administrative problems. So, while the Ministry of Education and Sports claims that management of nursing schools is far better compared to the situation before, the committee recommends that a critical review into this case or crisis be undertaken in a bid to improve on the poor attitudes.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, previously these nursing institutions were under the Ministry of Health and then they were transferred to the Ministry of Education. Whenever we interface with these two ministries, there is always an accusation, saying, “We could have done better if we were under Ministry of Health” and then Education says, they are better. So, the Committee is recommending that the two should sit and if need be, the committee will still interact with them to get actually a long lasting solution on this matter.

The committee recommends that a review on the curriculum for nursing courses be undertaken to ensure that academic certificates are awarded for enrolled nurses and a diploma for registered nurses. This will ensure international competitiveness as well.   

Mr Speaker and honourable members, there has been a very big complaint by the nurses that however much they train, they are only given professional certificates, but not academic ones; I think that is the position of the committee.

The Uganda AIDS Commission fund is under President’s Office, but its budget continues to be reflected in the Ministry of Health ceiling. An explanation given by the Ministry of Finance to the committee was that putting the funds of the Commission in the budget of the Office of the President budget higher and the donors would question it as a big budget. This explanation was unacceptable to the committee and the committee recommends that the funds for Uganda AIDS Commission be removed from the health budget.  

Social health insurance:

Mr Speaker, the National Health Policy of 1999 provides that the health sector shall develop and support alternative financing schemes, such as health insurance to boost health care provision.  The ministry has begun working on a Bill on social health insurance scheme. 

The committee was informed that consultations with stakeholders are still ongoing. Under this proposed scheme, government and private sector employers and employees will be required to pay a monthly premium into the fund to be enrolled and access health services together with dependants whenever they fall sick.  

Health service providers, that is the clinics will be accredited and will be paid by the management of the fund. The committee commends this move and recommends that this process be expedited and the Bill be brought to Parliament for enactment into law.

Mr Speaker, these are the budget proposals for financial 2005/2006 and as far as our figure is concerned, I beg this House to approve a total of Ugshs 267,314,408,000 of which Ugshs 91,171,987,000 is for recurrent; Ugshs 176,142,621,000 is for development, including donor as a total budget required for the Ministry of Health headquarters, Mulago and Butabika national referral hospitals; Health Service Commission; Uganda Blood Transfusion Services and the 11 regional referral hospitals for the financial year 2006/2007. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On behalf of Parliament, I want to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for this elaborate report on the sector.

3.42
THE Shadow minister OF education and sports (Ms Christine Bako): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will try to be as brief as possible. It is unfortunate that our logistical troubles have continued and you are not able to have this report with you. But I beg that if you paid some attention, you would be able to get the critical issues that I am raising in my capacity as the alternative minister in charge. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in the first place, I am more than honoured to present to this Parliament, our electorate in whom we trust the view of the opposition on Education and Sports as a response to ministerial policy statement, Vote 013 and the other sub-sectors in the ministry. I am grateful to the Minister of Education for lifting the sector from under performance to the level where it is right now. Honourable minister, thank you very much for taking the future of this country seriously. 

Honourable Speaker, allow me to most sincerely thank the committee on Social Services for a job well done. Although I am a member of the committee, I am here to present the views of the opposition regarding Education and Sports with a focus on this year’s budget in my capacity as the alternative minister in charge. 

The vision of the ministry is indeed acceptable quality education and sports for all. The mission and mandate of the ministry indeed are relevant, but actualising them has proved an uphill task due to budgetary constraints and often mismanagement of the little resources available to the ministry. 

Honourable Speaker, the various sub-sector missions need to be streamlined into a general mission of the ministry in order to track realisation of the strategic objectives since many of the sub-sector objectives seem to be overlapping particularly those in the main stream ministry.

Universal Primary Education: 

Mr Speaker, we appreciate the fact that Uganda is striving to achieve some of the Millennium Development Goals particularly that of lowering illiteracy levels in the country by provision of UPE. However, providing this for only four children per family is not adequate. It is the position of the opposition that UPE be made compulsory for all; it is the official position. This way, no sections of our society will be left out on such a very basic human right; the right to education enshrined in Article 30 of our Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, government has given us what has been achieved so far under UPE despite acute shortfalls in resources and the achievements so far registered. However, we feel the quality of UPE remains a challenge particularly in the cognitive development of our children. With only 19 per cent of UPE graduates attaining proficiency and literacy, this trend leaves a lot to be desired from the sector. 

The quality question in teaching and instruction will not be addressed unless there is improvement in the general welfare of the teachers in terms of pay, housing, among others. No unmotivated worker performs to the best of their ability. We in the opposition propose that teachers be paid a minimum of 250,000 per month. 

Mr Speaker, this may appear to be too much given the main teachers we have, but it must be remembered that investing in our people sensibly is the most lasting investment and it is the responsibility of government to look for money and other related resources for such a critical investment. 

There is still abnormal teacher pupil ratio in most of the UPE schools. This hampers concentration and effective teaching, Mr Speaker. This calls for more recruitment and training of teachers and construction of more classrooms. We in the opposition propose that over the next years, government should strive to reduce the teacher pupil ratio to 1:75 particularly for the lower classes, primary one to primary three and subsequently upper classes. 

Mr Speaker, it is sad to note that under the 0944 projects only Ugshs 5.9 billion was secured yet the expenditure requirement was Ugshs 32.136 billion.  Only 18 PTCs received support for general up grading while 22 PTCs were unattended to. This hampers training of teachers since their status is indescribable in terms of quality or teacher education. Policy statement, page 107, we appreciate up grading of five PTC’s into core PTCs. However, there is need for budgetary reflection for the remaining 22 if we are to improve the quality of UPE right from the instructors themselves. 

Mr Speaker, schooling discipline has reached intolerable levels in most of our schools. Teacher-student and all pupil interaction is more based on mistrust than trust. There is more horizontal interaction between teachers and students than the used to be vertical interaction. Much as this may reflect the general decay in society and promotion of children’s rights, the ministry needs to move first to rescue a seemingly lost generation. 

There is need for more parental involvement in the education of our children since most of them are shifting discipline of their children to the teachers who often have “I do not care attitude” due to poor rewarding system. We propose monthly parent pupil class days and parent teacher dialogues. 

Universal Post Primary Education and Training: 

Much as the idea of UPPET is excellent, its implementation during a time when the health of our economy is on the life support system leaves a lot to be desired from government as to how it hopes to generate the enormous resources it requires to kick-start the UPPET. The budget allocation of Ugshs 30 billion for the start is too insignificant to make any impact in the running of a programme of such a magnitude with a shortfall of Ugshs 106 billion. 

Mr Speaker, the unit cost of investment in this sub-sector is more mythical than realistic. The estimated Ugshs 7 million per government aided school and an additional Ugshs 29,420,047 per student in both government and private secondary schools respectively introduced unachievable dream in this sub-sector.

What is the breakdown of such allocation for food, sanitation, instruction materials, among others? Do such unit costs take into account some of the operating environments of schools as day and boarding? Can the Ministry of Education, therefore, provide a realistic breakdown of such figures for day and boarding schools? 

Honourable Speaker, government expects to place UPPET funds in the hands of private players in the secondary education sector to cater for students in whose location there is no government-aided school. How is government going to exercise control over management of these funds? And what mechanisms are in place to monitor? What is the eligibility criterion in place for private schools during the uptake of students? 

The opposition strongly feels that government needs to put up the necessary physical infrastructure, at least one secondary school per sub-county before pronouncing itself on such a massive undertaking. 

The running of UPPET will sincerely depend most on the availability of staff particularly the teachers. How far has the recruitment process gone for the 4,863 teachers for the financial year 2005/2006? And what is the additional teacher requirement before the off take?

Honourable Speaker, unless such input is in place, it is advisable that government pre-thinks its position on UPPET. It is sad to note that last financial year, there was no budget line for fund training of laboratory technicians. As in the minister’s policy statement, page 11, yet government emphasis right now is on sciences. It is incumbent upon government now to ensure that those who instruct practicals are well trained. 

We propose that each science subject should have at least two technicians so that in case one is away or sick, the other takes over so that students do not end up getting the theoretical bits of sciences. Does the ministry have a funded budget line for training of these technocrats this financial year? The allocation of Ugshs 2 billion for science equipment is too little to sustain at least three practicals per subject per week in a secondary school.

Honourable Speaker, by Article 162 of the Constitution, the Education Service Commission is mandated to advise His Excellency the President in relation to education service. It is incumbent upon them together with other sub-sectors in the ministry to see to it that he is not misled to implement a well-intentioned programme haphazardly just because it was another election pledge.

Tertiary Education:

We note with concern the continuous under funding of our institutions of higher learning. This has often led to undesirable industrial action in terms of strikes among others. Universities continue to be run under minimum budgets with huge deficits. For example, management of redundancies in Kyambogo is expected to cost Ugshs 978 million. This is unprovided for in the budget.

Payment of Arrears on Incremental unpaid Annual Increments:  

A worked financial implication of Ugshs 225.8 million is not provided for in the budget. The non-wage budget of the institution is Ugshs 9.6 billion against the ceiling of Ugshs 5.1 billion. Capital development budget of Ugshs 1.2 billion has received government allocation of only Ugshs 280 million. All the shortfalls amount to Shs 2.1 billion. 

It is only reasonable that the items that are not provided for in the budget mentioned above be included in this year’s budget. Such colossal deficits compromise effective and efficient management of the institutions, compromise staff development and quality of higher education. 

Honourable Speaker, government must realise that tertiary education is almost the final stage of a final product to the level market. Yes, government may not provide tertiary education for all, but the need for implementation of a loan scheme would suffice this purpose. Yet, this is one area where there is no progress in the President’s manifesto with no budget provision, but a reported output policy statement. 

On page 63, we hope a task force appointed to move forward the recommendations will act sooner than later in order to enable the poor access tertiary education. Honourable Speaker, there is also no progress in the President’s manifesto regarding sponsorship for students from war ravaged areas. The budget provision is zero shillings; out put is access to university education by students from war-ravaged areas. 

Policy Statement, page 63: Does government have a provision for this year’s budget for such political promises? The opposition feels this amounts to taking the electorate for granted; disrespect for the President’s manifesto and above all undermining the institution of the Presidency.

Honourable Speaker, it has come to our knowledge that the unit cost of investment for identical courses in public universities is valid. The opposition proposes that students admitted for same courses in all public universities should receive the same amount of money for equity reasons. 

May the minister explain the valuations in the unit cost of investment for same courses in different universities? The quality concerns raised as a result of high student population in universities particularly Makerere University still remain. We appreciate the fact that the university is reducing intake levels in order to have more realistic lecturer student ratios. 

Honourable Speaker, we are concerned that the number of lecturers is still inadequate to handle the swelling population. There is therefore need for more recruitment of academic staff. For example, one lecturer cannot effectively teach and objectively mark 500 students and have regular assessment tests. It is our belief that quality education goes with quality instruction. The budget needs to focus on this aspect of recruitment for all the public universities particularly in areas where highly specialized skills are needed.

Inadequacy of academic staff has led to delays in completion of courses in time, therefore, putting strains on poor parents who have to maintain their children in the city at high costs and untold risks particularly the girl child whose vulnerability to poverty and life style diseases is very high.

Sports and Games:

Mr Speaker, the opposition is disappointed with the low attention and miserable funding that the sports sub-sector has continued to receive over the years. This has made the otherwise gainful sub-sector to remain undeveloped. The National Council of Sports has an insignificant budget of only Ugshs 414 million. We appreciate the establishment of the department of sports, but a budget line of only Ugshs 459 million is highly insignificant. The Education Service Commission was to advertise and appoint persons to fill these positions. That is according to the policy statement on page 6. Is this department fully operational now? 

Mr Speaker, if funding of the sports sub sector remains low, we will not harness the enormous potential that the country has. We in the opposition wonder how such a funding of less than one billion shillings will fund air tickets, allowances, and medical care for the sports men and women of our country? 

Mr Speaker, a policy statement reflected nothing to do with the reward system for sportsmen and women in terms of medals.  Does the ministry have a specific worth of money or other tangibles that come with a medal? Is this being reflected in this year’s budget? The opposition proposes that there should be a streamlined rewarding system for each medal won by our sportsmen and women. 

The opposition is further disappointed by the lack of clear plan for absorbing graduates of the school system into the labour market. For example, how many doctors will be produced at the end of this year and where will they be absorbed, given that shortfall? Unless the Ministry of Education and the related ministries harmonise the human resource development of our country, based on the economic most critical demands, our training will remain void. If this has been indicated in the ten-year strategic plan, for the sector, it is the opposition’s appeal that the Ministry of Education and Sports avails this to Parliament as soon as possible. 

Mr Speaker, no resource is more important than the human being whose training exceeds no other need.  For God and my country. I thank you and I beg to lay this on the table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for presenting the opposition’s position on the issue.

4.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join all colleagues again in apologising for the inadequacies in the Parliamentary Commission. We expected these copies of reports even before lunchtime, but up to now, we are told the equipment has some problems and we hope the copies will come your way soon.

Mr Speaker, the report on the health sector is quite brief. We just picked on areas where we think we need to lay more critical emphasis on. But I am privileged that the opposition has been given this opportunity to submit its observations and recommendations on the ministerial policy statement for health. 

We are all aware that in order to enhance the social economic development, there is need for us to have a health and reproductive society. We recognise that ill health is a major cause of the cycle of poverty at individual, household and community levels. The health sector reforms are, therefore, key to poverty alleviation in the country and we commend government for integrating the health sector strategic plan into the poverty eradication action plan. In order to provide maximum benefit for the populace, these plans must be operationalised through focused budgetary allocations and interventions in the health sector. But it is sad to note that allocations to the various sub-sectors in the Ministry of Health have been so decimal that the desired goal may not be realised at all.

Mr Speaker, in the policy statement on page 7, if I may touch on a few general observations, it is reported that in the last financial year 2005/06 all the votes in that ministry registered more than 100 per cent releases apart from Butabika and Mulago Hospital which registered 92 per cent and 94 per cent respectively. 

The percentages released give an impression of very good performance and the high level of attention being given to the Ministry of Health. But, the Ministry and all the departments therein are given very tight ceilings for preparation of their budgets. As a result, therefore, the various departments also set themselves the targets based on the limited ceilings. So, whatever is reported in the policy statement as performance above target in our opinion is rather misleading. 

Mr Speaker, the professionals in the Ministry of Health are really fully dedicated servants. We want to recognise that, but their potential to deliver services has been greatly limited by the tight ceilings that the Ministry of Finance continues to slap on the Ministry of Health. Consequently, the ministry continues to grapple with the following challenges:

Frequent stock out of medical supplies such as HIV kits and drugs and it is also recorded on page 14 of the policy statement.

There is understaffing and inadequate support for training and research, poor physical infrastructure in the major National Referral Hospital of Mulago and all the regional referral hospitals. I am glad the committee also pointed out to this effect that all the regional referral hospitals – the structures have outlived their usefulness. The situation is the same with general hospitals, which we used to call district hospitals. All the general hospitals are grappling with the same problems. 

Mr Speaker, the medical workers are under motivated and are under remunerated. There is also general lack of logistical support for ambulances for most hospitals. It is also sad again to note that there is frequent power cut leading to break down of the cold chain or storage of delicate perishables like blood and vaccines and this has led to a lot of losses countrywide. There is generally prohibitive distance to health care facilities. We appreciate government’s effort to put up health centres up to parish level, but it is not enough just to put a structure; the people should be able to accessible services. So, the issue is that distances to health facilities are prohibitive. 

Mr Speaker, even the costs of cost sharing have become increasingly unaffordable. The Ministry of Finance itself has actually compiled some of this data, through the Uganda Participatory Poverty Alleviation project. In spite of all the above problems, the share of the health sector budget has reduced over the last six years from 11.1 per cent in 1991 to now 9.7 per cent of the budget. 

Mr Speaker, since Members do not have copies, I want to maybe quote a few financial years. In 1999/2000 financial year, the health sector took 11.1 per cent of our national budget. In 2000/2001, it remained almost the same 11 per cent, in 2001-2002, it went to 11.6 and it increased the following year to 13.9 per cent. It started reducing in 2003/2004 to 12.2 per cent, 2004/2005 to 10.9 per cent, last year we had 13.7 per cent and this year we have registered a very big drop from 13.7 per cent to a mere 9.7 percent. 

Mr Speaker, the current health care budget of the government is barely $6 per person per annum yet the estimated minimum health care package; the United Nations minimum health care package estimate is at $12 per person per annum. In other words, the health sector is performing at less than 50 per cent of the requirement.  

Mr Speaker, allow me comment on a few aspects of the policy in regard to disease control. In as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned, while the policy statement on page 14 says that the prevalence rate has stagnated at 6 per cent, over the last five years. The national budget speech on page 20 says that the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS has actually increased from 6.1 per cent to 7.1 per cent over the same period. 

It is ironical that the two different figures quoted are all authentic and from the same government. One is inclined to believe that the Minister of Finance may have quoted more realistic figures than his counter part in the Ministry of Health given the situation to date. We in the opposition decried the running rate at which the HIV scourge is taking toll on our people. This debilitating malady has impoverished communities even the more.  

Mr Speaker, the mismanagement of the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria led to a very big setback in the control of the three deadly diseases. It is therefore not surprising that the prevalence of the HIV/AIDS has risen over the last five years as reported by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The opposition would like to commend government for instituting the Justice Ogoola Commission of Inquiry into the mismanagement of the Global Fund for TB, HIV/AIDS and Malaria. We however demand that the report be made public so that serious audits can be assessed on the implementation of the recommendation of the report- (Applause)- It will also demonstrate government’s commitment to transparency to combat corruption in the country. 

The opposition would also like to encourage and support efforts to enactment of laws that curb the spread of HIV/AIDS and acceptable to our traditional practices. This support must however be based on a national consensus and must not undermine the rights of privacy of individuals nor promote stigtimisation and discrimination of people living with HIV/AIDS. We also call upon government, religious institutions and all civil society organisations to mainstream HIV/AIDS messages in all their intervention. 

We further recommend that the provision of anti-retroviral therapy be high on the agenda of the ministry and that the access to ARV drugs be guarantee and procurement process should be improved to avoid the frequent stock outs of supplies that has been reported by the ministry.

Malaria:

Mr Speaker, we in the opposition share grief with government over the high prevalence rate and the high mortality as a result of malaria, which now is responsible for over 40 per cent of the disease burden. Actually, it has reached a level where it could justifiably be declared a national disaster.  As earlier observed, it is unfortunate that the golden opportunity of the $193 million Global Fund project for control of HIV/AIDS, Malaria and TB suffered abuse and it is now at bay. 

We in the opposition would like to support integrated efforts to control malaria that are safe and environmentally friendly. The proposed use of DDT for internal residual spraying has attracted a lot of public concern given that DDT is undoubtedly a persistent organic pollutant. 

We demand that the environment impact assessment report on DDT should be subjected to public scrutiny. Without the desired consensus, the internal residual spray policy using DDT will justifiably be resisted and resources will have been put to waste. So, we need to build consensus and before we take any steps, we also suggest that government considers doing more research in other ways of controlling malaria. For example, there is a popularised medicinal herb which is reported to have very strong anti malarial and mosquito repellant effects. Such a tree as locally called the Indian neem and scientifically called the Azadirachta Indica could be domesticated in all homes and institutions. 

Besides providing good shade it is good for building materials, fuel wood and oil can be extracted from its seed. It is reported that the neem oil can be smeared directly on the body to repel mosquitoes and that the oil is known to have curative effects for most of the skin diseases like ring worms, scabies, wounds and the like. 

Alternatively, since kerosene is the most used fuel in the rural areas, the oil may also be mixed with kerosene for lighting and when the kerosene lump is then lit the fumes emitted thereof are known to repel mosquitoes. Mr Speaker, it is our noble duty to encourage every research on alternative bio-medical and environmentally friendly mechanisms of controlling malaria. 

In my report, I laboured to put in other attachments-I think those copies could be available for Members to do further reading- other attachments on the various uses and benefits of the Indian neem; I have just mentioned that as one of the examples. 

So, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the malaria transmitting mosquito is ubiquitous, it is available throughout the tropics and their total eradication may not be a very easy task. The malaria parasite on the other hand is also reported to be detectable in all, even in seemingly health individuals like you and me. We maybe here looking very healthy but if the blood is stated, malaria maybe there at different stages of development. 

We, therefore, propose that government considers giving - it sounds ridiculous but we propose that government considers giving prophylactic treatment to all on a single day.  Sanitation of the population could be declared as an activity on, say, malaria day. Summoning the vectors together may not be as easy as summoning the parasite. This is an argument that we think we should try and see how to follow up.

We also would like to comment briefly on the status of the hospitals. The country has two national referral hospitals, 11 regional referral hospitals, 39 general hospitals and about 55 NGO hospitals that receive support from government.  The general conditions in all hospitals, as I had earlier on pointed out, require urgent improvement.  

Honourable members, all hospitals in the country are grappling with financial difficulties owing to the limited budgetary allocations from government.  I just want to use Mulago National Referral Hospital as an example. Mulago was only allocated Ugshs 5 billion out of the required Ugshs 24 billion.  Moreover, most departments and institutes like the Uganda Heart Institute, the Uganda Kidney Institute, are all poorly equipped- This has already been elaborated at length by committee- Many Ugandans with heart or kidney problems have had to helplessly perish because they cannot afford the high costs of treatment abroad.  

We recognise the fact that all ministries and government departments are not allowed to spend any revenue at source.  However, Sir, hospitals are giving life-saving services. It can be very frustrating to a medical practitioner to watch a patient dying just because certain drug “x” is out of stock and the money allocated for such purposes got exhausted, yet in the safe of the same hospital there is some locally generated revenue that is to be sent back to the Consolidated Fund.  

Honourable members, the hospitals cannot cope with the increased volume of work that they face. There is limited space for inpatients, there is old medical equipment, inability to cope with the power surges, understaffing in nearly all hospitals especially following a ban on recruitment of staff, inadequate motivation of the health staff and lack of proper ambulances. All these are challenges that I had earlier on alluded to.

Most districts have since found difficulties in financing the various sectors entrusted to them following the abolition of graduated tax. The opposition would therefore like to demand that government puts the desired priority on budgetary allocations to health, if PEAP and the millennium development goals are to be realised.

On this note we recommend the following: 
1. 	Government considers allowing all hospitals to spend locally generated revenue at source but fully account for it to the centre. In this way, the huge funding gaps that the ministry experiences every financial year would be bridged to a certain extent, and there would be improved service delivery.  

2. 	Government considers giving tax-free fuel to run generators in all hospitals. We have looked at all options. All hospitals should be saved of this load shedding; alternatively, if the load shedding approach cannot be achieved, government should consider giving tax-free fuel for all hospitals to run generators. We have had a lot of losses, and not just losses of supplies but also patients dying in hospitals on account of load shedding and lack of power. 

	We also would like to urge government to provide – mark my word – proper ambulances to all hospitals. We are not talking about double cabin pickups. Provide proper ambulances and ensure that procurement of supplies and equipment to hospitals and health centres is improved.

3. 	We also recommend that there must be comprehensive remuneration and attractive incentives for health workers.  This should include such incentives like housing for all medical doctors in government hospitals, extra pay for workers in areas which are difficult to access, and helping them to get their own transport through hire purchase approaches. Such incentives would attract medical workers to work without hesitation in any part of the country. This would also retain them in the profession, to avoid brain drain.  

	The Opposition desires that all Ugandans access affordable quality health services. This can only happen if government reviews the tight MTEF ceilings given to the Ministry of Health, to enable the Ministry address the glaring gaps that have greatly affected its performance.  

Thank you very much, hon. colleagues, for listening to me. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the presentation. Honourable members, after receiving all these presentations from the opposition, now you realise that you have to sit down and review the way these statements have to be presented.  When ministries present their policy statements to the committee, the committee sits and gets questions and information and tests the information given in those statements. 

Equally, I think the House would not like to be ambushed, in the sense that they do not test what is contained in the statements of the opposition. While they can make their statements, they should be tested in the committee so that the technical staff of ministries can be asked about this information. 

Now we have been given information about neem oil and so forth. We have experts in the ministry who would be able to comment, so that when we start debating, it is from an informed position. It is the first time to hear this statement and now we are required to answer and comment on it. I find that the best way of facilitating the members is to get well researched statements, be it from government or the opposition. I thank you very much.

4.26
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I take this opportunity to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services and the shadow ministers of the opposition. I would have dealt on a number of issues, but let me confine myself to the qualifications of nurses and their diplomas.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, although the chairperson of the committee said that there is going to be a review of the curriculum regarding the training of nurses and at the same time there is going to be a diploma, there is something that is happening. It seems there is acrimony between the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health. 

As we talk right now, student nurses have already done an exam, which was administered by the Ministry of Education, but then the Nurses’ Council in the Ministry of Health is telling the same students to sit for another exam.  Unless the two ministries come up very fast and brief this Parliament on what is happening, we may have a catastrophe. 

On page 21, the committee says that the Ministry of Education claims that management of nursing schools is far better compared to the situation before. As we talk right now, the registrar of the Nurses Council is offering diplomas, yet if you read further the committee chairperson is saying they are going to review the curriculum. Now we ask, what diploma are they offering when they have not reviewed the curriculum? Already, a paltry Ugshs 80,000 is being fleeced from the student nurses for a paper called a diploma, when the Ministry of Education is carrying out a review on how to offer diplomas and other related qualifications.  

Honourable members, we must move very fast to avert this crisis. If I could read something, which I may even lay on Table, about this acrimony.  This is a letter from the Minister of Education to the Principals of Health training institutions. The subject is: “Entry qualifications into training for enrolled comprehensive nurse cadres”. It goes on to say, “This circular is to notify you and the general public that in the interest of increased access to training for enrolled comprehensive nurses, the minimum entry qualification has been revised as stated under: 
1. Ordinary level certificate with a minimum of five passes in science.  
2. English and biology are core subjects while chemistry, maths and physics are non-core subjects to be considered.  
3. The non-core subjects can be substituted by geography, general science, health science, agriculture, food and nutrition and home economics as alternative subjects.” They go on. Dr. Richard Akankwasa signed the letter and a copy was given to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. 

Hear the rebuttal, Mr Speaker and honourable members, from the Nurses Council. This is to the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Education.  The subject was, “Circular of entry qualifications into enrolled comprehensive nurse training.” I am sorry, but I will be fast: 

“We have accidentally come across - hear the word ‘accidentally’- a circular from the Ministry of Education and Sports dated 9 February 2005 and signed by you, notifying the general public on the minimum entry qualifications into enrolled comprehensive nurse training. The circular, while agreeing and recognizing that Ordinary level certificate with a minimum of five passes in science subjects was an acceptable minimum requirement, went ahead to contradict itself by stating that English and Biology were the core subjects, leaving out the other sciences i.e. chemistry, mathematics and physics, as non-core subjects that can be substituted.” 

It goes on to say, “it further states that the decision to lower the entry requirements as said above was reached at in a high-level meeting that was also attended by Uganda nurses and mid wives.” 

Mr Speaker, it continues, but I will lay it on the table. 

What all this shows is that there is fighting. It seems some people were not happy about the smooth transfer of some of the aspects of Ministry of Health to Education. There have been wrangles here. Some members of staff from Health have even been removed from their houses. They are being told that “you belong to the Ministry of Health.” 

Now you see, even when they were transferring most of the aspects of the Ministry of Education, they left the examinations board still intact in the nursing sector. That is where I have the problem. Ministry of Education is examining student nurses and the council is also examining. They are giving diplomas to us, which I consider fake because the curriculum is still undergoing its review. 

The committee is saying that we need the Minister to come out. I think the chairperson of the committee, and even the ministry, should come out faster because the diplomas, as I talk right now, are being offered. You pay Ugshs 80,000. The Ministry of Education does not recognise this. These are some of the things that were coming out. 

Unless the chairperson and the Minister of Education come out, and then we sit and Parliament works out recommendations that will be amicable for all parties involved, I think the situation will be getting out of hand very soon. When the Ministry of Education wants something, I understand they really communicate to the Minister of Education. When the Ministry of Health communicates to the tutors, it only gives copies to the Minister of Education; it does not pass through the Ministry of Education.  

These, Mr Speaker, are some of the things I have noticed here. Unless the committee sits down with the minister and they give us a solution as quickly as possible, most of these things which have been given today are going to remain ink on paper, and a lot of water is going under the bridge. I thank you.

4.34
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you Mr Speaker. I rise here to raise the issue of declining performance in our senior secondary schools, especially the upcountry schools from which most of us actually got our education and were able to access higher education.  

The committee has raised very useful information about the status of the regional referral hospitals and other health centres. There has also been the issue of academic performance in universities and other tertiary institutions. I did not hear at all the declining performance of most of the upcountry schools, except for those around Kampala where parents pay not less than Ugshs 400,000 per term. This is far beyond the scope of the majority of Ugandans, who are the peasants, who form the greatest bulk of the support of the NRM as the top leadership always says. This is very unfortunate.

In the entire West Nile region only one student who completed his A’ level within West Nile was admitted into Makerere University to do Agriculture, only one!  You can check your records. This is very unfortunate. We cannot access university education from those rural schools, which used to be actually very giant schools. These schools actually used to do better than schools like Kisubi, Namilyango, Buddo, Gayaza and so forth. One such school in West Nile is St. Josephs College Ombachi and others like St. Charles Lwanga Koboko, Mvara and so forth. Go to the West, we had schools like Nyakasura, St. Leos, Kabalega, Ntare, Kigezi College and many others. In the East, St. Peters Tororo, Nabumali, Mwiri, Teso College Aloet and several others.  

It is true that in the 1970s and 1980s we had a problem with the national army. The present government under President Yoweri Museveni was able to turn that round, to come up with a fairly pro-people national army. This is a fact; I always stand for the truth. 

Now the question is, if this same government can turn round a bad army into a pro-people army, what is difficult about turning round our schools which used to do very well in the past but cannot now send students to Makerere University and other institutions? Is it deliberate? I want to know.

When the Minister of Education came here last year during the Seventh Parliament and presented the issue of quota system admission into Makerere, I opposed it.  I said I would accept it as a temporary measure. The Hansard can prove that. Now many of us politicians from upcountry, from those disadvantaged regions, have to foot the education bills of the brilliant students from our areas so that they come and do their A’ levels in schools like Buddo, Kisubi, Namagunga and the others. If you check your records again, you will find that schools like Nyakasura and St. Leos did not send any students on government sponsorship apart from those on quota system. 

If we are to promote a bright future for the young generation, a future that should cover the entire country, the Ministry of Education should do something to revamp these once powerful senior secondary schools. What does the future hold for places like West Nile, the greater North, the far East, here in Buganda, areas outside our Kampala District and the neighbouring districts like Mukono, Wakiso and so forth? My appeal to the Minister, once again, is that please do something, instead of actually going for these schools you say you are going to construct - are they 41 - in the country. 

If I was the Minister of Education, I would rather do something to cure these dilapidating, declining once giant schools in the country, and then proceed to construct these so-called schools to accommodate the graduates from the UPE.

I want to raise the issue of Mulago Heart Institute. We got a letter, as Members of Parliament, from Dr John Omagino, who is a consultant surgeon at that institute. The Board Chairman, Robert Subunya, signed this letter. They were appealing to Parliament to support them so that money can be released from the Executive arm of Government to put in place a unit to cater for the sick. 

Many of us have been reading in the newspapers about people who are appealing for money to take their children to India and South Africa for heart treatment. Mr Speaker, it is my conviction that Dr Omagino and his Board chairman have written to us only after being failed by the officials, both technocrats and the political leadership, of the Ministry of Health.  

The letter is self-explanatory. According to them, for this project a total cost of US $3.6 million will actually help them take off. They have even gone ahead to propose that they are not in a hurry to have this money at once, that it can be phased out. For the start, they have come up with a figure of $1 million. 

What surprises me is that this very government of ours is always ready to bail out people like Basajjabalaba; can you imagine! This is a big shame! When that man falls into a financial crisis, the State is ready to borrow money from heaven to bail him out. When professionals have Ugandans - the citizens of this country - at heart for a very important institution like the Uganda Heart Institute, this loving government of ours cannot even raise one dollar. What a shame! 

Dr Omagino has gone ahead and come out with six advantages that we will, as a country, get out of this institution:

1. 	More Ugandans will access the service. Up to five patients can be worked on per day but this can rise with visiting teams.
2. The cost reduction from US$ 12,000 per patient abroad will come down to US$4,000. 
3. 	There will be training opportunities for doctors, nurses and other health professionals, instead of sending them abroad.
4. 	Attracting collaboration with sister institutions, individual cardiologists and cardiac surgeons who can visit and work with our team.
5. 	Stimulate our young and talented professionals to join the cardiac specialty.
6. 	There will be the creation of employment and job opportunities for Ugandan professionals.

May I, therefore, appeal through hon. Crispus Kiyonga, a renown medical doctor, please do us a favour and talk to people who matter in this country, so that we can be able to raise this money from the national treasury and have this unit put in place. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.49
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the report that has been presented by the chairman. It is well researched, elaborate and a challenge for those who are to implement it for better performance. 

Mr Speaker, I arise on two aspects. First and foremost, I arise on the issue of the Ministry of Education and Sports, and specifically the area of sports. Although the Ministry is a custodian of sports, I see very little input in the section of sports. I, therefore, appeal to you to consider this as a section that employs so many youths in various fields. Sports is so elaborate; it has the category of football, athletics, boxing and so on. Any potential sporting person that excels in this section gets a job globally. We always go and watch football after we retire from our plenary. These are people from the countries that have supported sports.  

I am lamenting; a couple of weeks ago Uganda was represented by six athletes at the All Africa Athletics Championships in Madagascar. Unfortunately, there was no coach for them due to inadequate funding. This is a very serious issue, and yet Uganda had the highest glory in sports in East Africa. So, there is need for us to support this. We are on record, we are in the world of Olympics, and so we should support this.  

A fortnight ago we were in Dar-es-Salaam and I happened to meet my colleague with whom I was in Christ Church, New Zealand. His name is Baga, a Tanzanian athlete. He told me they have a separate ministry that takes care of sports and every club is taken as a department. Why don’t we borrow that example and also have a separate ministry that does not again go to Ministry of Education, which is too large? Look at the funding there, our budget also at times overstretches!  

Furthermore, Mr Speaker, there is the issue of help. Our government intends to extend and bring services to the people, increasing the medical and administration units. Here in Karamoja we have benefited by getting new districts; the total number of districts in Karamoja is now five. Unfortunately when I saw the list of the referral hospitals, we are not there. The population of Karamoja is no longer 300, which people used to say was just nothing; we are now 1,000,900. In spite of whatever is happening there, we are increasing –(Laughter)- a referral hospital is like Mulago. Some of us have no access to Mulago because it is so far. If you give us a referral hospital, that is our Mulago. 

On the issue of ambulances, I thank the Member who raised this issue. This is a very crucial area. To some of the committees now presenting their reports, please, I appeal to you, let us go to the rural areas and see what is happening. Some people have transformed donkeys into ambulances and some use bicycles. Why not budget seriously for ambulances for this area?  

In Moroto Hospital, which was constructed in 1952, the theatre is completely dilapidated, anytime it might burry the doctor and the patients. Honourable ministers, please take time to report to the district. It is not a matter of attacking somebody. It is a fact that when you go to some areas you will think that there is no life there. So I was delighted to see that for the first time a school is being put in Karamoja, in Moroto District, in Matheniko; this is a very big achievement. 

However, I also need a public university for Karamoja –(Laughter)- Yes! There are mushrooming universities here and there. Karamoja is a special case. We need a public university because our university is now the grade III teacher colleges. We do not have any university. From secondary, you go to grade III and that is it; there is no diploma course anymore. We want a public university for Karamoja and I am appealing with my humble heart because education does a lot. 

I am, therefore, saying support sports. We shall reduce the issue of people floating after graduating because they do not have any job. I also appeal for a university for Karamoja. Thank you. 

4.55
MS FARIDAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will also begin by thanking the chairperson of the committee for the good report he has given us and the good insight of the two sectors he has represented here. I also thank the shadow ministers for their reports.

Mr Speaker, I have an observation, and I seek indulgence from the hon. Minister of Education who is present here. I appreciate the observation made by the committee about the suspension of SFG funds and the reasons given. Mubende District has a problem here. The suspension of SFG funds was done abruptly. Although they have given us genuine reasons, we have to know that this was done when the initial planning and budgeting of the districts was already done. The IPFS were presented to the districts and of course they went on to plan in line with those IPFS. When you plan of course you anticipate some variances, but we never anticipated a variance of getting to zero. As far as we see it now, Mubende District SFG is zero.

Mubende District had a problem. In the last financial year, 2005/2006, we never realised our SFG releases 100 percent. We got a deficit of Shs 177 million, of course which was translated into debts to the district. This was from the contracts, which were given to the contractors to do SFG work, but here we are in a dilemma. That debt still stands at Shs 177 million and we are not getting anymore money from SFG. We would take the suggestion that classroom construction is suspended, but what are we going to do with Shs 177 million? 

Honourable members, I think we all realise the revenue crisis our districts are in. We passed our budget last Friday, with estimated revenue of Shs 500 million. Even if we realise this local revenue at 100 percent, still we cannot take away Shs 177 million to pay those contractors who the district is indebted to. So, we are here in a dilemma. The district is going to be dragged to courts yet this was not our mistake. I seek the advice of the hon. Minister of Education on the way forward. How are we supposed to cover up this? As a district, we see ourselves at crossroads.

The other issue, Mr Speaker, is just a correction for our records. On annex 1 of the committee report we have a list of schools where laboratories were received. On that list we have two schools, St Joseph’s Kakindu Senior Secondary School, Mubende and Mityana Secondary School, Mubende. I think on the commencement of this project Mubende was still one district. As we talk now, Mityana District was curved out of Mubende District and those two schools come from Mityana District. I request the people concerned to correct it to Mityana, so that in future when there is an opportunity, they do not take Mubende as having benefited from the project. We just have to make it straight: St Joseph’s Kakindu Senior Secondary School is in Mityana District, and so is Mityana Secondary School. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.59
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on two issues. The first one is about the UPE programme. I want to thank the committee for highlighting the plight of Uganda’s children. My emphasis is on the dropout of children with disabilities. Much as we have a programme in place, what has happened is that children with disabilities, especially the blind and the deaf, have not been well facilitated in terms of human resource to handle their cases. These are children who have special needs. The blind need Braille machines and instruction material, and the deaf need teachers who are specialised in special needs education. I appeal to government to recruit teachers who have trained in special needs education - in their recruitment policy for all the primary schools in the country. 

Whereas we might think of having specialised schools, these children might feel isolated. So, what we are thinking of is having an integrated education system where we can have these children integrate in the normal learning processes. By doing so, we need teachers who can handle them at that level. Therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I urge you to help in advancing this cause. These teachers who handle primary school children are being recruited and recognised. Even where possible, since there are incentives given to employees who work in what I call hard environments, there is need to have a special incentive for these teachers who handle students with disabilities.

Another point I want to put across is about the funding of UNISE. This is an arm of Kyambogo University, which trains teachers in special needs education. It was being funded by DANIDA, but some time later DANIDA pulled out. The funding, which goes to Kyambogo University is too little to have specialised programmes handled at UNISE. If the Ministry of Education can increase the funding of UNISE, this will create room for more teachers, who can handle the increasing number of assignments in this specialised area, to be trained.

As we enter the year 2007 where we are going to have universal secondary education, I see a problem when it comes to children or students with disabilities. It should be government policy that when they are recruiting, as they are going to do, they take into account the special needs of children with disabilities. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as you may realise, the few institutions, which cater for children or students with disabilities, are sparsely located. At times they are too expensive for most of the parents with children with disabilities. Someone from Mbarara cannot have his or her children taken to Madera. So, if we can have teachers trained in special needs education recruited and deployed in these secondary schools, then it will ease on the drop out of children with disabilities.  

The Government came up with a policy of having four schools in each region to cater for the special educational needs of persons with disabilities. Most of these schools are, however, in a sorry state and others are yet to be completed. I urge government, as we go in for the universal secondary education to finalise the completion and where possible rehabilitate some of these institutions, so that we can have a win-win situation. Whereas we cater for the majority who are able, we should also have a slot for the marginalised, those are persons with disabilities. I urge the Ministry of Education to take into account special needs. We need an integrated education system, which takes into account all the needs of the people who are Ugandans.  

The other issue is the teaching of special needs education at tertiary level. The realisation is that apart from UNISE, other institutions of higher education do not emphasise teaching of special needs education as part and parcel of their education programmes. I urge the Ministry of Education to streamline this. I urge them to integrate it in their education policy that special needs education becomes compulsory in primary teacher education institutions, national teacher colleges and other educational institutions, which are mandated to do education training in this country. 

Mr Speaker, health institutions in this country are not disability friendly. If you move through your constituencies, you will find that it is hard for us. It is hard especially for women with disabilities to climb these labour ward beds and access some of the public places in these hospitals. I urge the Ministry of Health, in their planning, to take into consideration some of the issues that pertain to the accessibility of persons with disabilities.  

Much as we have referral hospitals in most of the regions where I have been - for about two months now I have been going there - the facilities in most of these referral hospitals are in a sorry state. Where they exist, many are not operational. The generators are there but they are not working. The x-ray machines are there but they are not working. The greatest burden that we are faced with in most of the referral hospitals is lack of blood. The blood stores in most of the referral hospitals are empty. I raised this issue sometime back to the Minister of Health. He told me he was going to handle it. I am happy he is here and maybe he will give us an update.  

Mr Speaker, as I rest my case, emphasis should be given to the plight of persons with disabilities because they are dear to us. If you are here and you have spectacles, then you are a disabled person. Maybe you do not know that. So, when I am talking of people with disabilities, many of us here are disabled and we do not know. We should support this and advance our case. We are marginalised, and some of us do not know that actually we are disabled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.10
MR COSMAS BUSIMA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I should start by thanking the chairman for the report, which is well presented. I have a few comments to make. Like my friend hon. Pajobo, I thought that it was the belief of all people from Mt Elgon that Mt Elgon Technical College would be part of Busitema University. In this report, I do not see Mt Elgon being reflected as a constituency of Busitema University. 

The other thing I would like to say is that, in the report the committee indicates that there is Shs 0.5 billion available for construction of a library at Makerere University Business School. I agree with them, you cannot run an institution of that level without a library. This Shs 0.5 billion to me is a good start, but it is very little. More funds should be looked for. It may not be enough, but I am just pointing it out so that it is on record. A library to serve such an institution will cost more than that.  

Another thing, which I would like to comment on, is the issue of medical equipment. A number of Members have talked about it. You find that we do not have specific standards for medical equipment and yet they are so vital in health delivery. We do not have set standards to procure our equipment. We get equipment from India, Spain and Germany. It is costly to our country because they come with different specifications. There is need to come up with definite specifications, which the suppliers must meet. 

Another issue on medical equipment; we lack trained people to maintain our equipment. You will get shocked when you go to Mulago and find recently procured equipment. It is lying in the yard because we do not have specialists who can actually maintain this equipment and run it! A good example is the X-ray machines, which we have been talking about. We have very beautiful, modern X-ray machines in Mulago but their maintenance is poor because we do not have people who have been specifically trained to repair and maintain them. We may have people who can operate them but operation is different from repairing them. There is need to look into that field and see if we can have young men trained to do that.  

The other issue I would like to comment on is the issue of health centre IVs. I was not a Member of the last Parliament, but I would like to thank that person who initiated the idea of health centre IVs. Honourable members, the diseases that kill most of us are called communicable diseases. We die of Malaria, Cholera, Typhoid; diseases for which we do not need to go to Mulago. Those can be handled at health centre IIIs, even IIs. Why am I saying so? We need to consolidate health centre IVs instead of thinking of referral hospitals. What they will do is to open up surgery. 

This morning, Members were talking of 80 percent of Ugandans living in rural areas. Those guys do not suffer from heart failure. In most cases they will die of diseases like Cholera or Dysentery; so if we are to spend a lot of money, it should be in the direction of health centre IVs. If we really care for the 80 percent, the peasants, we should do this. 

Members have read about the issue of double cabins being called ambulances. In my understanding, an ambulance is any vehicle, which serves hospitals. You find that ambulances are not in hospitals. They are in health centre IVs and their major purpose is to deliver drugs. I am sure for every Member here who has something called a district hospital there is an ambulance we know of. So, let us get our priorities right. A double cabin will serve very well in a rural area, in health centre IVs, but may not do well in Arua Hospital or another hospital like Lira. They may need the normal ambulance we know of.  

Mr Speaker, I agree with members who talked about poor performance in the rural areas. I tend to agree with them, but we should address some issues. One Member said His Excellency the President managed to turn the Army round, which was good. However, as much as UPE is a government issue, it is being implemented at district level. The people to blame are not the centre. Each district has a team of educational officers, inspectors, tutors; those are the people who should be blamed. It is up to us as leaders to go back to our districts and work on them because they are the ones failing the Government. It is not the Government failing itself. It is those people who have been entrusted with the duty of implementing UPE at that local level that are not performing. As Members are saying, the duty should be withdrawn from the district and it comes to the centre, which again will defeat the purpose of decentralisation.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I will echo what a Member here has just said, the issue of natural medicine. I am a believer in natural medicine. That is what I take. When I have Malaria, I do not go to any hospital, I just go for herbs. I used to have Hypertension and I controlled it using the drugs provided by Dr Nambatya at Wandegeya. You can see I am a healthy man. When I see that issue missing in the report on Health, I become concerned. Thank you for allowing me to express it.

5.20
DR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank the committee for their good report. I need clarification from the Minister of Education. My reference is on page 5 of the chairman’s report and on annex 3, that is, the issue of the 41 seed secondary schools. 

I agree with the reason the committee gave, that they are going to construct 41 seed secondary schools in sub-counties without any other form of secondary school. When you go to annex 3, there is a list of the 41 sub-counties, but Pallisa District is allocated two positions, in Gogonyo sub-county and Abobong sub-county. I presume there are many other sub-counties in the whole country that do not have any form of secondary school. If my assumption is wrong, at least in my county I have a sub-county with no secondary school, that is, Ngenge sub-county. So, what is the criterion for allocating Pallisa County two schools in two sub-counties when other sub-counties like Ngenge sub-county do not have any form of secondary school? 

Since I am the one who has raised this, I propose that one of the positions allocated to Pallisa District should go to Ngenge sub-county or the other two sub-counties of Benet and Kwanyi, which have no secondary school at all. At least the criteria should be really convincing. If they are not convincing, one of the allocations given to Pallisa District should go to Kween County. Thank you very much.  

5.22
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to express a few comments on the report, which has been very ably presented today.  

First, I would like to thank the Ministry of Education for having taken seriously our very many years of a request to have a university established in the east. For that, we offer you a big clap. We also thank you very much for the distribution of the various colleges in this university. We know that it is an institution that will benefit the entire region, and the way the colleges have been distributed throughout the region makes us have a lot of gratitude. We definitely can now start to get our children very well educated.  

However, as I said earlier on, we have a problem. I think it has also been mentioned here by one of the Members. We have a problem of education standards in the lower classes. The UPE classes are operating okay, but the children are not passing. I can tell you that for last year, in the whole constituency of West Budama North we had only 16 first grades in primary seven. It is important that the problem facing these children is resolved one way or the other, so that we do not have to import students from other places or outside the country - as you know, we are very close to Kenya - to fill our university when it begins operating. We need to develop these children to take up their positions in this university.  

We have had a lot of assistance from some well wishers to provide us with textbooks. We feel that what we already have is not enough. The teachers are not adequate. The text books, which the children use, are also not adequate; the ratio is too high. Worse still, when the few children that manage to get to the secondary schools get there, they also do not perform very well. The fate of many of these schools was mentioned here. Schools like Tororo College, Budaka College, Kachonga, and so on, no longer perform as they used to. So, please, Ministry of Education, we implore you to assist us in developing the standards of these schools.  

Going on to the health sector, it is a known fact that medicines in the health centres are inadequate. However, we are grateful for what the National Medical Stores (NMS) is doing. They try their best to supply us with medicines, much as the supply is inadequate. Their cry, however, is that the credit lines are under-funded. There is need for more money to be put in these credit lines so that we are able to procure more medicines, especially for health centre IVs. 

It is also a fact that the management of some of these credit lines seems to be rather long. The in-charge of health centre IVs has got to write to the CAO, who then writes to the Medical Stores, to procure medicine. I do not know why they do not go direct? A case in point is a recent situation where I found at our health centre IV, out of the four cycles of requisition for medicines only one had been accomplished, and for about six months there had been no medicines. When we got in touch with NMS, we immediately got the supplies that we required. It is just because of the length of the procurement process, which we are talking about. So, there should be a way of shortening this process to ensure that the procurement is done expeditiously.  

Apart from the medicines, there is a question of the medical equipment, the mattresses, the beds, the weighing scales; all these are actually not there. Sometimes you find an empty bed without a mattress. Sometimes all the people are sleeping on the floor; or women are sharing wards with men. It is really a very serious issue! It is important that the Ministry addresses this problem.  

I propose that as we procure medicines through the credit lines, we should also procure some of this equipment and supplies through some established credit lines so that we do not have to wait for some donations from elsewhere. I have been informed by the Minister of Health that there is some development towards procuring these supplies through credit lines. Let it be expedited, so that at least we are able to get the supplies quickly and do not have to wait for the mattresses to get torn before we can get more.

When I looked at the report, I did not see any special mention of the health centre IIs. I represent a very rural constituency. The referral hospital in the district is about 30 kilometres away from the nearest corner of my constituency in Tororo. These are the centres that are meant to help my people, the parish citizens. I request that these be given a lot of attention. 

First of all, much as it is a policy that they should be built in every parish, I think right now I do not have more than five, out of the estimated 30 or so to be constructed. It is not mentioned in the report. I request that some special attention be given to this. When I looked at the budget PHC for Tororo District, I did not see any figure there. So I request that we also emphasize on the construction of these health centre IIs and equipping of the few that are now operating in peoples’ homes.  

THE SPEAKER: We have to curtail debate, because there are so many contributors.

MR OKECHO: Okay, I think I do not need to mention much. My next point is on the schools, which are yet to receive some accreditation as far as teachers are concerned. There are so many schools without proper teachers. I thank the ministry, again for earmarked appointment of a few more teachers into these schools. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.33
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Laughter)- yes, he chose me some time. He did!

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Before you continue with your contribution, let me explain what I am trying to do. I am trying to spread out the contributions to distant places. If you cover, for instance Pallisa, those issues around may be expressed. You are too many and -(Interjections)- there is Bunyoro. That is what I am trying to do, please, bear with me. I am trying to cover the entire country. So, this is Buvuma Islands.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. I want to also thank the shadow ministers and the previous speakers. 

Looking at page 4 of the report, I want to emphasize the committee’s recommendation that the law to legislate against the high dropout rate for UPE pupils is long overdue. On this note, I want the Minister of Health to collaborate with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and also the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - why am I saying this? When you visit the shores of Lake Victoria you will find that most of the school-going pupils are actually used as labourers. Unless the three ministries work as a team, we cannot achieve the set objective. 

I would like to say that the three ministries should actually work as a team because the LCs cannot assist us on this note. You know that they are elective. We should use the technical people to enforce the law, to make sure that most of these children can actually go to school.

I also want to agree with the committee on Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE), on page 5. Our teachers’ salaries have just been increased by Shs 20,000. This Parliament has been making the same recommendation, to increase the threshold from Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000 so that at least these teachers will be within the bracket. Otherwise, when you increase on one hand and the other hand is taxing it, it does not make sense.  

If we could recall, since the Income Tax Act was enacted the threshold has never been changed. It is hardly ten years now. The cost of living has been increasing year after year, so there is need for the Minister of Finance to consider increasing the threshold on this note.

I also would like to know from the Minister the criteria used to select the 41 secondary schools. The honourable minister knows very well that Buvuma Islands, with four sub-counties, has only one secondary school, and yet these are islands. I would love to have seen one of the sub-counties of Buvuma, at least one. The three do not have at all, but at least one should have been selected to benefit. On the mainland, students can walk, but these are islands. I think the honourable minister, since he had even promised to assess the education status on the Island, will consider the issue of Buvuma so that at least we benefit. The three sub-counties do not have anything. They do not have private or government schools. So there is need for Buvuma to be considered.

My last concern is on the health sector. I would have loved -(Interjection)- Buvuma is not there, I will not take it. Regarding the 41 schools, Buvuma is not on the list so I do not want to take that information.

Regarding the health sector, I would have loved to see the Ministry of Health consider the issue of Sleeping Sickness. It has not been mentioned at all. I would have loved to see the prevention, but it has not been mentioned anywhere in the report. If you recall very well, the Minister of Health had undertaken to equip the health centre IVs in Buvuma sub-county with testing and even drugs to treat Sleeping Sickness. When I see nothing -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is why I told you that the supervisory role of these committees should not end with the Budget process; it should be a continuous process. After the budget, committees should sit and say, “We captured this during this period”, and then they investigate and come back. Let it be a continuous process rather than stopping with these policies, which we deal with at Budget time.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance but this is the time. If nothing has been allocated on health regarding Sleeping Sickness, when the people fall sick you cannot again think about another debate on the Floor. I think there was need for the Minister of Health to make some allocations for some areas, especially hospitals in Busoga and within Mukono, so that they can have the drugs. It is a fact that areas around Lake Victoria still have tsetse flies, which cause sleeping sickness. So we need actually to safeguard. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.46
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have some three issues of concern. 

One is a clarification. We have Gulu Regional Referral Hospital and very many times I have gone to the ground – currently Gulu University is using Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I got information that Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is right now a national referral hospital. I just want clarification from the minister, if that is the status of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital right now? If it is so, then it has to be removed from the 11, 12, 13 regional referral hospitals and also be given the attention a national referral hospital deserves. If it is a regional referral hospital, it is really in a very sorry state. It needs a lot of attention. If the status has been raised to a national referral hospital, then even more allocation of resources has to be given to Gulu Hospital. I need clarification because I do not have the facts and figures. I do not have somewhere to refer to yet that this is what has been written on it.

I also want to comment on Gulu University. It was raised here on page 11 that Gulu University has a lot of problems. It has been left hanging like that; no response, no recommendation. I do not know if that is how Gulu University is going to be treated? Gulu University is actually one of those government universities. In fact, it takes more students from elsewhere than Gulu District itself.  So, attention should be given to that university.

I also seek clarification on annex 1. They mention Gulu, Lacor Girls; and we have St Mary’s School Lacor. So this Lacor Girls School is a bit of a problem to me. It needs some checking up, so that we put the right name. That is not really the right name because we do not have Lacor Girls. We have Sacred Heart Girls’ School, but Lacor Girls is not there.  

I also want to make an observation on this school for the war-affected children. All the children of Gulu District or of Northern Uganda have been affected by the war. There are, however, very specific kinds of children who are admitted to that school. I just want to make an observation. If it is really for the children who are formerly abducted, we are going to stigmatise them more, if we do not want to integrate them with all other children from all walks of life. Yes, we need that school very much, but let us include all the children, not only those children who were abducted. We want them to believe that they are the same as all other children from the community. Thank you very much.

5.53
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for Social Services for what they have presented to this august House. My concerns are in the areas of education, especially the primary and secondary school level.  

Mr Speaker, I received communication from the Ministry of Education last financial year to the effect that this financial year three schools in my constituency would be considered, namely Barlonyo Memorial Agro-technical School, Lira Senior Secondary School and Barakwo Senior Secondary School. To my surprise, they have not appeared anywhere in this financial year.  

When you consider the seed schools, as I was trying to read, in some sub-regions there are over three or four. In some districts, there are over two. I do not understand how the planning unit in the Ministry of Education came out with this kind of arrangement. In my constituency, we really deserve this consideration. In my constituency, and especially in Lira District, when we dissolved the learning centres, up to now the state of pupils is still unsolved. 

I reported to this House and the Minister concerned told me they were going to take action. To-date these pupils are at large and we are doing resettlement. Parents from these IDP camps, which were in Lira Municipality, are going back to their respective sub-counties. They are unable to construct temporary shelters there, so they commute between the former IDP camps and the new IDP camps. These pupils are just hanging between these two camps. I wonder what government is doing about this.  

In my constituency, we are moving our people from the original 12 camps to their respective IDP camps. These camps are located on the grounds of primary schools. Yesterday I was there and they told me that these primary schools, which are 11, will open next term. I wonder what the Ministry of Education has in place to ensure that these primary schools where the new IDP camps are located are going to start formally. Otherwise the teachers’ houses are not there, they are not even willing to construct huts in these new IDP camps and they have to commute from Lira Municipality. I do know what kind of assistance they will get in order to operate normally.  

Mr Speaker, you remember last year we raised on the Floor of this House the issue of the status of the IDPs in our district and the ministers said they were going to take action immediately. They were to ensure that the status of the IDP camps was known, but up to date nothing has been done. I wonder if that ministry is also in the – and with that kind of promises, you can go to IDP camps now and look at the status of these people and you just sympathize with them. We have no health centres there; no staff and the people are just living at the mercy of God. So, I appeal to the Minister concerned to work on this immediately.  

If we go by parish, out of the 20 parishes I have in my constituency, there were only two health units being constructed, which work has ever since stopped because of the war. I do not know what the planning unit in the Ministry of Health is trying to do for these people? If it were not because of some of these NGOs, which have got mobile clinics, we would have lost people in big numbers.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in Lira District and particularly in my constituency we have suffered three main “deaths” and we are being buried in coffins with three ends. The first “death” is education. We have died there completely because that has been assisted by a “senior death” called poverty and now when the “third death” called disease comes in, we are not going to survive these coming years. You can wonder after 20 years every honourable member on this Floor is complaining about help and about education, where are we moving? For 20 years we talk of peace and progress, are we complaining or we are just thanking ourselves?

Otherwise, my serious concern to the ministry is that they should take what we state here seriously. Let us have serious planning and then we implement what we have said here because there is a difference between what we say here and what is on the ground. What is on the ground is so different that we come here to complain it, year in and out. When are we going to enjoy talking peacefully in this House? 

Otherwise, let us turn this honourable House into a quarrelling and complaining room because it is axiomatic that we have not achieved anything. Why do we say, “Thank you for the good report”, and soon after begin complaining? Why are you complaining after saying that the report has been very good? Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter! Let us be serious. Therefore, I am appealing to the honourable ministers - the hon. Minister of Education has just told me that my constituency is going to be dealt with through a macro plan from the Prime Minister’s Office. I do not know where the budget is and I have not seen it anywhere. I do not know how they are going to address this issue. 

Unfortunately, this letter, which was written to His Excellency the President, was copied to me and the Rt hon. Prime Minister. I beg the honourable minister to include at least one of the schools in this process; otherwise we are being unfairly treated. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.53
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, hon. Speaker. I have only two or three areas, which I want to find out from the Minister responsible for Primary Education. In Lira there are so many schools that have a different number of staffing levels, in some schools there are only three teachers posted and this has gone on for five, six, even seven years.

Secondly, there are schools where teachers have died and they have sought permission for replacement but they have not been given.

Thirdly, there are teachers who have upgraded but cannot be considered at their new qualification level. So, I want to know from the Minister whether this policy of the ceiling presented to various primary schools still holds.  

Then with the withdrawal of SFG funds, I am not sure whether there is a link between the headquarters of the Ministry of Education and that of local government. The schools really require serious attention. Some of them soon after completing the buildings, they require immediate rehabilitation or renovation and we are pulling away from them and creating new arenas for development!  

I would also want to know from the Minister of Education whether they are aware of the state of the classrooms that were constructed, which need a lot of repair.

Finally, while looking at this annex 1; I want to appeal to the Minister for Education that in the interest of promoting girl-child education at secondary school level, I have only one very big and important girls’ secondary school called St Catherine in my constituency. I have very many big schools but none of them is receiving a rehabilitation programme and yet we are going to new sub-counties to construct new schools without mention of rehabilitation of the existing schools! So, if there is any favour I am seeking for from this ministry, let them give us either a laboratory or a library for St Catherine Girls’ Secondary School located at Boroboro in Erute South Constituency.  I thank you.

5.56
MR MOSES APILIGA (UPC, West Moyo County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, I would first of all like to congratulate this government particularly the Ministry of Education for maintaining the high standards of education of our country and also thank all the Ugandans for taking education very seriously. Wherever Ugandans travel abroad, they perform with distinction and it is something for which we should all be proud of as a nation.  

There is an element of education, especially tertiary education, which also brings foreigners to this country and they in turn bring in foreign exchange. I think due recognition should be given to this. Furthermore, a lot of our graduates when they travel and work abroad, they are able to remit sums of money, which benefit this country for which we should be grateful and proud and thank the Ministry of Education for producing labour that is internationally marketable.

However, I would like to draw the attention of the Ministry of Education to our local needs. Sometimes we are not sure whether a lot of our people are trained to travel abroad. Brain drain remains a concern particularly in the fields of health and education itself. I have very few observations to make in relation to education. I did not see anything in relation to ICT particularly in secondary schools. 

Most of our students who left this country were able to fit elsewhere because their level of education was internationally acceptable. However, now in areas of ICT we are really lagging behind. I would, therefore, beg the Ministry of Education to seriously consider introducing ICT in all our secondary schools free of charge starting with the areas, which are really very poor. 

There are particular areas where we are performing badly particularly in upcountry schools due to lack of libraries. I have not seen enough emphasis in the report here placed on the use of libraries, just basic libraries, which don’t even have access to the Internet, to enable students gain information.  

Mr Speaker, I also note that many of our students are not able to continue with science because of lack of laboratories. In Moyo, for example, there is only one secondary school, out of the five that have recently been installed, with a laboratory. Therefore, it means the others do not have the full benefit of learning science and getting science education.

The question of the teachers has been alluded to earlier by colleagues, but I have noted with extreme concern that since 1996, recruitment for secondary schools’ teachers had been suspended. It is only this year that recruitment is going to commence. At the same time, primary school teachers’ recruitment has been suspended. Both primary and secondary schools do require a lot more teachers who need to be trained further. 

I am particularly grateful, Mr Speaker, to note that Lefori, which is in my constituency is included as one of the 41 UPPET schools. Unfortunately, when I told this good news to my constituents this afternoon, the feedback I got was, “Do not be fooled by what is promised because it is going to be the same as in health, it will never occur.” There is a sense of disbelief among the people when the government says they are going to do something. It remains my hope that what is promised here will be fulfilled. 

Mr Speaker, turning to health, Moyo Hospital, which was one of the 22 hospitals built by UPC, is in a terrible state. Previous ministers of Health do agree with this and when they make visits to Moyo they promise that the hospital needs complete refurbishment. As of now the sewerage system is not working. The 100-bedded hospital has 120 to 160 people sleeping in various parts of the hospital; some on beds, many on the floor. This is deplorable!

We also note that the X-ray machine, while it has been properly reported in the committee report, was also noted two years ago to be in need of replacement. Last year it was promised that one of the 19 X-ray machines, which were ordered, would be installed in Moyo, but for some reason this has not occurred and it is included yet as another promise. 

The generator in the same hospital, which is required for sterilisation of equipment and for a lot of other the things, is not working. Immediate attention should really be paid to this.

Finally, Cholera is accepted as an endemic disease only in Uganda. Moyo has Cholera spreading from one sub-county to another. No action seems to be taken about this, and I draw the attention of the Minister of Health to these matters. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

6.05
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for granting me this chance. I will supplement on what hon. Apiliga has said. Obongi is a place hosting many refugees in Uganda - it is in Moyo, West Nile. We benefited from the calamities of the Sudanese. We have learnt that in calamities there are opportunities for the disadvantaged or marginalised people. But our fears are that the Sudanese are going. The provisions they had for education from which the people of Obongi benefited will be going. Where are we going to remain? 

This I say with reference to page 5, where there is talk about review of the curriculum and the subjects particularly covered being reduced from 40 to 22. The report here has not included what subjects are being reduced. And if the subject of my concern, which is “Introduction to Computers,” is one of them, then the only school in the whole of Obongi that has got one computer belongs to the Sudanese. We are not sure whether it is going to run after their return to their country. I am, therefore, requesting the Government, particularly the Ministry of Education and this committee of Parliament, to visit Obongi and assess the deficiencies in the area of coverage of secondary schools per sub-county. 

There is only one secondary school in the whole of Obongi County and that is Obongi Secondary School and yet we have three sub-counties. Obongi Secondary School was terribly affected by the war of the West Nile Bank Front. It lost a lot of equipment and its lorry, and this matter was reported to the Ministry of Education. We were promised a replacement over five years ago and as my colleague hon. Apiliga has said, people in Obongi know that government does not deliver. The example is the lorry.  

We are talking about reconstruction of the whole of Northern Uganda now that the war is ending. Our situation in West Nile has been a little bit better than that of our brothers in the Acholi sub- region. We, therefore, request you honourable members to take seriously the issues of the people of Obongi especially with regard to education. 

Finally, the most affected area as far as Cholera is concerned in Moyo District is Obongi constituency. There seems to be a reservoir of Cholera germs in the neighbouring areas of Sudan because of this traffic of people to and fro. You try to treat the people who are affected with the Cholera here and more come from the Sudan. I personally went to the Ministry of Health, but I am very disappointed to report here that the promises which were made amicably on a round table to control the disease have not been implemented. I request the committee to come to Obongi. I will take you to Obongi so that you see for yourselves.

THE SPEAKER:  What is the cause of Cholera?

MR FUNGAROO: The cause of Cholera is poor hygiene and sanitation; and so we need to break the cycle of transmission of the disease.  

We have tried to mobilise within ourselves, but the source is from Sudan. We cannot go to Sudan and demobilise the Sudanese there, let alone the fact that the capacity of our health and infrastructure is very weak to handle the inflow of the new cases, which are the cause of concern. We were for example, promised beds by the Ministry of Health - Cholera beds - but none has been delivered up to now. And all the mattresses, which existed there, were soaked with vomit, which rendered them unusable. This is why I am here to request for more interventions from the Ministry of Health. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.10
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the report on social services. I have some few issues to raise concerning my district. 

Regarding education, I would like to thank the NRM Government and the Ministry of Education for declaring free secondary education beginning in 2007. Actually this excited everybody, and I think that is why the NRM went through. We are very grateful.  

The Government said that we shall be having at least one secondary school in every sub-county. As a politician, I went wild telling them that, “We shall have one secondary school per sub-county”, but now the ministry has come with only 41 schools to be constructed! In Koboko District we have only four government-aided secondly schools. Kuluva sub-county is not among the 41 and yet it is a very large sub-county, and also within the sub-counties where we have one, the distance between one sub- county and another is over six miles. 

Definitely, even if we declare universal secondary education, the people of Koboko will never benefit because the schools are very far from one another and other sub-counties don’t even have a single school. I am, therefore, requesting government that since the committee has set up some community-aided secondary schools, let it take up at least these two or three secondary schools so that we can benefit from the universal secondary school.  

Regarding the payment of subsistence in universities, I think we are giving with one hand to the poor and removing using the other hand. Because a poor child who has been picked through the quota system to come to either Makerere or Gulu, whichever is the nearest to them, may not afford subsistence, accommodation and feeding and in the end the child will never benefit from university education. 

I am happy that the committee has noted the defect and it is important to warn the technical people against declaring policies, which are very important, without consulting Parliament. If we were consulted we would have given advice. In fact this declaration has made students to pay for their accommodation and feeding. So, please I want this to be publicised so that those who are admitted can benefit from education.

Mr Speaker, on the side of health, I am grateful that this time around government is going to consider and prioritise the activities of the health centre IVs. I am urging the Ministry of Health to start with new districts without hospitals, like Koboko District. We have our health centre IV, which up to now is not functioning, no operation takes place there, and there is only one doctor who is also the director, plus 12 staff including the sweepers to work in the whole health centre IV. So really, the situation is pathetic. When you go to the ward you find particular nurses working throughout the night, and they are all fatigued. So, I beg the Government to support this health centre IV, which is acting as a hospital. 

The situation was worsened when Cholera befell Koboko at the beginning of this month; we neither had tanks for water nor blankets to cover the patients. You know patients carry their own blankets and when they are thrown away, they feel like running after them. So, the situation was very pathetic. May I find out from the Minister of Health, when Cholera strikes like that, what strategies do you have in place, do you only send in drugs? What about the other facilities required? Please, let us have disaster preparedness in case of areas, which are prone to Cholera like Koboko, Moyo and Adjumani.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and I would also like to comment on the maternal mortality rate in Koboko. Every week a woman dies during child birth because of the long distances to be covered to reach health centres. If you need help, you have to go to Arua, Kuru or Kuluva. So we need those health centre IVs to be equipped so that they can assist the ladies down there.  

Lastly, I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for giving us one ambulance, and I pray that the second one will follow soon. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there is a practice here: if you are a member of the committee presenting a report, you do not make a contribution during the debate on that report. So I regret to say that those members of the committee – because I have got the list here – cannot be availed the opportunity to make a contribution –(Interjections)- no, this is the practice. I might have identified you without having looked at the list but having looked at the list and you are a member of the committee, the practice is that you do not contribute.  

6.18
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for that comment. I will generally comment on education that I know. I am one of those people who believe that Universal Primary Education (UPE) has worked, and when we get to post-primary education, it is another opening that will help the primary school dropouts.  

Quite a number have been dropping out of primary school because they did not see anywhere to go - to continue. When we have universal post-primary education, it is an opening that is going to help further UPE. Some people think about passing in grade one as the only way of education. I do not believe that as an educationist. Everybody who has had an opportunity to get an association in class has been educated in one way or another. So, that is what I believe in and I know UPE has helped a lot.  

Mr Speaker, I really feel that before we get into post-primary education, we need a committee - as people mentioned about CHOGM – to take us through the implementation. The report has some issues like the Shs 47,000 that will be given to private schools. What is the basis of the Shs 47,000, and so many other issues? I feel we need a committee of expertise, like some of us who are consultants, to sit down and take everybody through until when we actually get to February next year. The committee should be giving constant reports to Parliament for all the Parliamentarians to appreciate what post-primary education is all about. 

In post-primary education there is specialisation in sciences and so on. We cannot go with 50 students per teacher because there is specialisation in all these post-primary institutes. At the moment those institutions are divided – at least the schools are divided into three: there are government-aided, private, and government schools. All those need to be treated differently if we are to consider universal post-primary education. In most of these you have founding bodies be they for boarding schools or single sex schools. 

There is quite a lot that is involved and we cannot go with a blanket statement like: “So much money is given per child to go to school.” We really need to get everybody to appreciate this and the Committee on Social Services needs to have a special select committee to look at our road to post-primary education so that we do it properly and not get any problems.  

I would like to make a correction and a request to the Ministry of Health not to be very selfish, and visit Kalangala. The statement that health centre IVs in Kalangala were equipped is wrong. I am just requesting that we get there and look at what we call the equipping of health centre IVs and actually know exactly what we are talking about. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I quite appreciate the interest you have in this subject, but I have a problem in that today we were also supposed to have dealt with reports from the Committees on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and Physical Infrastructure, but we have not been able because the one from Social Services is big. At the same time, we have to finish this work within the time frame given.  

I have got four other committees, namely: Gender, Labour and Social Development, Natural Resources, Defence and Internal Affairs and Tourism, Trade and Industry, which I have to complete within the period I have told you. After this exercise, I have to read all the Votes to prepare for the Appropriation Bill because it is prepared on the basis of the Votes, which we pass here when we sit here as a committee. This we will have to do this week.  

Tomorrow I have a problem because it is a Cabinet day. Again, if the ministers should be in the Cabinet then we may not transact business in the morning. So I have seen your interest but I have assured you that time will be allocated to discuss further details about the operations of these ministries. 

I would like the ministers to - in this remaining time - to make their brief comments so that we clear this report and start with other reports tomorrow. This is the problem I am facing, but I know Social Services is a very important committee because it is catering for education and health. Your concerns have been registered and at an appropriate time I will give maybe two days again to discuss matters affecting these two ministries. Please, bear with me. So, can I call upon the Minister of Education to make brief comments?

6.24
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As usual I will thank my colleagues, Members of Parliament, for their sustained interest in education. Every time there is a debate on Education, a big number of Members contribute substantively and objectively. Today I have heard 15 Members of Parliament contributing to the report and the fifteenth Member is none other than the Shadow Minister of Education, and I beg to start with her comments.

The comments by the Shadow Minister of Education were objective in many aspects, and she made quite challenging comments on where improvements can be made. She appreciated the work so far done, which was a very good idea, and she also appreciated the achievements by the UPE programme that I believe every Ugandan should appreciate. As the sector Minister, I agree, there are some loopholes and shortfalls, but I want to assure Parliament that the NRM manifesto indicates that focus will be put on UPE, especially on improving the quality of that programme along with other programmes.

The minister in the Opposition recommended that there should be libraries and laboratories in all the schools. That is the ideal situation we are aiming at and soon or later, I believe if stability continues in this country and if the revenue continues to improve, that is the target we have as a ministry and as government.  

She pointed out indiscipline in schools and I think she was on target because of late we have had many indicators that probably discipline is breaking down in schools. We have of late had teachers beating and injuring students, and abuse of children at school, et cetera. But the Ministry has put in place detailed school management committee guidelines to guide authorities in charge of schools to minimise indiscipline and at the same time achieve improvement in the quality of the services of education.  

She commented on the universal post-primary education and training. She was very positive and thought it is high time we started. I would like to inform this House that we are starting with only one year, senior one. You will remember with UPE we started with everybody - whoever wanted to come back to school from any class had the doors open. But probably we cannot repeat that practice with the universal post-primary education. Therefore, next year we shall have only senior one and there after add one class every year. We shall be able to monitor where the interventions are required and be able improve year by year. 

I will again say here that all of you and every Ugandan is going to be included in the consultations. But we did not want to start consultations before the Budget was approved because when you approve the Budget we shall know for sure what money is available and the scope of the work and programme, which we are putting in place. So from the date this budget will be approved, there will be rounds of consultations, dialogue, memoranda and workshops to involve all stakeholders in discussing what we think will be possible and feasible in the implementation of universal post-primary education.  

Right now the officers at the ministry are preparing working notes because when we come to consult widely we do not want just to come with a question, “What do you think we should do?” There should be a working paper. They have worked on the working paper, it is at an advanced stage and when we start consultations, we shall use that working paper and framework to get your inputs and views. I would at this stage, request that when we get to that level, kindly make your contributions.

The minister wondered whether we are focusing on day or boarding schools under the universal post-primary education. The emphasis will mainly be on day schools because those are the ones located in different parts of the country, and secondly they are cheaper to run since many young people can access them from home. Boarding schools are very expensive and I cannot say that government will raise money to pay for children in schools where they have facilities costing half a million shillings per term. So, we are mainly focusing on day schools.

She raised the issue, which I think was very pertinent, and that is the nature of partnership with private schools. We are again working on a draft memorandum of understanding. “What will be the nature and relationship between government and private schools when we come to implement universal post-primary education?” There must definitely be a memorandum of understanding, and the process of identifying some of those schools has already started, but again you will have a lot of input into that.  

She ended by advising government to rethink universal post-primary education, which means, “Is this the right time?” Mr Speaker, I have stood on this Floor to say we were ready yesterday - ready in the sense that as a government and as a country we should be moving. It took us long to go into Universal Primary Education, we are now ten years old in that programme, and we are ready to move to the next stage. 

When we talk about readiness I will repeat what I said, it is not the buildings, it is not this and that. But as a country in our macro-development programmes, don’t you think that we should be moving where the others have moved already? Shouldn’t we start on the universal post-primary education because that is the level where all the literacy skills gained at primary are consolidated and made into what we can call intellectual capacities? If we do not move to that level, the massive population whom we are educating at the lower level will soon lapse into illiteracy and we shall have nothing to show ten years to come that we invested so much in Universal Primary Education without a post-primary programme. 

So, as I said, I noted the minister’s comments and I think in many aspects she was very objective and made very useful input into the planning of the sector.  

Finally, she talked about the labour market and was calling upon government and the Ministry of Education to harmonise the education and training with the labour market demand. She also raised a question, “Where do the graduates go?” That is why the Government and the Ministry of Education in particular have been revising the disciplines at different levels of education. We are now hammering on the issue of sciences because if we are to turn out engineers who are on international demand, we cannot get them out of arts students. If we are looking for doctors, I do not believe we should wait for them until they come to the university to turn them into doctors, let alone nurses and any other; and these are professions and disciplines with international demand.  

As we get into the East African Commission or Federation, there will be access to jobs in all the countries of the region, and we do not want Uganda to be at a disadvantage. Let me cite one example now of the tourism industry. I did not realise that we do not have manpower in that area until now as we get organised for the CHOGM. High labour in that area is not available in this country; we are now trying to catch up to see if we can raise the number that shall be needed. But those are the areas where we should be focusing. So, that was a very good point raised. 

We should, therefore, promote and support the curriculum changes, which we are introducing, to make sure that we get into the disciplines where there is demand. This is not only nationally but also internationally. Normally international demand is based on scientific disciplines, and if we either neglect or don’t support that move, we shall get difficulties in marketing our labour. So those are some of the comments I could make on that presentation although I did not get a copy of her report. The best I could do was to jot down what I could remember, but I believe I will access a copy for follow-up purposes in the Education Ministry.

Fourteen Members of Parliament have contributed. Hon. Sebuliba Muddu Awulira contributed about the – I would not call it the wrangle, but there is some misunderstanding between the Nurses and Midwives Council and the objectives of the restructuring exercise by government. The ministry is not claiming territories, but this restructuring has gone on for five years now. Training institutions, which formerly belonged to departments, were transferred to the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education has done a good job of integrating all these other training departments into the mission and vision of the ministry.  

We still have some grey areas with the Nurses and Midwives Council where we need to clarify on a few things, but I am very happy to report to you, Mr Speaker, that we have already had two very fruitful meetings with the Minister of Health and concerned members of the two professions. I believe very soon we shall be reporting positively on the outcome of these consultations and dialogue we are now having. So, I appreciate the comments from the Member of Parliament, but we are doing something to make sure that we do not continue with this misunderstanding between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education.  

Hon. Onzima had very strong expressions about the traditional schools, which used to produce outstanding candidates for universities. Mr Speaker, we are all concerned because many of these schools have celebrated 100 years, 80 years and 90 years of existence. And indeed, like people, when you grow old, you do not become more beautiful (Laughter) I want to inform Parliament that Government is aware, and the Ministry of Education will soon embark on a rehabilitation programme. I did not come with my technical officer to give me a list of the schools, which are already on the list for rehabilitation, but this includes some of those traditional schools, which once upon a time were very good and performing very highly.  

So, I want to assure all the Members here that we shall start by rehabilitating those schools, make them regain their former glory and of course encourage improvement in their quality of education. But let me also say - I think it is my responsibility to say this: let us not just look at the Ministry or the Government. We can analyse the factors leading to the declining standards in those schools in our respective areas.  

When I went to one of the schools, which I will not name here, about two days after the beginning of the term, I found eight students. And when I asked the head teacher he told me, “This school has got 800 students.” I said, “Where are they, schools elsewhere have opened?”  He told me, “When you come back three weeks from today, you will find them here.” Three weeks from the day of opening the school term! I said, “What is the problem?”  “Well, that is our tradition here; kids do not come early to school.”  I said, “What is this?  Other schools start on the first day and they sit examinations, others start three weeks later, cutting the term by three weeks!” This was one of the upcountry schools, and he told me, “You know upcountry people, you know their attitude towards education,” and he was very relaxed and did not see anything wrong with that.  

What am I saying, Mr Speaker? As much as we are going to do everything possible to bridge the gap between the rural and urban areas, we are also going to sensitise people. We shall start with Members of Parliament and the rest of the leadership and others, on the need to put time into education; invest in education; and mobilise people for education so that we do not just say, “Well, it is our tradition here.” So, there is a lot of work.

I was very happy about hon. Pirir’s emphasis on sports and this afternoon you do not see my minister, hon. Bakkabulindi because we (the Cranes) have a friendly match with Burkina Faso at Namboole Stadium. At the weekend we shall start the African Region League, so I am happy that there is support for sports. But I also realise that we still need a lot of money to make it as vibrant as we should. All the same, our sportsmen and women have done very well. 

Elsewhere, one Member was talking about what we give those who excel in sports. Well, as a government we are giving it a deep thought, and of course to motivate the rest of the population, we shall come up with some framework of how we can reward these successful men and women.

The university in Karamoja was a good idea - that was a wonderful idea. Indeed I look forward to a situation where like in Nigeria we shall have over 30 universities in this country. With planning, stability and improvement in revenue, I am sure we shall get there but at the moment we are going step by step to avoid spreading thin on the ground. On the other hand, we encourage private sector participants to start universities in any part of the country. So if there is an application for one investor in a university in Karamoja, be assured that we shall assist him to start that university.  

The Government is moving step by step, you know very well – how long did we continue with Makerere University? Then on board came Mbarara, Gulu and Kyambogo Universities. Now we are moving to Busitema - we are moving, but we should avoid spreading out too thin at that level. What we do at UPE level cannot be done at university level. So the best we can do is to plan, prepare and make sure that we do not make blunders at that level. But all the same, since we are in partnership with the private sector, some private investors can come up with an idea and I believe there will be no problem for a private investor in a Karamoja university.

The Woman Member of Parliament for Mubende, I am inviting her to the office for further discussion about the SFG arrears of Shs 177 million. We do not expect debts on that programme because it is a financial year programme. At the end of the financial year, everything should have fitted into whatever was at the programme. But I ask the honourable member to come for further discussions with the technical people. I will definitely make the corrections for Kakindu and Mityana Secondary Schools.

Hon. Balyejjusa had a lot of good points about people with disabilities in the education sector. Let us believe that education for people with disabilities is an NRM invention of yesterday. We are just starting on that; tell me whether we had this programme 20 years back? So, like any other new programme, we are moving. I am very happy that we are moving and addressing the gaps along the way. There is nothing like marginalising or neglecting the people with disabilities at any level. I am sure we are doing very well.  

UNISE is the programme we have at Kyambogo and we are training teachers in special needs for the whole region south of the Sahara. When you go there, you find all sorts of nationals, but we are doing very well and we are turning out teachers who are gradually being posted to take up various posts in schools at different levels.  

I am happy, Mr Speaker, at Wakiso we are about to commission a school specially constructed for people with disabilities. One is planned for Gulu and several others throughout the region. So, as soon as we get them complete, definitely we shall be able to serve the people with disabilities, recruit teachers, et cetera. At tertiary level we still have a problem; we need professors at that level who can teach our people. But I am sure university authorities are doing their best because I understand there are several people with disabilities who have qualified with degrees.  

The hon. Member of Parliament for Budadiri asked, “Should Mount Elgon Technical College become part of Busitema University?” Busitema University is a unique university, and I am very anxious to see how it develops. It is a multi-campus university, and I understand its designs are very popular and common in other countries. We are trying it out, and some of the tertiary institutions will be part of that university. So as we start and as we continue, we shall see the scope of that university and what other colleges can be included. 

The Makerere University Business School (MUBS) library; again step by step. It is important for us to appreciate the revenue of the country and the plans we have for developing some of this infrastructure, which happens to be very expensive.  But at least if we have Shs 0.5 billion, that is a good way to start.

Hon. Yekko, you commented on annex 3, but we are looking at that list. It may change but we made it before many new districts came on board with more sub-counties. The idea is that, can we have children access post-primary education from wherever they are?

The Member of Parliament, West Budama, appreciates the university in the East. I am very happy. You are also saying that the education at the lower level is still of low achievement.  Well, as I said earlier on at primary level – and I repeat without fear or favour - the driving force behind a child at that level is the parent. The emphasis put on education by the child’s parents at primary level is what makes him or her pass. So I want to appeal to my fellow parents that let us give direction to our children and then monitor with the school authorities.  

I was in the eastern region, as you know, for some time - I know it very well, but we need to start with the community, with the parents, with the leaders at that level; I have gone to markets and I found children in uniforms with books selling bananas and tomatoes during school hours and I have always felt like arresting all of them! What are they doing, how do you start telling your child to sell bananas in the market when classes are going on? So, these are law issues but hon. Member of Parliament, we need a mobilisation and sensitisation drive.  

The Member of Parliament, Buvuma, I am aware of your case. We are looking at all these issues of how accessible some of these areas are and I believe we shall find a solution.  

The salary for the primary teachers, I am very excited about the increase, but I realise that Pay As You Earn might chunk off something. However, of course we shall continue. Uganda is not running away tomorrow, we are moving very positively.

The Member of Parliament from Gulu said Gulu University has problems, which were not reported about. The chairperson probably forgot, but it was discussed. They are under-funded and they still have to acquire land and other infrastructure, but we are together with them.  

The rehabilitation school, Madam, you say we open it to everybody. That is supposed to be a rehabilitation institution and the teachers there are specially trained. They are not only teachers, but also psychiatrists and social community development officers because we wanted to screen those badly traumatised children and then send them out to other schools. They are not going to stay there forever, and it is not even a school, it is a rehabilitation centre. The people of Belgium donated it to us and of course we added some Government of Uganda money. But those of you who can pass northwards, please go and see that state-of-the-art complex. We think that it will motivate those badly traumatised children to get them a little bit rehabilitated in order to be able to pick up studies in other schools.

Hon. Angiro, we are working on the schools in the North. I mentioned the programme co-ordinated through the Office of the Prime Minister, but we are working together to see that whatever we do is not sector-by-sector but as a government. We want to put our resources together to make sure that we meet the needs of the people in that region. If we move sector-by-sector, then we shall suffer from uncoordinated movements and I do not think that we can afford to invest without coordination. So, I am aware of that case, and through the Office of the Prime Minister a lot is being done.

Hon. Odit, staffing ceilings differ from school to school. Naturally they differ depending on the population in the school. But of course we are now examining all the district staff ceilings to make sure that we balance without districts being left without enough teachers.

Withdrawal of SFG was not abrupt, that is a financial year-based programme, and you cannot tell me that I had planned for three years, no. It is year by year and we look at the work plans from the districts. Well, it might have been abrupt but I do not think it should have caused damage to the level of debts because we do not expect debts. But where there are debts, please draw our attention to them. 

What I want you to appreciate is that this year the Shs 16 billion for that SFG programme has been allocated to districts, which were badly affected. When you look at the annex, you can see the teacher-classroom ratio is very high - over 100 to one. You might find those with a lower ratio, but those are the pastoral areas where children walk 15 miles to get to the nearest school. So we are looking at the distribution and location of schools, and the little money we have left in this financial year is to do that.  

I am going to No. 12 and about to complete. Dr Apiliga, I am very happy you are hinting on ICT. ICT has already been put on board in the education sector. I think, Mr Speaker, I will come with a separate paper to indicate how far we have moved on this, but I am very happy to inform Parliament that we have some of the pilot schemes from the NEPAD organisation of the African Union. Uganda was selected for six experimental projects, which we have already launched. His Excellency the President launched one in Kamuli District. I launched others recently, but I will present a fully-fledged paper. We are in collaboration with Microsoft on computers. We have connected many schools to the Internet, so we are not lagging behind, but moving very fast.  

The teachers’ ban was lifted, we are recruiting selectively, and I am sure we shall soon be there.  

There is a gentleman who made comments on Obongi County. I could detect his anxiety, but let me invite him to the office so that we talk in details. I know he made a comment that government does not deliver, but I want to assure Parliament that government is going to deliver, and it delivers most of the time.

Hon. Baba Diri, we are always in touch. On one secondary school per sub-county, we are moving to that. Where we do not have a government secondary school, we are going to work with the community and private schools like we did under the UPE programme and then the universities, which caused a lot of anxiety about the welfare of students at public universities. It is in our strategic plan, but the timeframe for its implementation will come from your input when the consultations intensify. It was a proposal, but I should warn Parliament and government at this stage that the UPE crop will soon be up there and we should - just four years from today, the UPE crop will be ready to enter university. Four years is just a short time for planning purposes.  

So, government and this Parliament have to start projecting the funding modalities for university education, and these are some of the ideas we are putting across.  Indeed if we remain stagnant - where we are - if we continue with funding university education the way we are doing today, we shall not be able to catch up. So it is time that we start debate, and whenever I hear these debates I am happy that people have started projecting their minds ahead of time. So it is a suggestion in our strategic plan for the sector, but subject to discussion. We shall come out with the modalities.

Hon. Kavuma, I thank you for suggesting a national committee to implement universal post-primary education. There is already a task force involving so many people - different stakeholders, but very soon we are moving to a national committee and I will call upon you to help us either to chair it or be a member. What I am promising on that is that we shall consult widely before we implement universal post-primary education next year.

Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. I have gone into details because most of the comments were very relevant for planning and implementation purposes of the education programmes. I appreciate the chairperson and the committee for internalising the issues in the sector and making relevant recommendations, which we are ready to implement when funds become available. I thank you so much and I want to say that the struggle continues. This country must get its manpower trained and qualified. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will agree with me that this has been a very good presentation by the Minister in response to issues raised. Thank you very much, honourable minister. (Applause)

6.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala Otiam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues. I will try to summarise the issues, which were raised, because they were many but they were centering around one thing, namely the inadequate or limited resource envelope and allocation to the health sector.

I want to begin by thanking the Chairman of the Social Services Committee for coming up with such a detailed report and good recommendations, which I believe we are already pursuing in the health sector. 

I would like also to take this opportunity to thank all colleagues who came for my victory party over the weekend. Thank you very much for coming, and thank you very much for encouraging my people to give me the next kisanja. I can assure you that the next kisanja is already delivered, and I want also to thank those colleagues who never turned up and have promised to come for the second kisanja; you will be there, please. Thank you.

The issue of drug stock out, poor infrastructure, inadequate staffing, lack of proper ambulances, more health centre IIs, access to ARVs by all who need to have them, inadequate resources for the credit line, the need to renovate regional referral hospitals and to have one in Karamoja and the poor equipment in our health facilities; all of them centre around one thing as I have already alluded to. I want to point out that this government is trying its level best to address those problems.  

We have identified inadequate resources as one of the strategic bottlenecks hampering the delivery of quality and quantity healthcare to the people of this country. We shall very soon be presenting a Bill here to introduce social health insurance as an alternative way of funding the health sector.  

Mr Speaker, the Government has further prioritised some of the issues we need to deal with. I am happy that the war in the North is coming to its logical conclusion and very soon we shall be having more resources being allocated from Defence to the Health and Education sectors. We are going to make more savings because the war in the North has been consuming a lot of our resources. When that war is finally concluded, we shall have more resources to address all those issues that you have raised.

I call upon all colleagues here present to fully support the Government programmes of bonna bagaggawale because when we increase productivity - when we add value to what we produce, we shall widen the tax base of this country. Subsequently we should be able to allocate more resources to the Health and Education sectors because these two produce after a long time but initially they are sectors that consume resources and so what each one of us should be doing is to say, “How can we increase the tax base of this country?” Other than all of us lamenting, “Oh, I do not have health centre II, no drugs.”  All of us should be thinking of how we can generate more funds, and bonna bagaggawale is one area through which we are addressing this. I call for support from all of you Members.  

I now want to address myself to some specific issues that were raised. There was the issue of DDT being raised here and my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Health, was proposing that we need an integrated approach of fighting Malaria other than the use of DDT. I want to assure my colleague and honourable members that we are already using this integrated approach. We are already using the insecticide treated nets and focusing our attention on early case management using very good drugs. We have even introduced a new drug, which is more effective, Coartem. We have a whole programme of Malaria control specifically to address the high morbidity and mortality rate caused by Malaria. So, my colleague, we are addressing that.  

But of course I want to call upon all colleagues to support the re-introduction of DDT. The environmental impact assessment has been presented to NEMA and I am sure colleagues now have access to it. The Social Services Committee Members were all given copies of this report and the report is also available in most of our public libraries. So, please, have access to it, read about the re-introduction of DDT so that finally when we come here, we are all supportive. Most of the countries around us are now using DDT and they are able to bring down morbidity and mortality due to Malaria.  

In the near future, if we re-introduce DDT, we shall not have an infant mortality rate of 88 per 1000. We shall be talking of something like five per 1000. Therefore, Members, we should not be derailed by those who are sentimental and make all sorts of unsubstantiated remarks about DDT that it is carcinogenic - it causes impotence.  If it does surely, why is it that Kabale, a place where DDT was used way back in 1959, has people who are very prolific? (Laughter) So we must back what we say with scientific facts. Some people allege that DDT is carcinogenic, but research has proved that coffee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are going to provoke an unnecessary debate. Since you have said that when you are prepared you will come and present a statement on this, you reserve that for that day.  

DR OTIAM OTAALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. I will now summarise.  

On the lack of blood in the hospitals, Mr Speaker, I would like to call for your indulgence that in the near future maybe we start with the honourable members here as very potential donors of blood. The problem of lack of blood in the hospitals is because the majority of people of this country do not donate blood. We are relying on school children, and the time when we normally experience shortage is especially during holidays. But as leaders, we can lead by example. Mr Speaker, I will come and consult you on an appropriate method of how we can start fighting the issue of inadequate blood, starting with ourselves being committed Members who donate blood regularly.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the Speaker has donated ten times before - I have! (Applause)

DR OTIAM OTAALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I wish the rest of the honourable members of this august House could follow suit. I would be most obliged.

A question was raised regarding the bureaucracy of the credit line scheme. We have directed all the district health officers to expedite the procurement of drugs through the credit line scheme by ensuring that the necessary documents are signed by the CAO within one day of receipt of the requisition from the various heads of the health sub-districts. We are trying to prevail over them so that they do not simply take these documents to the CAO’s office and dump them there. A specific officer could be assigned to handle these documents so that the process of procuring drugs through the credit line scheme is expedited.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of inadequate staff, we are addressing this matter. We are again going to advertise centrally this year because the problem has been that people could do multiple interviews in different districts, and in the end they simply choose one place they feel is the best for them. Ultimately you would find a person being recruited in more than one district and that led to a lot of gaps. Having recruited someone and he or she does not turn up renders resources getting wasted in the process of re-advertising and re-recruitment.  

So now we are going to advertise centrally so that people do not have an opportunity of doing multiple interviews. Within this coming financial year, we should be able to fill up the various gaps existing in most of our health facilities. At the same time, we are addressing the issue of incentives for hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. We are discussing this matter with the Ministry of Public Service and I will get the august House posted when we finally conclude it.  

Mr Speaker, there was a question as to whether Gulu Hospital is a national referral hospital or not. I would like to inform the House that we are in the process of upgrading Gulu Regional Hospital to a national referral status. Hopefully next financial year, Gulu National Referral Hospital should be able to receive a commensurate amount of funding to measure up to that status.  

About Cholera in Moyo and Obongi counties, it is really unfortunate because it has involved people dying. It would be very courteous for our honourable members to get us informed early enough other than waiting to come and raise this matter in the House - because it is a disservice to your people when it comes here late. We have been addressing the issue of Cholera in Koboko - we handled it very fast. We dealt with Cholera in Pader, Gulu and in most of these districts in the North because the honourable members from those constituencies, together with the district health directors informed us in good time. It is really unfortunate and I call upon my colleagues, whenever such an issue arises, please get us informed as soon as you can. Otherwise, it is not right to say that the ministry is doing nothing and people are dying.

We are trying to address ourselves to the root cause of the persistent Cholera pandemic in that region. We have identified the issue of sanitation as one of the major causes, initially starting with the districts of Northern Uganda within the IDP camps. The sanitation situation there was not good and that is where Cholera started breaking out. But we are addressing that and now that the people are going back to their homes, they will be having better sanitation.  

Of course there are also other districts where water and latrine coverage is still very low. We have already linked up with the Ministry of Local Government to pass the necessary legislation. In fact the legislations are already in place, but what we need is enforcement. Why should our people not have pit latrines to guard against most of their Diarrhoea-related diseases, including Cholera? We are going to do all that we can to make sure that it is enforced.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to end there. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, when the report was introduced the prayer was that we adopt the report. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are moving forward because now we are remaining with six reports, and tomorrow again we shall start in the morning at 10.30 a.m. although I don’t know for some of our colleagues, the ministers – are you having a Cabinet meeting again?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In view of the problem, we shall still have Cabinet but those who will be addressing the issues, the line ministers should come here tomorrow, and others must go to Cabinet because we have so many issues to attend to. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would therefore request the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, because we will be dealing with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Minister of Works, that is, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure; I also ask the Ministers of Gender, Energy and that of Natural Resources – Defence I think will come the other day. But if you can be here we can also deal with it; sector ministers for these can be released from Cabinet so that we process the reports.

Honourable members, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 7.17 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 August 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)


