Tuesday, 29th August, 2000.

Parliament met at 10:56 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

ASCERTAINMENT OF QUORUM

110 Members were ascertained as being present.

PRAYERS.

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order)

LT.COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am asking for procedure or guidance from Minister. A Select Committee on Defence was set up and was supposed to report within 90 days. Right now, there are people waiting to be interviewed, but if Members miss this Session, they will be named as dodging or not present. Should we suspend the proceedings of this Committee, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In view of the decision that was made by the Business and Welfare Committee, on how to transact business during this Session, I think we can suspend your proceedings for sometime. You will be advised when to start. The implication will be that if you will not finish the task within the period given, but this matter will be considered.

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This issue came up in this House last week. And there are Committees that still need to work on their mandates in order to report to the House. The Speaker, at that time, promised to guide some of us on how we can retrieve to complete our Committee work. How is that procedure laid down, Sir, if we are all mandated to be here? How will we then report here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not say that you all have to be here at all times, only for the time being, while we are considering this issue. It may be necessary to re-locate you, for the time being, to a Committee room near here, so that if we want you, especially for voting, you can be summoned. But in due course, we shall definitely tell you what to do. For the time being let us concentrate on this work.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I have heard your ruling in response to hon. Mudoola's query. The decision of 90 days for the Select Committee was reached by the whole House, and was passed by the whole House. I am not challenging your ruling, but I want you to advise me as to whether you can single handedly overturn a resolution of Parliament, without Parliament pronouncing itself on it. I am not really challenging you, I just wanted clarification. It is not so clear to me whether an issue of defence, like this one, should just be wiped off indefinitely without Parliament knowing the merits of such action. I just want to know whether the Business Committee has assumed the powers of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yours is an interpretation of what I have said, and you are entitled to that interpretation. I have not said that this will not be done as directed by the House. The House said within 90 days, but the report can be produced within 30 days! So, when you say within 90 days, it does not mean that they will have to report after 90 days. If they have finished the work now, they can report. If, within 90 days they are unable to produce a report, they will definitely come and say we are unable to do this and they will give reasons and then the House will decide, but the period of 90 days still stands.

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, looking at our Order Paper, I see item 1 as Ascertainment of quorum and item 2 as Prayers.  I know that both are part of the business of Parliament. Knowing that we are here by God's grace, and where two or three are gathered, they form quorum for prayer, which should come first? Should we start by praying and then ascertain quorum or should we ascertain quorum and then pray?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, while I was waiting in the VIP Lounge, I sent somebody to ascertain quorum before I entered. Therefore, before I assumed the Chair, I ascertained quorum and when I came here we started with the Prayer.  You are right. 

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I begin my remarks, by thanking the chairman and the Committee on Social Services for their good report. The report clearly shows that they have understood the width and breadth of the operations of the Ministry of Education and Sports, and I thank them for this.

The Committee has made many recommendations. I do not contest these recommendations. I only promise, on behalf of the Ministry, to study them and do everything possible to implement as many of them as possible.  

I would like to thank hon. Members, who had an opportunity to comment on this report, for their thoughtful and analytical comments. Again, I would like to say that I do not contest the comments and recommendations made, but if I was to stop there, I am sure hon. Members would be very disappointed. So, may I make some few qualifying remarks on the contributions that hon. Members made. 

Someone asked what hon. Omony Ogaba was doing in the Ministry, in view of the fact that we do not seem to have a budget on sports. It is true that, when the present political management of the Ministry of Education and Sports reported for duty, the situation on sports was not clear. So, what we did was to set up a task force to study and analyse the situation. This task force started work in December 1999. Among the terms of reference of this task force was to develop a national sports policy for Uganda. This task force completed its work in May 2000. In June 2000, the Ministry organised a national conference on coming out with a sports policy. We have now commissioned the task force to come up with a final document that will be debated by the top management of the Ministry. It will eventually go to Cabinet and eventually to Parliament. 

It is difficult to budget for a sub-sector without a policy, it is difficult to budget for a sub-sector without a structure, and it is difficult to work out a strategic plan for a sub-sector before a policy is in place. We think that once all this has been done, we will be in a position to approach the Cabinet Committee on restructuring of Government, so that modern infrastructure for sports can be put in place –(Interruption).  

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I am keenly listening to the Minister and to the outline he is giving like lack of policy, and the need to have task force. All that for these new waters in which we are charting, so that we can now come up with precise needs and appropriate budgeting. Sports is not a new activity in Uganda. It was here well before the hon. Minister was in the Ministry. Now, we do have a Minister for Sports. Does this confirm what the report has said, that there does exist a structure with a political leadership, but there will be no activity, until the emergence of this task force. Were we groping in the dark? Have there been no sports activities since this nation, Uganda, was created in 1962?  Are we really now inventing a new activity called sports? 

I would have been happier to hear that the Minister felt that there was a need to make amendments to modernise and so on. But he impresses as someone who is charting new waters of the sports world, which never existed. I know Ugandans to have competed in international sports events, and that is a result of activities that have taken a long time to build up. Could the Minister please clarify, because he seems to be opening up a new book now?  I am totally confused!

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. I do not know whether hon. Pinto and I have the same facts. I do not know whether he was here yesterday during the debate, because I am responding to some of the points that were raised. There is an existing infrastructure for sports, and it has been analysed by the Committee. The Committee has found it inadequate, and indeed, hon. Members took off some time yesterday, to further analyse some of the inadequacies of the existing infrastructure in sports. For example, hon. Shannon Kakungulu, whose point I am responding to, actually indicated that there was a National Council of Sports, but that its budget is skewed in certain directions. He wanted to see a more balanced distribution of resources within the disciplines, particularly taking into account the fact that we are better at boxing than at football. So, it is not that I am opening a new book, certainly, not, I am just acknowledging that the existing infrastructure is archaic. It can hardly cope with the modern demands of the sports sub-sector. Having realised this, we embarked on the steps I outlined - (Interruption)

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to dodge questions and continue labouring to send this House to sleep, when we have just left our beds? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, when you ask somebody a question, he may give you an answer that you expect, but he may also give an answer that you may not understand. That does not mean an answer is not being given. So, that is his way of expressing himself.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Shannon Kakungulu expressed concern over the Hyuha affair in Makerere University. He said that the integrity of the degrees being offered at Makerere University is at stake, and that we run the risk of being ostracised by the international academic community, if the scandal is not put away for good.

The facts have to be established first and then appropriate decisions will be taken thereafter. The terms and conditions of service of this officer have to be taken into account. The process of investigation to establish the facts is practically in its final stages, what remains is to give the officer an opportunity to have something to say before appropriate organs of the University and then a decision will be taken.  According to the timetable of these appropriate organs, the matter is likely to be concluded next week. 

I share the concern on the integrity of the degrees, and I share the concern that, nothing that will lead to the ostracising and the boycotting of academic awards given at Makerere should be omitted. But I ask hon. Members to hold their fire until next week, when the appropriate organs will finally consider and decide on this case.  

Lt. Nkalubo raised the issue of protecting girls while they are at school. We have taken a strong stand against defilement, especially by the teachers, and we are taking a two pronged approach. One approach is administrative justice, to deal with the teachers who misbehave, and the second is the fact that defilement is a criminal offence. I am sure Members are aware that we have tried as much as possible to work with the Police and the DPP to see that defilers, whether in school or outside school, are prosecuted.  

There is a proposal or request from hon. Nkalubo for taxes to be removed from sanitary pads so that as many school girls as possible can afford them. I undertake to take up this matter with the Minister of Finance, and he will be able to report as to whether it is possible.

The issue of schoolgirl pregnancies and what we do about them, is a serious issue. We need to give the girls a chance to pursue their studies even after giving birth. Government will soon come out with a concrete policy on this. It has remained in the discretion of head teachers, but in the interest of promoting the education of the girl child, we are going to soon come up with a more concrete plan.  

Hon. John Eresu reverted to the question of sports, and sighted the welfare and retirement benefits or arrangements for national sports persons who, until now, have not had proper arrangements made for them. This is one of those issues to be covered by the national sports policy. Because, there has been a lacuna, it depended on the discretion of whoever was there. Now we want to come up more concretely with a national sports policy. Who am I to ask whether this was not done before? I have realised that it was not done before, and I am doing it.  That is all.

Hon. Eresu also complained about the classification of good schools and bad schools, and good students and bad students or poor students. We do not have such classifications in the Ministry of Education and Sports. Even in all the recent announcements of results, we have neither ranked students nor schools at national level. This policy was tremendously opposed. I was under pressure to follow the old system of classification. My position is that, in every district, in every school, there is performance, children try. So, this must be reflected in how we announce the results. But of course, I know that there are imbalances in resources that are available to various schools, or in teachers. These are things, which we are working on under the education strategic investment plan. 

Hon. Eresu also said that we should not rely on foreign technologies and that we should conduct research to improve our own indigenous technologies. This is quite correct. We have such a program, the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology is spearheading it, and the Ministry is part of it.

Hon. Deo Rwabita opened his remarks by saying that the Committee and hon. Members are not wasting their time here, therefore, we should take heed of what they are saying and follow up the recommendations. I have said so, and I repeat it, we shall study and follow up these recommendations.  

We have had some problems with UPE, and we can improve on the supervision, but may I say that UPE is the greatest legacy that the Movement is bequeathing to the people of Uganda. Take into account that there were many Governments before the Movement came in.  None of those Governments ever said that, at least one child or two children should go to school at a subsidised rate. This is the first one to say so. 

I think, it is our duty to get involved in correcting the shortfalls and the flaws that may be existing in UPE. We have issued guidelines, and we need supervision at the local level. The DEOs and the DISs are not employees of the central Government. They are employees of local government. We work with the local government to ensure that supervision and monitoring is done, and we shall continue to strengthen the guidelines to ensure that this legacy has a firm foundation. But it should not be left to the Ministry or to the local governments alone. I would like to appeal to all hon. Members of Parliament to get involved in supervision and in monitoring UPE –(Interruption).

MR.RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Minister. This Parliament highly appreciates the work that the ministry is doing for UPE, especially the construction of classrooms. But it is a known fact that a good portion of the money you send to districts, especially for construction of classrooms, ends up in dubious contracts taken up by councillors. As a result, very weak structures have been put up, and sometimes there is nothing to show on the ground for the money that has been spent. I am aware that one of the departments that are supposed to supervise has sent teams to some of these districts, and they looked at some of the structures and recommended that they should not be accepted. But money has continuously been going to the districts. Hon. Minister, what are going to do, to make sure that the districts get value for the money that is sent there?  

Number two, what are you going to do to people who award themselves these dubious contracts and end up taking money from the taxpayers pocket?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his answers on what UPE has done for this country. Indeed, UPE as a program has succeeded. The construction of classrooms up to village level has been used as a means for poverty eradication. The policy the Ministry sent to the districts allows the districts to recruit local contractors in areas of the projects, so that the local people can benefit from the fund. It is a very good policy. I would like to thank the Minister for that, but my concern is that, in an area where there is no competent contractor, can the policy be adjusted? Can it be adjusted to a level where, maybe, a contractor at district level is able to go and do work in a sub-county, where the contractor may not necessarily be coming from, so as to ensure that there is value for money.

Secondly, we are going to have many students qualifying to enter senior secondary schools or post primary schools. What is the Ministry going to do to open up for this huge army of UPE students qualifying from primary 7? I thank you.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to supplement my colleagues on the question of effectiveness and value for money. I had said earlier that in Rakai District, we have the experience of building primary schools and secondary schools. Our observation is, to be cost effective in constructing primary schools, you need to use the proper methods and you will get value for money at cheap cost. I gave an example of an NGO, World Vision, which mobilises people, including unemployed youth, and gets them engaged in construction. They give you a complete P.7 school with pit-latrines and teachers' houses at a cost of 35 million shillings, and this depends on the style of management, transparency and accountability. 

Since the need for primary schools is so great and the resources are limited, would the Ministry consider learning from these experiences? Maybe, you could work with NGOs like this one as partners in ensuring that there is proper implementation and cost-effective methods are used, so that you do get a school within affordable costs. The money can be used efficiently to give you good value for more constructions. Would the Minister consider such a venture? I am sure World Vision and other NGOs that have got relevant experience, like the Lutheran Federation, would be happy to participate with Government. Instead of using unreliable contractors where there is no supervision, and you end up with a shoddy job, could the Minister consider should be omitted this?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I thank the three hon. Members who have raised these supplementary questions.  First of all, hon. Sam Rwakoojo talked about the dubious contracts, which was taken by councillors, and result in the construction of sub-standard structures. We are liasing with the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that these dubious arrangements are stopped. We are also liasing with the police to ensure that, where fraudulent work has actually been done, prosecution can take place. Of course, it is regrettable for you to get a legacy like this, which is supposed to be for posterity, and you destroy it with dubious contracts. So, we shall not keep quiet as I have indicated. We are working with the local government and with police to ensure that these things do not happen.

Hon. Okumu-Ringa, I have no problem considering the question of external contractors in areas where no local contractors can be found.  

The third question was from hon. Pinto. After his preamble, he asks whether I would consider learning from the experience of the NGOs. Of course I will consider. Why should I refuse to consider learning from the NGOs? Certainly, I will consider and appreciate this. We have been comparing notes with them, but what you are saying now is that we should consider intensifying our interaction with them. We shall, sir.   

The other point was, what is going to happen to these people who are now part of UPE. I would like to give you an example to explain the issue hon. Okumu-Ringa raised. You know that last year, 280,000 candidates sat for PLE. In the year 2003, when the UPE bulk matures, we expect between 900,000 to 1,000,000 children to sit for PLE. So, it is a serious matter. What are we going to do with all these students? By then, we expect to have built Government aided secondary schools in every sub-county in Uganda. And by then, we expect to have built a community polytechnic in every sub-county of Uganda.  We have actually started training the trainers for those community polytechnics. So, it is not as if we are just sitting. Planning is underway to absorb the UPE bulk.  

We were given some advise yesterday that we do not have to build a new school everywhere, we can just take over the community schools which are already there. This is a proposal that we will consider quite seriously. 

‘What is a seed secondary school?’ A seed secondary school is a Government secondary school in a sub-country where there was no secondary school at all, even private. So, Government comes in to provide the first ever secondary school in that place. In literature we call it a seed school –(Interruption) 

MS. BABIHUGA: I rise in accordance to Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure, which says: 
“Subject to these Rules, Members shall not read newspapers or periodicals or books in the Chamber of the House except matters in them directly connected with the business of the House.”  

Is it therefore in order for the hon. Tom Butime, Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness, to read the New Vision while his colleague is labouring to explain the Education policy?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If he was doing that, he is not in order. He is out of order. (Laughter).

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I was saying that I had been asked how the issue of Core PTCs ended. The Catholic community was saying that they had not been given a fair share of the Core PTCs. In principle, the question has not ended. We just agreed to consider bringing on board a number of Catholic founded PTCs. What we have to do now is to select and analyse. To bring an existing ordinary PTC to a Core PTC level, we need to do some costing, and thereafter, we shall go to the budgeting process. So, the issue has not yet ended, it is in the hands –(Interruption).

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, ‘the issue has not ended’, that is the Minister’s statement! And if I may ask specifically, is there any money that was put aside in this current budget? If not, is there any deliberate plan to start some activity, say in this financial year? We need some specifics but not open-ended statements that the matter has just started. That does not satisfy us. We would like to get some specifics. Could the Minister be a little more specific?  

PROF.MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, the construction unit of the Ministry of Education and Sports has to do a preliminary assessment on whatever PTC you may have agreed upon to be transformed into a Core PTC. When that has been done, qualified people have to go in and do bills of quantities on the activity that is supposed to be done -(Interruption)

DR. MWEBESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member. The Minister is clarifying, but at the same time he is being vague and not specific. When the President went to Kabale District, he promised the people that Government would look into this issue and put money in the budget to correct this imbalance this financial year. So, when you start telling people that you are planning and you are budgeting, we just get confused and it sends the wrong messages, and makes the President a liar. So, we want specific clarification, is it in the budget or not?  Thank you.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, the fact is that there is no way you are going to commit money until you have identified the particular PTC that you are going to work on and until the work that is supposed to be done has been identified. The process of identification, coming up with bills of quantities and so on are is in progress. This is part of the process of constructing these new core-PTCs –(Interruption).

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, I raise to clarify this position. First of all, the request is going to be honoured by the Government, that is a fact. At the time, when the submissions were made, we had already advanced with the Budget. We have to honour the obligation when they submit the papers and reallocate the funds within the Budget, so that we can cater for it as soon the figures have been submitted to the Ministry of Finance. We are going to do this through reallocation on the available resources. In next year’s budget, it will stand on its own. This year it was not possible to accommodate it, because by the time the matter was raised, we were already advanced in the preparation and presentation of our Budget.  But we have indeed acknowledged that we have that obligation and we shall ensure that we reallocate within the Budget to provide for the work to start within this financial year. We will do this provided the figures have been provided to us, and that is the exercise that is being undertaken by the Ministry of Education. Thank you very much.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for that clarification.

Hon. Babihuga raised the point on the validation of teachers, and said that, it was rubbish for the Ministry of Education and Sports to engage in this exercise –(Interruption).  

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, when I said ‘rubbish’, I was referring to the move by the validaters not to recognise the Grade 2 and Grade 3 Teaching Certificates of teachers and requiring them to produce evidence that they had credits in O’level. This is happening in Rukungiri District. Many teachers have been threatened with termination letters to cancel their teaching certificates, and I maintain that this kind of action is inconsistent with our education standards, actually, is equivalent to rubbish. Is the hon. Minister in order to misquote me and twist my words out of context, in order to belittle me in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister was just beginning to respond to your queries. If you gave him time, maybe he would have cleared all those points.  Give him time.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, yesterday I sat here most of the afternoon and I listened to hon. Members without interruption. You will recollect that my colleague, Dr. Rwendeire, stood up twice to react. I refrained from reacting because I wanted to listen and understand what my hon. Friends were saying. And, the fact is that, the validation process was rubbished by hon. Babihuga.  I listened carefully to her –(Interruption).  

MS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Minister to produce the Hansard account, and until he does so, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you have clarified what you mentioned yesterday, let the Minister answer to what you have raised and then we proceed.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are doing two validation exercises.  The first one is at secondary level, and the Education Service Commission is undertaking that one. And this is a very important exercise. You say you are a teacher, you say you were posted here, many things have happened, can we revisit the records? Can we see your records? If you have your certificates and so on, what is the problem? Produce them and the issue ends there. This is a good exercise, and they have done a good job. They have unearthed many things, they have unearthed many irregularities, but we are putting our house in order. Hon. Members, we are putting our House in order. In the past everything was acceptable, we are now saying, there is a law governing the teaching profession. Are you complying with it?  This is the purpose of the –(Interruption)

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that the majority of the grade 3 teachers, who qualified since 1985 up to the very recent 90s, have not been given their teaching certificates. It is almost impossible for them to get these certificates from Makerere and Kyambogo. Some of them have had to pay a lot of money to the Education Officials in order to get authentic letters to say that they qualified. I would like the hon. Minister to explain to this House why the Ministry is denying these people their rightful certificates. How do you expect them to produce them when they have not been given to them?

MS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was following hon. Babihuga’s clarification and the reference to grade II teachers. The hon. Minister's response to them having good 'O' level grades did not make much sense to me. I know, for sure, that most of the grade II teachers did not have the opportunity to complete senior four. So, where are they going to acquire the grades to present for their validation exercise? 

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I covered the question of validation in secondary schools. What has happened is that, the District Administrations have borrowed a leaf from the Education Service Commission and they are also validating the qualifications of the teachers in the primary schools. A certificate is evidence that you completed a certain level of education. It is just evidence, and if you have lost it, you produce other evidence that, although you do not have this certificate, you actually have the qualifications. So, in principle, hon. Members, I would like to appeal to you to see the value of this validation exercise. If there are problems in the way it is being implemented in particular areas, can those problems be brought to our attention and we will deal with them. But in principle, it is a good thing to know that a person who says he is a grade III teacher is actually a grade III teacher. 

I will give you an example of what this validation exercise has done. This exercise has unearthed people who do not have PLE and 'O' level certificates, people who do not have the grades they claim to have, but they are in the class and they are miss leading the children. A few of these cases have been reported to the Police. So, in principle, it is not a bad thing to carry out a validation exercise. Individual problems that we may encounter, I lost my certificate and so on, can be handled.  

There was a point from hon. Arthur Bagunywa on the question of volume II of the primary school curriculum. Volume I includes English, mathematics, integrated science and social studies. It is the one, which we launched late last year, and it became operational in primary one up to primary three, at the beginning of this school year. The upper primaries are continuing with the old syllabus for practical reasons. 

Volume II will have cultural studies, agriculture, religious education, integrated production skills, and Kiswahili and a local language. The work on this curriculum has been completed by the National Curriculum Development Centre, but that is not the end of the story. It has to come through the academic board of the National Curriculum Development Centre, and then to the Ministry. The preparation for volume II is in its final stages. 

I appreciate another point raised by hon. Arthur Bagunywa, related to the key factor. I recognise this key factor and we shall examine whether we can refer to the old system, which produced the key factor.  

Hon. Ongom asked whether the paramedical institute in Gulu had been handed over to us. On the list of the institutions that were handed over from other Ministries, there is no paramedical institute in Gulu. I asked around and I was informed that it is not yet in place. I will inquire and see how far the preparations have gone for the establishment of this paramedical institute and see if it is possible to carry it forward. We are also concerned - (Interruption)

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt the Minister, but I would be grateful if he could be clearer about this paramedic institute. Is it the institute that is not in place or is it taking over which is not in place? It cannot be both

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, I agree with hon. Dick Nyai that it cannot be both. The institute does not exist, so what I am undertaking to do is to find out how far the preparations had gone for the establishment of this institute, and see if I can carry them forward. It cannot be both, I agree with you.

The question of teacher's houses was again raised by hon. Ongom. He raised it in the context of rural areas, but I can say it is in the context of all areas. We have been focusing on constructing classrooms under UPE, because we told children to come and we could not keep them under the trees. We recently agreed that Government would also make the construction of teachers’ houses a priority. The Ministry of Education and Sports is liasing with the Ministry of Local Government to put this in place.  

We were advised to co-ordinate with other Ministries, particularly on the issue of school health and the first aid boxes. You will remember that hon. Kiyonga accepted this arrangement, so we also accept it. We will be working together with the Ministry of Health on this matter. 

Hon. Byanyima raised the issue of the drop out rate for girls, which is still high. We do not like it and we are doing something about it. We recently launched a national strategy for girls’ education in Uganda. This strategy will ensure that there is a girl-friendly environment in the school. We also have a system of having a senior woman on the staff so that she can advise the girls. I have already outlined the policy on defilement. All these are intended to ensure that the drop out rate for girls is reduced. There are voluntary community mobilisers in every school, to sensitise not only the parents, but also the community generally, on the importance of not interfering with girls, especially, on their way to school.

I just want to say one thing on the issue of sponsorship of students through State House and how people can access it. Early this year, His Excellency the President attended a public function in a place called Kasagga in Luwero. On that occasion, he was accompanied by the chairperson and some members of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee, and this issue of sponsorship of students through State House was raised publicly. The President said that there were special cases that needed special attention, and as a patriot, he should have the leeway to take care of these special cases. Some of the members of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee were given the microphone, and they indicated that they would support this arrangement. Secondly, -(Interruption) 
 
MR.CHEBET: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The present system of admission under Government sponsorship to Makerere University and other institutions is very unfair and unjustifiable –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, this is a different subject.  The issue before the House now is financial support by the State House. It has nothing to do with admission. Admission is a different point, and support is a different point. Let us exhaust this particular one.

MR.CHEBET: Mr. Speaker, I was saying that the present system of sponsorship into tertiary institutions, including universities, is very unfair. I want sight Kapchorwa District as an example. This academic year alone, no student has been admitted under Government sponsorship in Mbarara or Makerere Universities.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe you did not follow up the point. The Minister is dealing with a different sponsorship scheme, allegedly from State House. He is not dealing with Government sponsorship of students in tertiary institutions, he is just answering a question, maybe he will come to that. 

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, one of the points raised yesterday was how people can access this facility. Well, my understanding is that, this facility is demand driven, it is not supply driven. People who are in need approach State House and State House responds, depending on criteria and needs –(Interruption).  

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am still not satisfied with the Minister’s response on this matter. It is true that there can be special needs to be covered under this system, and it is also true that some people can approach the President and bring up their cases for assistance. But the question was how could this facility be made known. Can people assume that there are possibilities of assistance for special cases in the State House, so that those who may not necessarily meet the President can have some way of channelling these cases to State House? The question that hon. Winnie Byanyima really asked was, how do we access this facility or how do people have information about this facility? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Ongom, the answer from the Minister is that, this is not under his portfolio. This is under the portfolio of State House, and there is a Minister in charge of State House. Maybe the question should be directed to the relevant Minister other than to a Minister who is not supposed to administer this particular fund.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was also asked whether it is not time to study and evaluate UPE, now that it has been running for some time. I concur entirely- (Interruption) 

MR.CHEBET: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was saying that, in view of the current unfair system of admitting students under Government sponsorship, particularly from periphery districts of Uganda, would the hon. Minister consider the option of admission under Government sponsorship on the quarter system, based on districts? If that is not possible, would the Minister, therefore, consider abolition of the entire Government sponsorship in universities and instead keep the current fees structure considerably low, so that many people may be able to pay?  Thank you.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Speaker, last year I circulated a request to hon. Members of Parliament, to advise the Ministry on how this sponsorship should be organised. Some Members responded to this request and others did not respond. This business of the quota system, which hon. Chebet Maikut is talking about, and other possible systems, are actually being studied. We have a Cabinet paper pending on this matter, and when it is finalised, we will bring it here.  

Hon. Mwandha said that it was time to do an evaluation study on UPE so that we see how we have done and also map out a way forward. I agree with this recommendation. 

Hon. Abura Kene raised the issue of the Akii Bua house. First of all, we are paying rent on this house. Secondly, we hoped to purchase this house for the Akii Bua family. But what has happened is that, the entire piece is no longer being sold. They are only selling the piece where the house is. So, there has to be a partition and a new valuation before we can finalise the purchase. This should not take very long, in my view. 

Hon. Byaruhanga’s principle issue was actually decentralising secondary education. In principle, we have no problem with decentralising secondary education. We have held some meetings with the local governments on how this might be done. I am going to use a phrase that may not sell, but the matter at hand is actually being handled. The Ministries of Education and Local Government have to study it, and when the modalities are ready, we will decentralise secondary education.  

Essentially, those were the main points that were raised. I request hon. Members to support these estimates. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Timothy Mutesasira): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to also thank my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, who have responded to the report. Your comments and the few omissions have been noted. I would also like to thank the Ministers for Health, Gender, Labour and Social Development, and Education and Sports for very ably responding to the issues that were raised on the Floor.  

I would like to appeal to Government to appreciate that the Ministries of Health, Education and Sports, and Gender, Labour and Social Development are the household Ministries. The socio-economic ratings of Uganda are based on these three Ministries. The socio-economic indicators that are used can only be improved if these Ministries are funded and facilitated. 

I would like to point out that, in spite of the fact that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has one full Minister and five Ministers of State, it is the least funded Ministry in this Government. Actually, if you look at the allocation of funds generally, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not appear anywhere. It is like going to a function and your presence is noted, but you are not very recognised. Visitors who are recognised are told to go and sit somewhere, but when you are not very well recognised, they tell you to sit ‘around there’. This is what is happening to the Ministry of Gender.  

When you look at the prioritisation of fund allocation to the Ministries, Ministry of Education is 28 percent, Health 8 percent, economic functions 8 percent and Agriculture 1 percent. Security is 14 percent, law and order is 6 percent, public administration is 19 percent, roads and networks is 9 percent, and then servicing of interest on loans is about 7 percent. Is the Ministry of Gender reflected anywhere? That is what I was saying, ‘Gender, you can go and sit somewhere there, but we know that you are around.’ But, as political and social leaders, we see that Gender is the Ministry that caters for youth –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. chairperson, this is the report that you presented and it has been debated, but if now you re-open debate, what will happen?

DR. MUTESASIRA: With those few words, Mr. Speaker –(Laughter)- I would like to propose the following to Parliament for approval for the financial year 2000/2001. We have now harmonised with the Ministry of Finance and these are the figures:  

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports: 
Total recurrent expenditure of 58,349,618,000/=, and total development expenditure of 85,378,540,300/=

Vote 024 – Makerere University:  
Total recurrent expenditure of 23,228,973,000/=.  
Total development expenditure of 7,498,802,000/=

Education Service Commission  - Vote 040
Total recurrent expenditure, 832,937,000/= and 
development expenditure, 40,000,000/=

Mbarara University - Vote 042
Total recurrent expenditure, 4,564,994,000/=  
Development expenditure, 552,353,000/=

ITEK - Vote 044
Total recurrent expenditure, 3,387,193,000/= 

Ministry of Health - Vote 0l4 
Recurrent expenditure, 25,184,577,000/=  
Development expenditure - I54,197,476,300/-.  

Butabika Hospital – 
Recurrent expenditure, 1,739,077,000/- and development expenditure of Shs.60 billion.  

Mulago Hospital – 
Recurrent - Shs.14,952,534,000 
Development - Shs.15,948,754,000.  

Health Service Commission: 
Recurrent - Shs.800,375,000 and 
Development -Shs.40 million.  

Vote 030 – The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development:  
Recurrent - Shs.4,963,918,000 and 
Development - Shs.13,445,865,000. 

I beg to move, Mr. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, the motion is to consider and adopt the report and to adopt the proposed estimates for the following places:
    • The Ministry of Education and Sports, Makerere University, Education Service Commission, Mbarara University, and ITEK. 
    • The Ministry of Health, Butabika Hospital, Mulago Hospital, Health Service Commission, 
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 

And the chairman has given the details. So, I will now put the question to the motion and you will respond accordingly. 

(Question put)

122 Members voted for the adoption of the motion
3 Members abstained

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the motion is carried.  Thank you. 

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just trying to suggest a procedure for voting. Would it not be easier and faster if we put up our hands? Would it not still be a head count?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it would be faster. In fact, that is what I had suggested before, but I was advised that, you have been standing, so I took that up. The problem with putting hands up is we may not be able to identify the ex-officials, otherwise we are going to improve on this very soon.  Hon. Members, I would like to inform you that there is an amended Order Paper, which we shall deal with in the afternoon. The House is suspended until 2.30 p.m. 

(The House rose at 12.29 p.m. and adjourned to 2.30 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.03 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, by the time I entered here, there were 118 Members, but many others have come in. So, we are safe and we can proceed because we have quorum. 

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Sometime this morning, some Members of Parliament approached the Prime Minister regarding item number four on the Order Paper. We were seeking for time to consult the Cabinet a little more, because there are some other constitutional amendments that we would have liked to table together. We were hoping that Cabinet would give time to consider our proposal, so that they come together. I am seeking clarification as to whether the Government side would like to give us time for political consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, on the Order Paper, there is a Bill for First Reading, and if there is a Bill for First Reading, there will be another stage for Second Reading and the Committee Stage before we move to Third Reading. Our Rules of Procedure allow people to amend motions, and if they wish, to amend what was originally in the Bill. So, that will be considered according to our rules of procedure. So, at First Reading, there are no amendments, and this is only the First Reading. amendments can be brought up in the Committee Stage, and may be justified when we have a general debate in the Second Reading. You will have time to do what you want. 

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, if the First Reading is on an amendment of a particular Article of the Constitution, once it is opened, is a Member entitled to bring another amendment on another Article, using that same application, during the course of the debate? Can we add to the amendment of the Constitution?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, as you know, when a Bill comes for First Reading, we do not participate in anything. It is only the Minister, and maybe the Clerk at Table, who calls for the first reading. The rest of us wait for other procedure, including a motion for Second Reading, followed by debate, and then we pronounce ourselves to the motion. At the Committee stage, we consider clause by clause, and any Member who wishes to propose an amendment, provided it is permitted by the Rules, will be able to do so.

MRS.IKOTE: Mr. Speaker, when an amendment to the Constitution has been opened using this small Bill, can we move another amendment within the Constitution under this motion, or do we have to bring a whole new motion and Bill?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: An amendment that is made on any motion, being now in particular to a Bill, must relate to the Bill itself as reflected in the long title.

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you for that clarification, Mr. Speaker. In fact, it is because of that explanation that we were requesting for an opportunity to have political discussions on this. The amendments, which some of us seek to make to the Constitution, are amendments which we consider very urgent, but which are not necessarily about the Rules of Procedure of the House, so they will not be judged as appropriate to introduce at the Bills’ Second Reading. Therefore, we beseech the Government side to give us opportunity for political discussions, so that we bring one Bill and move on it together, and look credible before the population.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you should appreciate that this is not the only move to amend the Constitution. Currently on our Table here, we have another Constitutional amendment, which was moved by hon. Onapito and Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. I will place that motion on the Order Paper some time this week. Therefore, any person who has an amendment will be free to bring his Bill and proceed with an amendment, or if the Rules allow, you can make amendments when we are dealing with this one. So, we are not blocking anybody who wishes to make an amendment. In fact, there may be amendments in the Constitution that will require a referendum. The amendments are not the same, so the approach may not be the same, but the door is not closed.

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do not want to give an impression that we have ambushed the hon. Members. On the contrary, we have been negotiating, and today, around one O’clock, we came to an agreement that we can move as we have done. If that has not been conveyed, I would like to make it clear that I have not ambushed any group.

MRS.MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I have not been part of any discussion, and listening to the arguments of hon. Winnie Byanyima and the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, I just do not follow. What are they talking about? Which amendment are you talking about, so that we all follow? I wish hon. Byanyima would tell us this thing that she wants to amend so that we all follow.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the first place, we have not got any Bill. As far as we are concerned, we are going to have a Bill formerly now before us. What has been in the background has been in the background. It cannot really come on record that, in the background, we have been talking about this and the other. Let us receive this Bill and then we can proceed further.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I understood you correctly, you said that, after the First Reading, there would be an opportunity or possibility for any other amendments to be introduced to this Bill. This Bill has got a very restricted memorandum. If one is going to bring an amendment that is not within the scope of this memorandum, will it be possible to bring it here? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, what are we trying to stop? Are we trying to stop the First Reading? What are we trying to do? I said there is a possibility, within the Rules. As you have said, if the Rules do not permit you to go beyond the long title, then you make amendments that are permissible under our Rules. If you have amendments to make, there are procedures. These amendments can be brought by the Executive or by any Member here. There is a well-laid out procedure to be followed, as was the case with the amendment of hon. Onapito, which is about to come. So, if you think you also have an amendment, you are free to start the process.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This amendment perceived is a unique amendment -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon., why do you not get the amendment first, then you can make the contribution because at the moment, there is no Bill.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: I want to be guided. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have no intention of interrupting the introduction of the amendment, but on behalf of my people, I am seeking clarification. The Government side or the Executive is not the only sector endeavouring to effect a constitutional amendment. Some of us also aspire to introduce Constitutional amendments, like those related to Article 269. During the presentation of the coming amendment can people like me effect amendments related to other sections of the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have said, like any other motion, people are free to amend within the Rules. If you look at the rules, they permit you to do so and you will be free to do so. Even if the rules do not allow you to do so, you are free, as a Member of Parliament, to bring your own motion to amend the Constitution. It has been done before, and I have said there is another Bill to amend the Constitution in the same way, and you can take the same procedure. We shall entertain it.

BILLS
FIRST READING

The Constitution (amendment) Bill, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Constitution (amendment) Bill, 2000” be read the First Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded, do you have something to say?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move, in accordance with Rule 8, and 44(d) initially, for a suspension of a number of rules, which I am going to specify, in order to enable this Bill to be dealt with by Parliament expeditiously. The reason being that the business of this House is already terribly hampered. It is just like running in a sack. You cannot run fast. The business of this House is being hampered because of these procedural rules. 

Rule 8of our Rules of Procedure reads as follows: 
“Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule may be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended for the time being.” 

I am seeking that consent, Sir.

Rule 44(d) reads as follows:  
“44. The following motions may be moved without notice- 
(d) any motion for the suspension of Rules of Procedure.” 

On the basis of those two Rules, I would like to move that Rule 39, which deals with the three days for a motion to be debated, be suspended. I also request Parliament to agree that this be suspended together with Rule 99(5) and (6), which refers a Bill to a Sessional Committee, and also Rule 105, which refers to Bills’ Second Readings. 

The reasons that I have just stated –(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, as hon. Members of this House are aware, the continued restrictions on the House’s business is the effect of the recent decision of the Constitutional Court. This court is the body with the powers of interpretation of the constitutionality of all matters, including legislation enacted by the House and the very Rules of Procedure of this House. The Constitutional Court has held that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But is your motion seconded?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: It was seconded, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, in the light of the gravity of the issue that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is about to propose to this august House, it would only be reasonable for him to tell us the import of the rules he wishes to be suspended, so that our Hansard bears the record. Does he want the Committee of this House not to consider this Bill? Does he want this House not to debate this Bill for three days? What does he want us to do, and let him read it out for our records?

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I do not want the Committee of this House - (Interjections)- now, I hoped that they would listen. I have intention of asking this Parliament not to refer the Bill to the Committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you make your case. Put your case across and then it shall be considered.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, may I request the hon. Members to listen to the case and they decide on it. I have no intention of asking this Parliament not to refer the Bill to the Committee, for sure, nor do I have any intention of asking this House not to have –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you please put across your case!

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: So, having cleared that, with due respect, let me say that the Rules involved are, Rule 8 and Rule 44(d), and I have indicated what they provide for. Now, Rule 100(5) requires a period of 14 days between the publication of the Bill in the Gazette and the Second Reading, and this Bill has been published. My request is that this Rule be suspended, so that 14 days do not actually elapse, so that we can move, if you agree, to the Second Reading. So, the first one is that you allow us not to have the 14 days.  

There is Rule 39, which requires three days’ notice of all motions to be given to the Clerk. I move that this Rule also be suspended, from an abundance of caution to the present condition, not withstanding that Rule 44(d), which I have just read, allows a motion of this type to suspend the rule to be proposed without notice. 

Rule 99 (5) provides that, a Rule that has received a First Reading, as the Constitutional (amendment) Bill has just received, shall be referred to an appropriate Sessional Committee. That is what the law provides. This Committee shall examine the Bill, and under Rule 99(6), that Committee shall report to the House afterwards for general debate. 

I therefore, move that Rule 99(5), Rule 99(6) and Rule 100 be suspended so that we expeditiously deal with the passage of issues of this Bill. 

In conclusion, therefore, my motion is, in order to give timely passage of the Constitutional (amendment) Bill, Rules 39,99(5), 99(6), 100(5), and the Rules of Procedure of this House be suspended in accordance with Rule 8 and Rule 44(d).  

We have all been in this Parliament for the last three days. It is very difficult to go on with this process because of the procedural difficulties.  So, we really want this done so that the House can get on with its -(Interjections)- no, after the House has agreed to the suspension, the Bill will be referred to an appropriate Standing Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion before us is that, under Rules 8 and 44(d) of our Rules of Procedure, we suspend certain Rules. According to our Rules of Procedure, it takes about 14 days before we consider the Second Reading, but he is seeking permission from you to suspend these rules so that we expeditiously deal with this, as he has said. After maybe the First Reading, he can move another motion for the Second Reading, so that you can debate this Bill and decide which way you wanted to go, of course subject to other things. The motion has been seconded, now it is open for debate, before we pronounce ourselves on it.  

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I would like him to clarify the import of the suspension of Rule 95. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is 99 (5) not 95.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I would like to support the Constitutional (amendment) Bill, I am really concerned at the manner in which the Minister would like us to debate this very important Bill that seeks to amend the 1995 Constitution for the first time since it was made. I am concerned that the hon. Minister not only wants to do away with the normal 14 days, the period within which some of us might have used to try and negotiate for our own interests, but he even wants to do away with the work of the Committee. A Committee that should scrutinise on behalf of people like myself, who are not lawyers, but who have elected other competent people to lead us in such an exercise. He even wants to do away with, so that we expedite and just pass something without understanding each and every line.  

Before he laid this Bill on the Table, we had told him that some of us have been trying to persuade the Government side that we also have amendments that we consider important for this country and urgent to take on board –(Interruption)

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I have already stated that, when Parliament agrees with this suspension, the Bill will be referred to an appropriate Committee. I have no intention of barring it from going to the Committee at all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, referring a Bill to a Committee is constitutional. What the Minister was talking about was rules. So, he has no power to come here to suspend a Bill from being referred to a Committee, which is a command of the Constitution.  He is limited, under Rule 8, to only talk about Rules of Procedure, which were made by this House. As far as the Constitution is concerned, I think his motion does not go there.

MR.DICK NYAI: I am seeking clarification, Mr. Speaker. Just before the Minister resumed his seat, he said that after he has been granted the suspensions he has sought, the Bill will then be referred to any appropriate Committee, and yet among other rules, he is seeking to suspend Rule 99(5). Rule 99(5) reads as follows: 
“Whenever a Bill is read the First Time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate Sessional Committee appointed under the provisions of article 90 of the Constitution which shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the Committee considers expedient or necessary.”  

And Rule 99(6) reads as follows: 
“When a Bill has been deliberated upon by the appropriate Committee under this rule, that Committee shall submit a report on it to the House.”  
Now, the Minister wants to suspend both these rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no contradiction between what I have said and what you have said. I said that referring the Bill to a Committee is constitutional and he has not asked this House to suspend that. In fact, if we dispose of this motion that is before us, I will refer this Bill to a Committee.

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am left in even greater confusion than I was at the beginning. If the Bill must go to the Committee, why then is he seeking to –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: According to his motion, he is seeking to refer it to the Sessional Committee.  

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, personally, I am concerned, because the very Minister who is here seeking a fast track amendment of the Constitution was in this House so many years ago, when the Constitution was thrown out of the window, and this country went into turmoil. He was here! Now he should be the one advising us to take a very cautious approach in amending the Constitution, but he is the one asking for a fast track -(Interruption)

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, for the information of the hon. Lady, I was not here, I was the Katikiro in Mengo -(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, order please. According to the Minister, he has evoked our Rules to seek your permission to suspend the Rules. His case is either not convincing or it is convincing. So, the best thing to do, if you think the case is not convincing, is to oppose it, and I am giving you an opportunity to do so! So, the Member for Mbarara Municipality was on the Floor.  Please, go on.

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Minister, Mayanja Nkangi, who has tabled this motion, is actually reminding me that he was a major architect of the 1962 Constitution. This was the very Constitution, where they fixed very many funny bukodyo in Lancaster House, which caused a crisis here in this country. That was in 1962 - (Interruption) 

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, for everyone’s information, especially those who do not know, I was never part of those people who made the 1962 Constitution. It was made in Lancaster in London. I was just here practising law. I was never part of them. So, is the lady in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is misinformed. Hon. Members, let us not turn this occasion into one for personal attacks. Just speak out on the merits or demerits of the motion to suspend the Rules, and eventually, we shall deal with the debate on the Bill itself. Let us not have personal attacks, just put up your case. Later, I will ask you to decide on the motion one way or the other. Maybe we should hear from the Learned Attorney General.

MR.BART KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you have quite rightly pointed out, the Rule that the Minister has read out seeking to suspend deals with the Bill being referred to an appropriate Sessional Committee. But under the Constitution, Bills can and should be referred to a Standing Committee. You could not possibly commit the Bill simultaneously to a Sessional Committee and a Standing Committee. So, he is saying, can we suspend the Rule that calls for sending the Bill to a Sessional Committee, to give way for us to commit it to a Standing Committee, in accordance with the Constitution?

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Attorney General for that clarification. But as I was saying, some of us were seeking to introduce an important amendment, which deals with holding Parliamentary and Presidential elections on the same day. In this kind of haste, however, it would seem that it is not even possible to go out in the corridors and persuade the Members on the Front Bench of the importance of saving at least $6 million that is going to be wasted on two elections. So, I am asking for caution. This is an important responsibility, I want to do it, and I do not want history to judge me. I do not want it to be said that I came here and rushed things through and caused a problem for the children in future. Let us take our time and do a well-considered job, and let us be given opportunity to introduce other amendments that are important for this country. I oppose this rushed approach.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, I sympathise with what the hon. Member is embodying in an intended amendment. If this House now passes the motion by the Minister to waive the 14 days, does that decision stand in the way of bringing the other amendment referred to by the hon. Member from Mbarara, for which I have sympathy? If the answer is yes, then I have got to think otherwise. I just want clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion before us is not dealing with the merits or demerits of the Bill. It is only dealing with the time factor, that is all. After we have resolved ourselves on this, then we shall go into the details, including any amendment that can possibly be made to this Bill.

MR.MED KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You have ruled, and rightly so, that the Constitution is superior to our Rules.  So the Minister had to suspend what should not have arisen in the first place, because the Constitution is clear, it sends the Bill to the Standing Committee. It is my considered opinion that the Minister withdraws the suspension of Rules 95 and 96, and we proceed as you have ruled, so that the Bill will go a Standing Committee as per the Constitution. I thank you.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On 7th June this year, the same hon. Minister came here and requested this same House to suspend those same rules, all of them. The House went ahead, suspended the rules, and passed a law speedily. That law is now being contested, and it is in the newspapers that the hearing is on Monday. Now, again, we have the same Minister coming to the same House and requesting for the suspension of the same rules. I think the frequency alone is too much. We should not, as a national Parliament, tolerate this kind of thing. We are not children! We should respect all arms of Government. It is not our business in this House to keep on circumventing what is before court. I think it is not fair. I respect the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and I respect his age, experience and status in our society.  I therefore request my mzee to respect his name and honourably withdraw the motion. We do not need it. Thank you.

MS. KIRASO BIRUNGI (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Members, I am getting concerned at the negative publicity and the negative attitude that the Sixth Parliament is getting of late from the population. And I would really hate as to do something to add onto that negative publicity.  

To add on to what my hon. colleagues have already said, what is the stampede for? Why should we act as if this world is going to end tonight? This Parliament makes the rules and it can and unmake them. I know that for a fact. But why should we do something that will put us in jeopardy in the eyes of the public? 

The 14 days are put there to enable participatory debate from the public, either through the newspapers or through us, their representatives. Why are we going to amend the Constitution in the first place? Because there was a problem arising out of what happened shamefully in this House, we were taken to court and we lost the court case. Why don’t we now learn and move consciously? Why should we repeat the same mistake? The whole world is looking at us.  Why should we do things that shall make us ashamed belonging to this Parliament? History is going to judge us. 

Much as I support the amendments, my conscious does not allow me to side with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in hurriedly doing what he is about to do, that is amend the Constitution for the first time. And we are saying we are going to restrict ourselves to trying to make good what has already gone bad. When it suits this House, we bend the law, is that credible! 

You have just said, Mr. Speaker, referring a Bill to the Committee is a constitutional matter. I would like to pose a question. Did we refer the Referendum Bill, 2000 to any Committee? If we did not, were we acting within the Constitution? –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have just heard that this issue is in court. Now that it is in court, I will not say anything about that.

MS. KIRASO: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Mr. Speaker. I would hate it for Parliament to again go to court for that matter.  

We need two thirds of this Parliament to support this amendment if it is to go through. Why should we start with friction right from the beginning? Why don’t we start with respecting each other’s views? Why don’t we become accommodative so that we move together and in harmony?  

Finally, I want it to go down on record that I support the amendment, but I do not support the method that the hon. Minister is proposing.  Thank you.

MR.KARUHANGA ELLY (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I really did not intend to make a contribution on this Bill because I have a headache, but I feel that I should make a small contribution. 

When in the Constituent Assembly, we introduced Committees into the Constitution. We did this because of the resistance we had from some people in the National Resistance Council on Committees. In order for us to be able to guarantee that this Parliament will function through Committees, a group of us decided that we should campaign to get the delegates to support the inclusion of Committees in the Constitution. This would normally be a job for our rules, but to be sure that this will not be stopped, we provided for these Committees in the Constitution.  

As it was, we had not been used to a practice of Committees.  And I would like the hon. Members to listen to this, because it is the basis upon which words like Standing Committees were inserted in the Constitution. It is because we were not used to the practice of Committees –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the motion is to suspend certain Rules, which were mentioned by the Minister. I expect you to tell us that you were either convinced by the Minister’s presentation or you are against it. We shall come to that debate later. So, the only discussion should be, should we suspend the Rules or not?

MR.KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I was trying to give a background so that people understand why the Minister is moving to amend Rule 99(5). That bias not withstanding, it is important that the hon. Members know that the inclusion of referring Bills to Standing Committees was because we had no experience at all on how Committees work. 

When we started drawing up the Rules, and I was a Member of the Rules Committee, we carried out research on how other Parliaments actually function. We found out that Bills go to Sessional Committees and Standing Committees. Standing Committees are voted in during the first session, like the Public Accounts Committee, etc. So, there is a difference between the Constitution and our Rules. But then, who cared? Nobody thought that somebody would go to court on an issue of that nature, what for! Parliament sends the Bills to the Committees. But as it turns out, somebody has gone to court, to say that the Referendum Act 3, 2000 is an invalid law because it was not referred to the Standing Committee. Therefore, although there was a Committee of the whole House, which is a Committee, our Rules separate the Committee of the whole House from the Standing Committee. This case is coming up in court on Monday. If we do not cure this problem this week, we shall be caught up -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga.

MR.KARUHANGA: I apologise, Mr. Speaker. I understand. Let me confine myself to the issue. I do not want to pre-empt the debate on the main Bill, but as far as I am concerned –(Interjections)- if I could be protected, Mr. Speaker so that I can make my contribution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR.KARUHANGA: Thank you. If we oppose the Minister's application to suspend the Rules, we will be shooting ourselves in the foot or in the stomach, as somebody has said. It is very important that the Minister and his entire team in the Ministry, together with the Attorney General, have seen it fit to make this application. This is an issue that we have discussed in the corridors, and many of us who have been interested in trying to solve this problem and make sure that our Parliament does not come to a deadlock, have to support - (Interruption) 

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, would I have this important clarification hon. Karuhanga. In the course of his contribution, he said that the decision we took in passing the Referendum Act 3, 2000 is being challenged, and I am not going to say it is being challenged in court - (Laughter). Can my hon. learned friend clarify to me and to this House whether the purpose of suspending this Rule to enable us pass a constitutional amendment is intended purely to defeat that challenge?

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, that matter is subjudice. You have already ruled on it, and the hon. Member is not going to lead me into temptation, but he should help deliver me from evil. Amen. Why should we support the Minister in suspending the Rules? What constitutional amendment is he making? He is asking us to make our work easier. It is a small amendment affecting the workings of Committees. It is not something that requires a lot of research. It is a matter we have lived with and we have discussed. It is a procedural matter. I do not see why we should not support the Minister. 

Allow me to make just a small reference to Members who are trying to use this amendment. It is wrong for us to say that now that we want to make this procedural amendment, we can use it to make structural adjustments to our Constitution and try to arm-twist and derail this small application. I think it would be holding the stick from the wrong end. I do not see why we should go into this bargaining.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, don’t you think you have really made up your mind one way or the other? I think, you have made up your minds one way or the other. The Minister's case is either convincing or it is not convincing. Why don’t we pronounce ourselves on this issue?

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: I would like clarification from the Minister as to whether the amendment on the procedural question of the Standing and Sessional Committees is in any way related to suspending the 14 days. I would like to know whether the two are linked or separate, because I support one and not the other. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I would like just one small thought from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs as to whether he did take into account Article 79(3) of our Constitution in making this request to suspend the Rules. Article 79(3) reads as follows: 
“Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.”  

If this Parliament is not allowed to consider matters that come before it democratically and with ample time, then I must concur with hon. Kiraso that this stampeding should be discouraged. You cannot say that the 14 days should be shortened at the expense of Parliament's credibility, whereas the Executive had talked of such a Bill more than two weeks ago. Where was the hon. Minister three weeks ago? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All these arguments are against the Minister, now why don’t we pronounce ourselves on the motion? The motion is that certain rules be suspended, and Members have spoken against this. Maybe some Members are for the suspension, but why don’t we resolve this now by voting.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that we want to suspend a number of Rules together, about five Rules, in an omnibus manner yet some may support the suspension of one rule but they do not support the suspension of another rule, I really seek your guidance. Would it be proper for us to deal with the suspension on these rules one by one not in an omnibus manner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, what was presented here is one motion, you consider it in the way it was presented. 

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker, I sought clarification and I would like the Minister to respond. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, he sought clarification as to what the purpose of your motion was.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: The single purpose of the motion is to release this Parliament from the shackles that have been imposed on it in doing its business. That is the only reason. If we want the business of Parliament to move fast, let us have the amendment quickly. How do we do that? Let us suspend some rules that are innocuous, because they are just procedural, but leave the substantial matters to be debated properly by the House and also to be referred to -(Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Justice to call our Rules shackles, when these rules are actually intended to assist this honourable House to achieve honourable results? The word 'shackles' is definitely negative. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think that was a slip of the tongue. I will now put the matter to vote, because I think that is the best you could get from him.

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: No, Sir. I am not very satisfied with the clarification. Possibly, he did not understand my question. Some of us have understood the reasons why he has got to have an amendment on the provision of the Constitution where the Bills are supposed to be sent to Sessional Committees rather than Standing Committees or sending them to Standing Committees other than Sessional ones.  We have no problem with such an amendment. But we would like to understand whether suspending the 14 days is linked to that amendment. I would support the question of moving an amendment on the question of Sessional and Standing Committees, but not necessarily the suspension of the 14 days because I do not see any reason and relations between the two. Thank you.

MR.WAPAKABULO (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like clarification on one or two things here.

One, is it necessary to proceed with a motion seeking to suspend Rule 99(5)? In my view, that is already automatically constitutional, anyway. So, we do not have to waste time on that. And we do not withdraw what is not there. So, it just falls by the way side. 

So, we focus on Article 100(5) to abridge the 14 days. Now there are two parts to it. There is a constitutional requirement about 14 days, and it is where the amendment of the Constitution relates to an amendment through a referendum or by the support of the district councils. With that one, 14 days are constitutionally mandatory, but the 14 days here would not bar us, because the amendment sought is an amendment that is solely within the power of this House. This House has plenary power to decide whether to speed up its work or to take it normally. 

Now, the case for speeding up is very interesting to me, because there is a court ruling that says that we have been doing our things irregularly. It means we have either been passing laws in a manner which is not constitutional or appointing Judges in a manner which is not constitutional - (Applause). You better listen because it does not pay to say aye when the reality is there. I know of some people –(Interruption) 

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality at one time sat in the hon. Chair where you are sitting, is now the National Political Commissar, and he is also known as a lawyer. Is he in order to deliberately mislead this House that there has been a court ruling to say that Judges were irregularly appointed? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding is that, once the court has made a ruling or judgement, anyone is entitled to use it as a precedent to decide disputes. If that is his interpretation, I cannot say he is out of order because he is interpreting the import of the judgement in that way.  

MR.WAPAKABULO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your kind ruling. Let me also add something about the Supreme Court ruling, which said that the right to information under Article 41 of the Constitution is so fundamental that Section 15 of the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act cannot stop it being enjoyed. Similarly, my right of speech on the Floor of this House cannot be affected by a mere rule of this House, which talks about subjudice. In other words, I am also entitled to discuss what is going on in the courts. Under Article 29, I am entitled to say anything in this House - (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, whereas you are free to use the judgements of court, I have already decided here that people should not talk about matters pending in court. I think we should respect this and just concentrate on the motion of suspension of the Rules. I thought you were seeking clarification, but then you went into detail. I am now going to ask you to vote.  

MR.WAPAKABULO: I withdraw that part of my observation, but I made it.  

Secondly, given the circumstances in which we are in, this is a very interesting situation. On 4th there will be a case before the court, but I know of some people who may want to use the judgement of the Constitutional Court to challenge offices of the Judges. If that happens, it shall embarrass not only the House, but also the Judiciary. So, I would like to suggest that, to abridge the time factor to the amendment of the Constitution to resolve a political question through the use of – (Interruption)

MR.NYAI: I would like to raise a procedural point. Is it in order with our regulations for an hon. Member to still proceed with an argument when the Speaker in the Chair has ruled that he is going to put the question to it? Can you guide this House in this matter, Mr. Speaker? – (Laughter)  

MR.WAPAKABULO: Sir, I conclude this way, we have a political/legal constitutional question. The Constitution has the answer through the power to amend the Constitution. The House has the answer through suspension of so many of the Rules, so that we proceed expeditiously to find that solution. Otherwise, my fear is that if we proceed in the way that is being suggested by those opposing the Minister, we are likely to embarrass not only the House but also the judicial system. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us vote on the motion. This morning when we were voting, you stood up, but with this big number we may have a problem counting. Therefore, I am going to ask the Ex-officio Members, to please resist putting up their hands one way or the other. And I trust they will do it.

MAJ.GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister willing to separate the two so that we are all mindful of what is at stake here. I can tell you that I will support this amendment of the Constitution at the First Reading, the Second Reading, and the Third Reading, I can tell you that. But even when we do that, we would like to do it in the most regular manner, and we really need guidance. That is why I would like to understand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my understanding of the purpose of this motion is that, the requirement of having 14 days between the First Reading and Second Reading be suspended, and that is all.

MR.NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see us worried about the 14 days, but first of all, suspending in accordance with the Rules is not inciting Parliament or reducing our credibility. If we suspend rules within the Rules we made, the credibility of Parliament stays intact.  

Secondly, the 14 days should not be a serious worry, and I will explain why. Under Article 262 of our Constitution, we will not have a Third Reading until 14 sitting days have elapsed. So, time for discussing this Bill is there. We have got 14 sitting days between the Second Reading and the Third Reading.  So, we could still suspend the Rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I did not want clarification.  Now, I am not going to ask you stand. There is a motion by the Minister to suspend certain Rules, which he has mentioned. 

127 Members voted in favour of the motion

38 Members voted against

13 Members abstained.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is carried - (Applause). According to the text of this Bill, I know that any Standing Committee is entitled to discuss a Bill. Since it will be a waste of time for all the Committees to discuss the same Bill, and since this Bill deals with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I will refer it to the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. This Committee should report to this House on Thursday morning. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 4.19 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30th August, 2000 at 10.00 a.m.)                

