Thursday, 28 August 2008

Parliament met at 3.25 p.m. in parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s meeting and to apologise for the late start. But as I indicated yesterday, we were meeting in the Parliamentary Commission with the Mayor of Kampala to negotiate for the green garden over there to extend our Chamber and also the architects to approve the designs. So it took much longer than I thought. But I am here, nevertheless, and I thank you for coming.

Secondly, Members were concerned about being switched off while submitting without warning. Our current system does not have a device that can enable you to get a warning when your time is about to expire. But we have asked the technicians to work on it so that you can be assisted. In the interim, we shall use the timer which is here; it will run twice. First it runs after two minutes and also after another two minutes and at that point the clerk will sound the bell indicating that you have one minute remaining. So, at two minutes you will get a signal and at the next two minutes you will get a signal. So the clerk will ring the bell and that should help you to wind up in a more modest manner. Thank you very much.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF: 

I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008 
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION, ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

3.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMIITE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Oliver Wonekha): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. This is the report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the Financial Year 2008/09.

Introduction –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, you guided this House yesterday that the Minister of Finance should be around each time the sector ministers are here to defend their budget. I do not see any of the ministers; I do not even see anybody acting in the position of the Leader of Government Business because I know hon. Hillary Onek is a senior minister who has come for his sector report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was with the Minister of Finance in the Parliamentary Commission; we parted just before 3.00 p.m. and I know that he is somewhere around. He must be in the canteen.

MRS WABUDEYA: Hon. Isaac Musumba is also around; he has just gone out and in the meantime, I will stand in for them as they return.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But actually the books of the Leader of Government Business are here. (Laughter)

MS WONEKHA: The committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is mandated by Article 90 of the Constitution of Uganda and rule 161(a) and (d) of our Rules of Procedure to examine and comment on the policy matters and discuss and review the estimates of revenue and expenditure and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

Methodology:

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and officials from the following semi-autonomous bodies: National Agricultural -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not have to read everything, just go to the highlights.

MS WONEKHA: Thank you. The mandate of MAAIF:

The committee noted that the mandate of MAAIF is to support, promote and guide the production and processing of crops, livestock, fish and all other agro-related activities in a sustainable manner so as to ensure the best quality for the consumers in the market and increased quantity of agricultural produce and products for domestic consumption, food security and export. 

The sector priorities for Financial Year 2007/08:
The committee noted that the priorities included the following: adoption of the rural development strategy, which sought to increase rural household incomes both through an expansion in the productivity and production of the key agricultural commodities and by facilitating their efficient marketing. 

Construction of MAAIF headquarters in Kampala to facilitate cost effectiveness including cutting down the cost of renting of office premises for MAAIF agencies. We have not seen any construction as yet. 

Re-centralisation of MAAIF staff carrying out disease control, and regulatory services for crops and livestock and local governments.

Implementation of the agricultural census and strategic interventions for tea and cocoa to increase production by 30 percent.

Expenditure performance for the three quarters in that year:
They are also included in the annex. The committee noted that the agricultural sector recurrent budget over performed at 103.7 percent on account of the non wage budget performing at Shs 109.9 percent. However, the wage budget performed below the pro rata budget at 78.7 percent. The wage under performance was on account of agricultural extension workers’ salaries performing at 72 percent. The agricultural sector performed at 54.2 percent on a pro-rata basis against the approved budget despite the over performance of the releases to CDO which performed at 360 percent. Of the released amount to the sector, 92.4 percent was actually spent.

CDO over performed against its pro-rata budget at 360 percent due supplementary releases of Shs 4 billion for cotton planting activities. Similarly, MAAIF and NAADS Secretariat are faced with resource absorption challenges at 60 percent and 31 percent of the development releases were spent respectively for the period under review.

The under performance of the non wage category of MAAIF at 67 percent is likely to constrain the operations of the ministry and its agencies like DDA, NAGRIC and DB that rely on the non wage budget for their operations while the under performance in NARO is likely to hamper agricultural research. Honourable members, NAGRIC stands for National Animal Genetic Research Centre and Database and DDA for Diary Development Authority. 

At the local government level, District Agricultural Advisory Services performed at 91 percent spending all the resources released for the period under review. This is a commendable performance given the importance of Agricultural Extension Services to farmers.

The Crop Sub-sector:

The committee was informed that the cash crop sub-sector registered a growth rate of 2.2 percent in the Financial Year 2007/2008 compared to a higher one of 5.4 percent in Financial Year 2006/2007.

The following were the achievements of FY 2007/2008:

Coffee: the committee noted that seven million out of 2000 million seedlings were produced by community based nurseries.

Coffee exports over performed at 2.7 million bags as compared to the targeted 2.5 million bags. These are 60 kilogram bags.

Cotton: the cotton sub-sector experienced a sharp decline in production to a mere 65,000 bales in the Cotton Year 2007/2008 down from 134,000 bales in Cotton Year 2006/2007.

Tea: the sub-sector recorded positive growth. In the year 2000, production was 29,298 metric tonnes while the exports were 26,388 metric tonnes. Comparatively, in 2007 production was at 44,912 tonnes while exports were 43,638 tonnes. This was mainly on account of increased planting materials under the strategic intervention programme.

Cocoa: cocoa production had increased from 3,700 metric tonnes to 10,006 metric tonnes in Cocoa Year 2002/2003 and 2006/2007 respectively. The expectation for 2007/2008 is 12,850 metric tones.

Food Crops:

The food crops sector is projected to grow at 2.4 percent in Financial Year 2007/2008 compared to a decline of 0.9 percent in Financial Year 2006/2007. The improved production is in response to the increased regional demand for Ugandan produce.

The Livestock Sub-sector:

The committee was informed that one million HC vaccinations against Contagious Bovine Pneumonia and 1,200,000 HC vaccinations against Foot and Mouth Disease were carried out. Animal quarantine infrastructure and the Diary Policy were approved.

The Animal Disease Control Policy was drafted and the Animal Disease Act, 1964 was reviewed. 

The livestock sub-sector registered and licensed 150 cattle traders, 25 hides and skins dealers and 25 milk dealers. 

Policies on the following were approved: sericulture, apiculture and National Tsetse Control. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the observations of the committee are as follows:
The committee expressed concern that the above mentioned policies meant to establish a legal framework for the production, trade and usage of animal feeds had taken a long time to be presented to Parliament. 

The committee urges government to expedite the process of operationalising the above policies and demands that the above mentioned policies be presented to Parliament.

The Fishing Sub-sector:

The committee noted that the fishing sector registered a decline in growth of minus 12.4 percent in Financial Year 2007/2008 following an earlier drop of 3 percent in FY 2006/2007. The poor performance is due to the depletion of fish stocks from the lakes, forcing factories to close. 

The committee observes that this trend will continue unless the enforcement of fishing regulations is enhanced and costs for inputs to the fisher folk reduced.

The committee recommends that the government should urgently intervene to reverse this negative trend this Financial Year 2008/2009. 

In order to benefit from the rising prices in the international markets from Europe, supply of fish products should strongly be supported to correspond to the increased demand. 

Government should increase investments in aquaculture and the ministry should demonstrate its responsibility for the sub-sector.

National Agricultural Advisory Services:
The committee was informed that the government policy for strategic intervention in agriculture through NAADS is aimed at increasing household incomes to at least Shs 20 million per annum in the short and medium term. NAADS extension services have been modified to include provision of agro-inputs, primary processing equipment and technologies that will increase production and add value to farmers’ produce and hence income.

In addition to NAADS direct support, the farmers will also be provided with micro finance credit under the Prosperity-for-All programme.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as regards NAADS achievements, the committee was informed that NAADS is involved in enterprise development and promotion as a basis for it to contribute to increasing farm household incomes and food security.

As regards Upland rice and citrus production in Hoima and Soroti respectively, production has not only increased but clear progress is being made in achieving integration among production, agro-processing and marketing. In Hoima for example, the number of rice mills has increased from three, four years ago to the current 38. 

The establishment of strong and viable farmer groups is a legal requirement for the NAADS as the foundation of farmer empowerment as well as effective provision of required services. Under these farmer groups, the foundations for a savings culture and governance have been laid. Clear outcomes for these include:

1. 	Creating an enabling environment for farmer participation in savings credit and cooperative societies.
2. 	Support for market linkage and organised marketing; and providing platforms for price negotiations.
3. 	Promoting farmer empowerment in all aspects of program implementation through guidance and facilitating enterprise selection development and promotion. The programme is positively contributing to the emergency and establishment of production zones. For example, now upland rice production zones are emerging in western savanna grasslands that include Hoima, Kibaale and Kamwenge, the Kyoga plains that is Iganga, Kamuli Pallisa, Kumi, southern Lira and Apac.

Challenges for NAADS:  

The committee was informed that the NAADS annual budget consists of central government, district, sub-county and farmer components. The continuing level of co-funding especially by local governments continues to defeat the realisation of all the resources in the budget required for the program implementation. The NAADS programme has become the main vehicle for attainment of Prosperity-for-All objectives. As a result, there are significant political interests and expectations. These will require to be managed effectively at off the centre and local governments. 

In addition, the implementation of other government programs, for example rural micro finance and secondary agro-processing, has to be harmonised with NAADS implementation. The Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets regulations and guidelines are not predisposed or suited to the highly seasonal nature of agriculture. More so, the limited capacity of producers/suppliers of stocking and planting materials makes compliance with these guidelines even more difficult. 

The release of limited funds in the first quarter, which coincides with the start of the rainy season and a substantial proportion of funds in the fourth quarter of the budget year that coincides with the end of the first rain seasons together cause substantial unspent balances by the end of the financial year. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, you will remember that old NAADS is supposed to offer just advisory services through private delivery and public funding. The new NAADS is supposed to offer advisory services through private delivery together with public funding, and is supposed to go into inputs. So, these are the observations of the committee.  

The committee observed that while the restructuring and the reviewing of the NAADS program is a welcome initiative, the NAADS Act should be amended to accommodate the proposed modifications.  

The committee observed that whereas NAADS seems to be widely taking over the responsibility originally under the PMA framework, the guidelines for the proposed restructuring and review of the program have not yet been brought before Parliament. 

Recommendations:  

The committee recommends that the government should expedite the process on modification of the new NAADS guidelines and avail the same to Parliament. Government should consider reviewing the National Agricultural Advisory Act 2001.  

National Agricultural Research organisation:
The committee was informed that NARO, guided by the National Agricultural Research Systems Act 2005, carried out the following activities among others:
i.	660 positions out of the 717 provided for during the Financial Year 2007/2008 budget were filled. The process to fill the remaining 57 positions is at an advanced stage.
ii.	Guidelines for participation of the private sector and universities in quality assurance under the NAADS were developed and a number of potential service providers were certified for registration.
iii.	Routine research management functions were decentralised to semi-autonomous institutes to reduce bureaucracy and operation costs. 
iv.	Two hybrid maize varieties and three sun flower varieties were released. An additional 11 projects were funded under the competitive grants scheme bringing the total number of projects in pilot zones to 23 while 8 projects were approved for non pilot zones.

Observation:  

The committee observed that funding to NARO had greatly reduced thus constraining the progress towards completion of ongoing research and demoralising scientists. This may result into loss of many of the distinguished scientists who are really needed the world over, and you know that some are with us here in this Parliament, Madam Speaker.

Recommendations:  

The committee recommends that government should increase domestic funding to NARO to reduce donor dependency in financing of activities to avoid stalling on growing research programs and demoralising scientists.  

Uganda Coffee Development Authority:

The committee was informed that seven million out of 20 million seedlings were produced by community-based nurseries. Coffee export was at 2.7 million bags as compared to the targeted 2.5. Half a million seedlings were generated in order to up scale coffee production in northern Uganda.  

Recommendation:

The committee recommends that small coffee producers should be organised into societies for better production, processing and marketing.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Cotton Development Organization:  

The committee was informed that the cotton sub-sector experienced a sharp decline in the production of Cotton to a mere 65,000 bales down from 134,000 and we were told that this was mainly due to the collapse of the zoning system, untimely delivery or no delivery of pesticides, competition among ginners, massive introduction of organic cotton whose yields were substantially lower given the pests challenge and inadequate training of farmers, and lack of independence of our farmers from ginners.

Observation:

The committee observed that government has committed itself to support farmers in accessing production inputs.

Recommendation:

The introduction of organic cotton farming in the country must be accompanied with adequate training and relevant extension services for the farmers.   

The actual sector releases for Financial Year 2007/2008 are in annex 1.

Implementation of Parliament’s recommendations for the Financial Year 2007/2008:

Observation:

The committee expressed concern that MAAIF failed to indicate the extent to which the Parliamentary recommendations for the Financial Year 2007/2008 were implemented.

Recommendation: 

The committee strongly urges MAAIF to desist from this practice and comply with the procedure.

Performance of Sector Loans and Grants:

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee observed that MAAIF is implementing projects enumerated below, among others:

The Fisheries project:

This is a five project that started in 2003 and will end in 2008. It is funded by the Government of Uganda and the African Development Bank to a tune of US $28.36 million. The Government of Uganda finances 30.5 percent of the local costs of the project.

Farming in Tsetse Controlled Areas (FITCA) Project:

The FITCA project is implemented in 12 districts of Bugiri, Busia, Iganga, Jinja, Kamuli, Kayunga, Mayuge, Mbale, Mukono, Pallisa, Soroti and Tororo to a tune of US $5.9 million for the project period 2001 to 2009.

Farm Income Enhancement project:

This is a five year project starting 2005 to 2010, costing $ 51.15 million and covering 37 districts.  

The North-west Small Holder Agricultural Development Project:  

This is an eight-year project from 2001 to 2008. It is funded by Government of Uganda and the African Development Bank. Its objective is to improve agricultural productivity and marketing in the North-west region of Uganda.  The districts where the project is being implemented are Arua, Nebbi, Adjumani, Moyo and Yumbe. 

We have National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project. The committee noted that this project is funded by the Government of Uganda and the African Development Bank to a tune of US $29.6 million for five years starting 2005 to 2010. The project covers 29 districts in the cattle corridor and has four major components which include, livestock genetic resources development, animal health, water supply and forage resources development, and livestock market infrastructure and information system.

Vegetable Oil Project:

The committee noted that this project began in 1998 and was due to end in 2006. However, it was extended to 2010.  

The objectives of the project include: 
(a)	Increasing farmer incomes through growing oil palm by establishing small holder farms,
(b)	Reducing imports of vegetable products,
(c)	Support to private sector for agro-industrial investments,
(d)	Developing the potential for sun-flower and other arable oil seeds.

Observation:

The committee observed that the information provided in the policy statement on the above projects was inadequate. 

The Fisheries Development Project has stalled.

Recommendation:

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General should carry out a value-for-money audit on the Fisheries Development Project and report to Parliament within three months.

MAAIF should provide detailed information on the implementation of projects, pointing out clearly the utilisation and performance of these loans and grants.

Non Tax Revenue Performance:

The committee observed that non-tax revenue performance was not indicated in the policy statement as required. Hon. Members, you know this is in our Budget Act where the ministry has to tell us about its revenue and expenditure. 

Recommendation:

The committee recommends that MAAIF should comply with this provision of the law.

General Observations and Recommendations:

The function of water for production is not yet streamlined. It was noted that the function is also scattered in various projects within the sector in National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project and Farm Income Enhancement Project.

While water for production was put under MAAIF the donors who were funding this activity reverted to basket funding, which does not guarantee funding for the activity.

Recommendation:

The committee recommends that the resources under the basket funding mechanism should be availed to MAAIF to undertake the activity of water for production.  

The funding of irrigation activities and water for livestock should be harmonised under water for agricultural production, and to ease coordination of this component the responsibility should be under MAAIF.

The committee observed that an income tax exemption arising out of new agro-processing investments will be established commencing 1 July 2008. The income tax exemption incentive is however discriminatory, as existing agro-processing firms will be disadvantaged since they will not benefit from the arrangement and therefore will not be able to compete with the new entrants.

The committee, therefore, recommends that existing firms should also benefit from the arrangement in order to compete favourably. 

The committee observed that the Vegetable Oil Development Project had persistent challenges of land ownership. The committee recommends that a status report on the additional 6,000 hectares that were to be procured together with an explanation on the 3,000 hectares of land in Masaka for the nucleus estate should be provided to Parliament.

The committee observed that strengthening of MAAIF, semi-autonomous agencies, namely, NAGREC, DB and DDA, requires additional funding of Shs 9,514,150,000 to reduce on the pressure on the ministry’s non-wage budget.

Recommendation:
The committee reiterates its recommendation that these institutions be accorded Vote status.

It further recommended that the funding for NAGREC should be increased by an additional Shs 6,556,750,000 to close the funding gap this financial year. It also recommended that funding for DDA should be increased by an additional Shs 2,957,400,000 to close the funding gap this same year.  

The committee observed that cotton is a strategic crop in the industrialisation of Uganda through exploitation of the entire value chain and the fight against poverty.

The committee further observed that government undertakes to provide extension services, input and establishing demonstration plots for farmers’ training and mechanisation. It was observed that the budget provision of Shs 5.7 billion for this sub sector is inadequate. The committee also observed that government has proposed to establish a cotton development fund.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that regulation of the sub-sector be strengthened. 

It further recommends that Shs 7.95 billion should be availed to achieve its targets.

The government should expedite the process of establishing the Cotton Development Fund with all stakeholders involved.

The committee expressed concern over the rampant and persistent land encroachment and conflicts in Kawanda, Ikulwe, Kitgum, Mbarara, Saanga, Kasese, Njeru and many areas where there is government land. The places I have mentioned are the ones in which we have agricultural research institutes.

The committee recommends that government, as a matter of urgency, should make efforts to survey this land and process land titles in order to curtail the encroachments. Those involved in the above practice should be prosecuted in the courts of law.

Key sector priorities for 2008/2009:

The committee was informed that government intends to focus budgetary interventions on the following priorities with implications for agriculture: agricultural development generally, strengthening agricultural advisory services, expansion of NAADS to reach all sub-counties and provide farmers with necessary in puts, investing in agro processing and marketing. The others include: physical infrastructure including agricultural physical infrastructure to enhance export competitiveness, agricultural research and technology development, strengthening capacity for strategic policy analysis, planning and agricultural statistics, water for agricultural production, quality assurance and regulatory services, epidemic diseases, pests and vector control, strengthening strategic interventions for increased production and income, for example, for exports like coffee, tea, cocoa and cotton, and of course the peace recovery  and development plan for Northern Uganda.

Sector budget for Financial Year 2008/2009:

The committee observed – we have an annex at the back of the report where the committee’s observations are indicated.

Anyway, the committee observed that during the Financial Year 2008/2009, the sector share to the total GDP is projected to be 3.8 percent down from 4.3 percent share in the last financial year. The reduction in the sector share is due to a significant reduction in funding for MAAIF by Shs 16.5 billion this financial year. The sector budget for the Financial Year 2008/2009 is projected to be Shs 223.3 billion excluding tax arrears and taxes, an increment of Shs 20.77 billion from that of the last financial year. This is due to increased funding for NAADS activities by Shs 37.8 billion. 

However, we observed that the sector registered a reduction of Shs 14.43 billion from the April submission of the indicative budget for Financial Year 2008/2009. The reduction in funding for MAAIF this financial year is due to a significant reduction in the donor-funded development budget by Shs 18.4 billion. This may be as a result of the completion of some of the development projects under the ministry.

Further, the government funded-development budget has stagnated from last financial year at the level of Shs 9.08 billion. It should be noted that MAAIF has had low absorption of project funds, which has to be addressed before the design of new projects.

The current non-wage budget for MAAIF registered an increment of Shs 1.9 billion from last financial year, which enabled semi-autonomous agencies like NAGREC and DDA to access more resources for the activities although not sufficient.

Funding for NARO has reduced by Shs 1.97 billion. This is due to a reduction in the donor contribution from Shs 21.19 to Shs 10.74 billion. This is partly due to the completion of ARTP II to a two-year bridging project of US $12 million that was approved by Parliament and on the fulfillment of the loan disbursement requirements funding position of NARO is projected to improve from the current levels.

The traditional agricultural extension services will receive a non-wage recurrent budget of Shs 3.21 billion in the Financial Year 20008/2009, a reduction of Shs 0.47 from that of last financial year.

It is envisaged that under the new arrangements for NAADS, funding especially for non-wage recurrent activities should be provided under the NAADS budget. Efficiency gains could be registered in this arrangement, if undertaken.

The Cotton Development Organisation will receive an additional Shs 3.5 billion during the Financial Year 2008/2009 compared to that of last financial year. However, the increment remains inadequate to enable the organization achieve the target of 300,000 bales. A further Shs 8 billion is required for it to achieve this target.

Observation:

The committee observed that there was no mention about horticulture in the policy statement. There was also no mention about the country’s international obligations. Here we refer to the international organisations that our country subscribes to. 

The livestock sub-sector continues to be marginalised in terms of funding as exemplified by budgetary allocations for MAAIF this financial year, where it is indicated that the crop resources has a share of only percent while animal resources is allotted a mere 17 percent of the MAAIF total budget.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that MAAIF comes out clearly with strategic interventions to promote the horticulture industry. MAAIF should indicate to Parliament in the next financial year’s policy statement all international obligations; this is a requirement of the law. The percentage share for the livestock sub-sector should be increased proportionately to its responsibilities.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in view of the above sector priorities, the committee requests Parliament to approve the following Votes - I have been advised by the ministry that there has been a shift in some of the monies. For example, let me read what I have. As far as the committee is concerned, we have for Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) Vote – 101: recurrent expenditure, Shs 16,791,936,930, development expenditure, Shs 66,050,279,816 giving us a total of Shs 82,842,216,746. 

NARO - Vote 142: recurrent expenditure of Shs 2,931,675,550 and development expenditure of Shs 36,421,426,623 giving us a total of Shs 39,353,102,173. 

NAADS – Vote 152: recurrent expenditure of Shs 5,692,718,000 and development expenditure of Shs 13,304,000,000 adding to a total of Shs 18,996,718,000. 

The Cotton Development Authority: recurrent expenditure of Shs 5.7 billion; and UCDA Vote 160: recurrent expenditure of 2,447,000,000.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that this report be adopted by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much Chairperson and the Committee for Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries. I have perused the signatures and it has the minimum number of signatures, therefore, is eligible for debate. But let me invite the Leader of the Opposition. 

4.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I again rise on behalf of another shadow minister. My colleague hon. Beti Kamya, like very many other Members of this House including the Rt hon. Speaker, is in the United States for the Uganda North American Conference. This conference has had a huge attrition on my Front Bench and I wonder whether we should not suggest to the UNAC that they hold their convention after August because we pay a heavy price for it? 

I also asked my colleague, hon. Dr Epetait, who is a veterinary doctor and, therefore, conversant with this sector to stand in her place. But Dr Epetait today had to leave for some urgent matters in the West Nile. I had been given a draft of the document, which was intended for presentation; I got caught up in so many commitments, we left here very late last night, and I was too exhausted to do much editing to it. So it is in a form that I cannot circulate. But I will try to be very straight and clear. 

I would first of all like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the report. A lot of the comments from our side will dwell far less on the committee report and I will explain shortly. But allow me to start by expressing the sympathies of the Opposition to the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries – the substantive Minister of Agriculture Eng. Hilary Onek has over the last financial year been nursing the wounds sustained in a serious accident. During the same year, the Minister of State in Charge of Livestock, hon. Maj. Bright Rwamirama got involved in a major accident. And then, a few months ago, the Minister of State in Charge of Crops, hon. Dr Kibirige Sebunya fell ill. This is something that we must really sympathise with the ministry over and also wish our three colleagues speedy recovery so that they can take the very onerous task of leading this sector to where it should be.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries presented to Parliament his policy statement for Financial Year 2008/09, which the committee reported on. The statement outlined the NRM Government policy on agriculture, which is aimed at increasing household income to Shs 20 million per annum in the short and medium term. This was to be achieved through the modified NAADS extension services and provision of micro-finance credit under the Prosperity-for-All programme. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ stated overall goal is to stimulate economic growth in Uganda by supporting, promoting and guiding the production and processing of crops, livestock, fish and all agro-related activities in a sustainable manner so as to ensure the best quality for the consumers in the market and increase the quantity of agricultural produce and products for domestic consumption, food security and export. 

Against this stated goal, however, the first concern of the Opposition is that the policy statement brought out a number of very negative developments that the committee also made mention of. For instance, the report said that the cotton sector output declined by 52 percent; the fish sector declined by 12.4 percent, while cash crops grew by 2.2 percent last year, this was a decline over the rate of 5.4 percent in the previous year. 

Madam Speaker, the ministry neither addressed the causes of these failures nor presented concrete plans to overcome shortcomings in the sector. These shortcomings coupled with the reduction in the overall sector share of the budget provision from 4.25 percent in the Financial Year 2007/08 to 3.8 percent in this financial year, raises more questions than answers as to whether government considers the ministry of agriculture relevant in the fight against poverty. And sometimes we sit here and we do not realise how important agriculture really is. So, I would like to bring out the basic facts on agriculture that will help you to appreciate the issues that we are raising.

The agricultural sector in Uganda is dominated by smallholders and very minimal mechanisation with the hand hoe as the main tool of cultivation. The sector is comprised of over 2 million households who produce on a range of farm units averaging about 2 hectares.

Food crop production dominates the sector contributing 71 percent of agricultural GDP while livestock production accounts for 17 percent; cash crops 5 percent; fisheries 4 percent; and forestry 3 percent. 

The importance of agriculture in that context cannot be over emphasised but let me add that the sector also plays a pivotal role in Uganda’s economy accounting for over 40 percent of total GDP, over 90 percent of our basic exports and 80 percent of employment. This is the sector where you had the chair outline the activities that the ministry is going through, and outlined the budget proposals. 

Madam Speaker, without any doubt, the agricultural sector is central in the improvement of economic performance, increased income, raising household standards, ensuring food security and poverty reduction. Against this background, the Maputo Declaration of July 2003 urged countries of the African Union to commit themselves to increase budgetary allocation to the agricultural sector so that the share of national budgetary resources reach 10 percent within five years. And the five years was the last Financial Year 2007/08, over which we are now seeing a decline. Maybe our peak of four percent was the object of meeting this target. 

Given this scenario, the Opposition is absolutely convinced that without concrete action and solid investment in the sector, no amount of sloganeering will lead to families increasing their household incomes to the wild target of Shs 20 million per year. We propose, as an interim measure, that Parliament comes out with a concrete programme for an emergency intervention in the agricultural sector. 

Madam Speaker, the constraints facing the agricultural sector ranges from the low budgetary allocation and limited appropriate advisory services to lack of skilled labour, poor technology, lack of farm inputs, limited access to credit, reliance on natural weather conditions, and inconsistency of the land tenure systems to agricultural modernisation. 

The Opposition is of the view that unless these constraints are properly addressed, any efforts to improve production and productivity as envisaged by the ministry will not yield any results both in the short and medium term. And we want to illustrate a few things. Last financial year, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries promised in their policy statement to target scaling up of increased production and productivity - it is in last year’s policy statement, of crops and animals through zoning, value addition, product development tied to market, and influencing consumer care and loyalty. In addition, the Ministry promised to ensure an attractive policy environment for performing agriculture as a business. 

The Opposition is concerned that this year, the Minister has not informed us on the outputs and achievements of these policy goals. For example, the Minister has not informed this Parliament as to how many policies, aimed at closing the gaps identified in crops, livestock and fisheries sub-sectors, were discussed and adopted during the Financial Year 2007/08. The ministry has not reported on progress on the national apiculture policy, the national policy on ticks and tick borne disease control, and the policy on livestock and disease control promised last financial year.

We want to pick two activities to illustrate two contrasting situations. Madam Speaker, government acknowledged that cotton production declined last year by more than 50 percent. The decline in the cotton sub-sector raises serious concerns. In his State of the Nation Address at the opening of the Seventh Parliament on 27 July 2001, His Excellency the President promised to raise cotton production to 400,000 bales within one year and to one million bales in the subsequent five years through establishment of big cotton plantations. 

In September 2001, a strategic intervention programme for promoting production, processing and marketing of selected exports, which included amongst others cotton, coffee and tea, was launched. This resulted in a substantial increase in cotton production to a peak of 254,000 bales in the financial year 2004/05. Thereafter, however, the sector started to decline and dropped drastically to just 65,000 bales in the last financial year.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the concern of the Opposition is the approach the ministry is taking to reverse this trend and the seriousness of the minister as pointed out in his policy statement. The minister points out that in order to arrest the decline and raise production to 300,000 bales in 2008/09 and beyond, I quote, and that is what is in the policy statement, “Government has decided to take back its farmers and support critical areas.” The Opposition would like to know from the minister as to whom government had loaned the farmers to. We are also interested to know the specific measures government is going to undertake to attain the magic figure of 300,000 bales, leave alone the one million because all we heard from the Chair of the committee is to give CDO more money. 

Growth was reported in the tea sub-sector. However, the ministry did not recognise that the recorded growth was a result of the input and participation of the private sector in the industry especially companies like Rwenzori Tea Commodities and others, even individuals like my honourable colleague Deus Bikwasizehi -(Interjection)- do not worry about the pronunciation; we do not have the letter “Z” in our language -(Interjection)- Oh! And hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, it should be recorded, who were involved in giving free tea clones to tea out growers. 

The ministry must recognise the importance and contribution of the private sector and it must therefore accordingly have in place concrete measures to support these people. And this is why the other time we raised concern about connecting the tea company, Kinkizi Development Company in Kanungu. It was for that reason. Unfortunately, in his policy statement for the Financial Year 2008/09, the ministry has promised to avail five tea seedlings to farmers under the strategic intervention programme -(Interjection)- you check the record, check page 6 of the policy statement because I am quoting from the policy statement. This is against the fact that you need approximately 15,000 tea seedlings to plant on one hectare of land. (Dr Suruma rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is some information.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Okay, I was told it is a typing error. [Mr William Nsubuga: “What is the correct figure?”] I leave it for them. 

The last aspect we want to illustrate is food crops production and rural development. Madam Speaker, as we pointed out earlier on, 71 percent of agricultural activities is subsistence; it is about food. Everybody knows the dramatic increment in food prices that the country went through due to the world commodity price increments and the global warming effects that are affecting the whole world. In a country like Malawi, government decided to deliberately subsidise fertilizer prices; and now as I speak, a 150 kilogramme bag of Di-Ammonium Phosphate fertilizer (DAP) on the market is Shs 120,000. In Kenya, the government decided to support the resettlement of those who were displaced by subsidising inputs, fertilizers and seeds.

In our policy statement, where is the recognition of the global increment in food prices and its effect on poverty particularly for marginal urban dwellers who within a short time have been priced out of eating meat, have been priced out of eating fish, have even been priced out of eating beans -(Interjection)- and vegetables. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, against all these, we would like to draw our conclusion by stating that we recognise that for the foreseeable future, Ugandans must embrace agriculture as the country’s engine of economic growth at least for the rural people and that agricultural development is critical for rural transformation. For those things to have meaning for us, we would like to give a few specific recommendations.

The first is for us as a country to urgently review our goal for agricultural development and how these should be managed. Unless we are very clear plan of where we want our agriculture to go, there is no way that these budgetary allocations will have effect, it is not possible.

Secondly, we must review the framework for agricultural development. Hon. Members, you now hear the shift in emphasis to NAADS or Prosperity-For-All. Behind that is a big programme that we talked about for many years called PMA, Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. Now we have stopped planning for modernisation of agriculture, we are now going straight to giving money to six households and things like that. We have to go back because - fortunately I reviewed the PMA in 2000 and in reviewing the current PMA, we looked at the PMA that was first developed in Tororo under the then the Vice-President, Dr Specioza Kazibwe. For many of us who are professionals in agriculture, that PMA made sense because you talked about coffee, you saw what was possible, you set targets and you defined activities that must be done to meet those targets. That is the only way agriculture will be transformed. 

The framework for implementation of such PMA, it is the Ministry of Agriculture that has the relevance. Now, you will find that the agricultural officers belong to the districts and the veterinary officers belong to the districts; they have no obligation to report on what they are doing to central government or to harmonise their targets with that of central government. So there is just no way that within this framework, with the budget that we give the Ministry of Agriculture, we can make progress. 

Thirdly, we must provide necessary conditions for agriculture to be performed. In other, words we must really have very specific targets for our farmers. If we have clear targets, extension services will become relevant and research will be relevant. More importantly, in the situation where commodity prices have distorted input prices and availability, we must provide for ways to ensure that our farmers can access affordable inputs. We must also provide for ways to ensure that our farmers have affordable credit. 

The other time I did mention here that I had just acquired a tractor through DFCU leasing but I have to pay 24 percent interest and I have no grace period. All this and yet immediately I got the tractor, I had to plough the land, plant the crop and harvest before I begin to get returns. A structured financial arrangement, whether a separate bank or the one that is being proposed but with the intention of ensuring that affordable credit will go to farming and not be abused like the past, will make a huge difference. 

Finally, in that support is market development. Conceptually, we have a problem because we are handling market development and putting in place physical structures like rural markets and even making the Ministry of Agriculture be responsible for access roads. You give the Ministry of Works, which is responsible for roads, Shs 1.3 trillion and because you have a road component in the Ministry of Agriculture, you undermine its budget allocation. This must end. Let the Ministry of Works provide roads that the farmer will use, the trader will use and the child going to school will use without shouldering Ministry of Agriculture with the responsibility. Once we are agreed on all these, we must fund it with an appropriate budgetary allocation.  

Finally, in doing whatever we do with the programme and the money, we must realise that agriculture for development is a long term thing. You cannot shift your target every year and have a target. I thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. (Applause)   

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when I looked at page 5 of the report, it talks about the fishing sub-sector and the whole of the sub-sector is only covered in half of a page. However, I remember during the debate, the issue of the fishing sector came out and you guided us at that time that before this report is presented, they are supposed to present a report so that we deal with that matter because of the issues regarding the loan which was passed for the construction of landing sites. 

The committee has visited those areas - the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation – and I thought that the report should have come together with this. Given your guidance that day that we should deal with it at the time when we are dealing with the report of MIAAF, I am seeking your guidance now on that matter. I wonder whether it still holds or it has been deferred to another date. I felt that this should have been the right time for us to have it given because this sub-sector is even marginalised in the report; it is only a half a page covering the whole thing. Madam Speaker, I need your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I do recall that we asked the Minister in charge of Fisheries to come here and update us on that famous loan and the landing sites and what he was going to do, but I have no indication whether he is ready. I do not know whether he is ready now but what I can say is that I am willing to create another occasion specifically for that because it is very important.

Maybe just for the record, I have noted since we started these debates that the committee report takes one hour at least and the response from the Opposition takes 45 minutes to one hour. So, you find that between those two, we take two hours. We then have to create one and a half hours for the rest of the House. We have not yet formed our rules so I am not going to curtail what is going on. We shall do it until we finish, but I think for the attention of the Rules Committee, they should help us. They should help us with regard to the response of the Opposition; they are responding to the policy statement which should ideally come by the end of June. So, the shadow sector ministers, even if they have interests in other sectors, they have their sector so they should be able to produce a response to this statement well before so that they can pass it on to the House. 

I have seen the ministers everyday scribbling; the element of surprise I think is not fair. I think that the shadow sector ministers you have a responsibility; the policy statements come early, so answer early so that we have a free flow and we do not take too much time. We shall then later on deal with the minutes because there are five minutes and then they are few et cetera. However, as I said, I am only saying it for the future. For now, I think we just have to continue as we have been doing. 

4.46
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee and the chairperson for the presentation of the report. I have a few comments to make here and I intend to be very brief. 

First of all, I want to congratulate the ministry for the good performance that has been highlighted on page 9. It has been mentioned that coffee export was expected to be at 2.5 million bags but it over performed to the tune of 2.7 million bags. That is wonderful. The comment I want to make here is that the ministry should put some kind of emphasis on the quality of the coffee that is being exported. In the few areas that I go to when I go to my constituency of workers, I get a number of complaints from the processors that the competition that is out there on coffee tends to bring in some mafia that pack any type of coffee that they land on and then they export it in the name of Uganda. So, there is that likelihood of losing our good market that we have acquired out there. That could have a bad repercussion in the long run. 

Also in the cotton sector, it is being mentioned that organic cotton is on market and on demand. Indeed, it is true because I went to Lango Cooperative and I found that they have an order from a certain buyer from Britain but they cannot even provide the tonnage that is expected of them. This means the government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, must endeavour to help the farmers to catch up so that they are able to provide the cooperative union with cotton to sell.

This decline has a cause because previously, as we all recall, Uganda was doing very fine when the cooperatives were in place. However, right now because of the competition and liberalisation, it is an open activity for everyone to come in but then it must have some kind of supervision. I just want to get clarification from the Ministry of Agriculture whether it is not possible to reiterate and get back cooperative unions, because they used to do very well. We used to export our goods in good quality and big quantities and probably we could be able to compete on the global market.

Thirdly, I want to bring this in because agriculture being the backbone of our country, all the production and the pride is done by the workers. Workers are contributing quite a lot towards this success. I therefore want to talk about the ongoing story of the NSSF mismanagement. I wonder what is going on. I represent all the workers of this country, no matter where, and some of these are farmers who are also contributing to NSSF. The NSSF is being mismanaged day in day out. We have changed management but still the funds are being misappropriated. 

I just want to find out and get clarification in regard to who is responsible for NSSF today –(Dr Suruma rose_)- give me time. Here we have the funds in the Ministry of Finance, we have the policy in the Ministry of Labour and workers are confused. Money is misappropriated in the name of being put into projects, buying land - we just read in papers that someone bought 52 acres of air using the money from the workers who produce, who make us proud that our economy is doing fine. Nobody is mentioning this. We do not know how a worker can get his money. Why is this money being misappropriated and why aren’t workers represented on the board? Is it intentional? What is the idea behind all this? Tomorrow they are going to pay Alcon Shs 31 billion for work not done and we continue and continue. Uganda Revenue Authority got a loan of billions of money. We need clarification -(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to say that the ministry which is responsible for overseeing NSSF is responsible for the problems in agriculture? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, you see the honourable member represents workers and some of these workers are in the agricultural sector. So, that is really what she is asking. That is part of her constituency. (Applause)

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much for the wise ruling, Madam Speaker. I just want to get clarification. Workers are concerned because their money is being taken left and right and nobody is asking and they do not know who to address -(Member timed out) 

4.54
MR SANJAY TANNA (INDEPENDENT, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification both from the committee and the ministry. I will concentrate on the cotton sector. 

The area I represent used to predominantly survive on cotton. We have the highest number of ginneries in this country. We have the highest number of redundant ginneries now, in Uganda. It is only and only because the Cotton Development Organisation has allowed that to happen. In my opinion, it is tantamount to mismanagement of the cotton sector in the country. It is a shame that despite the committee saying that CDO performed at 360 percent, we have dropped production to less than a half.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: Performed in terms of cash releases - cash to the Cotton Development Organisation - but not the actual performance on the ground.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I was saying. They got 360 percent of what they were supposed to have got and when you look at the output, it is 50 percent lower than the previous year. So, I would like to seek clarification on this sector. 

The committee has not raised significant issues, like the mismanagement in CDO. Certain persons in CDO have favoured particular ginners and let down others. Some of these ginners have invested billions of shillings in the development of this cotton industry in this county. 

As we speak today, for the last several years, till 2005, cotton prices internationally were going down. Today we do not have that excuse. Our farmers should benefit from the rising cotton demand and prices. Uganda produces one of the best premium cotton available on the world market. We are rated among the top five producers of cotton. It is a shame when our farmers are willing to work but not the organisation that is mandated with helping; and the committee has put four bullets here and all it says is “the committee observes that government has committed itself to support farmers in accessing production inputs.” Are we really serious when we are handling the population of this country and having been mandated to help these farmers to survive?

Like I have already mentioned, most of the ginneries in Eastern Uganda are closed because either they have been stopped from buying cotton from the farmers or they have been stopped from pre-financing the farmers. Some of them gave cotton seeds and were stopped from buying back. There is total anarchy in the Cotton Development Organisation. I beg that the committee revisits this sub-sector and I urge that a committee be put in place to investigate this matter. I beg to submit.

4.58
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to thank the committee for the report and again thank the NRM Government for the effort they have put in agriculture. Even when some people may not see that it is well, it is well, because they have introduced new crops like cocoa while others like tea have been picked. I remember what we went through when the agricultural system broke down in Amin and Obote II days. We have made some progress in agriculture.

Where I come from in Kyenjojo, we used to grow cotton. I grew up as a cotton farmer and there was no such thing as Cotton Development Authority and yet cotton was one of the highest paying cash crops in the country. My guess is that it is the Cotton Development Organisation which has not done its work and should be looked at by the ministry or even Parliament so that this decline can really turn around. 

I propose that the money they have additionally been given should go to crops like tea, which are on the increase. Cotton, after all, is a seasonal crop, and that is one of the problems, and yet tea is a permanent crop. Once you have grown tea and taken care of it, it will serve for many generations and even our exports will be very good. I propose that Cotton Development Authority is looked at again by whichever ministry is responsible.

My concern is on other crops, which have been left out in the report yet they are important. There are crops like bananas - you know Uganda is a banana country and we export bananas to Kenya, Rwanda and other parts of DRC. It is a food as well as cash crop and should be given priority in our agricultural activities. The same goes for maize; we are exporting a lot of maize and even much of the maize going to places like Sudan by WFP is from Uganda. It is a cash crop as well as a food crop. There are many other cops we could look at. I feel in the report they have highlighted just a few of the crops especially for us rural people. Some of the crops which bring us food and cash are not the ones on paper. 

I support my colleague, hon. Ssentongo, and the workers of this country because they are being cheated by some individuals in NSSF. It is a tragedy for this country –(Member timed out)

5.03
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. On page 12, the report mentions NLPIP and water for production. Budiope constituency is in the cattle corridor and there has been an increased public outcry over water for production, which has led to death of many animals. 

On that very page, they say the government secured a loan in 2005 and that loan is expiring in 2010. Madam Speaker, I understand the Ministry of Agriculture wrote a letter to you, and I was given a copy, clearly indicating that Buyende Dam, Imeri-Ndolwa Dam in Budiope Constituency will be desilted. This was since 2005, and this is 2008 and they still tell us that they are still designing. I wonder how long it takes to design de-silting of a dam. I would like to get clarification from the minister when they intend to de-silt these dams. 

I want to commend government for its quick interventions whenever there is disease outbreak. On page 4, the committee noted that 1,000,000 HC vaccines were procured. I only want to ask the minister - when this vaccine is procured by government, is it supposed to be given to farmers at a standard price? If the answer is yes, what is that standard price? If the answer is no, why do staff from their ministry charge Shs 2,000 per cow? 

I represent a constituency, which is surrounded by Lake Kyoga. As you may note, the report clearly captures that there is depletion of fish stocks in some of these lakes. I agree with the report entirely on the poor performance of fish stokes in some of these lakes. When you look at the observation on page 5, they are saying that the trend will continue unless the enforcement of fishing regulations is enhanced. There is a very big problem at these fishing areas. What is happening is that staff from the ministry who are supposed to enforce the regulations are just accumulating wealth. It is a very big problem on Lake Kyoga; the staff there are busy collecting money and in so doing, are just encouraging people to use poor fishing gear. 

On the Fisheries Development Project on page 11, I want to thank the government for starting construction of fish landing sites. However, I want to draw the minister’s attention to the fact that work at Bukwa landing site, which was given to Dembe and Liberty Company, has stalled. This company simply sub-contracted to Lamba, which has done shoddy work and forced the consulting engineer to demolish the structures that had been raised. I therefore call upon the ministry officials to closely monitor these projects otherwise we may end up losing a lot of money, well aware that that the project cost Shs 2.5 billion -(Member timed out)

5.09
CAPT (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I think it is extremely important that we pay attention to the biggest private sector. When people talk of the private sector, they think of Mulwana and a few other fellows around Kampala but in my opinion, this is the biggest private sector in this country, which employs the majority of our people. 

The last census of head of cattle in this country put them at around six million. Botswana has about 2.5 to 3 million head of cattle. While we earn no more than US$ 15 million, Botswana earns over US$ 100 million and yet we have more head of cattle in this country.

The cash crop sub-sector has declined from 4.5 percent in FY 2006/2007 to 2.2 percent last financial year. Cotton is a clear testimony. When you go to all the cotton growing areas in this country, which include the entire northern Uganda, eastern axis, Kasese and some parts of western Uganda, you do not see any production of cotton. Those of us who travel upcountry - I am told the target is about 300,000 bales but it has declined from 134,000 to 65,000 in the fiscal years following each other, that is, last financial year and the other one.

The fish sub-sector has declined by 12.4 percent according to the figures from the planners of this country. What has happened to the rural development strategies at sub-county level? People are not talking about it. It was mentioned extensively in 2007/2008 Financial Year for enhancement of productivity and so on. What has happened to it?

On page 11, we passed all these loans in the Seventh Parliament, Farm Income Enhancement Project, North West Small Holding Agricultural Development Project; and yet they are all underperforming at about 15 to 20 percent. Hon. Suruma is here and I am glad. Yesterday I raised a point about his ministry and I am very happy that he is here. All of them are non-performing and I am very certain that most likely, we are paying a penalty on the non-performing portfolio. Prime Minister, you do not have to ask; it is as if you doubt my competence. We are paying penalties on these non-performing loans, which you pressurise us to pass here in Parliament.

Madam Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, what is the problem? This is the biggest employing sector - cattle keepers, producers of cotton, coffee. What is the problem? Shida gani? This is not military language, but what is the problem ladies and gentlemen, that we cannot tackle agriculture and actually integrate it with processing factories? (Member timed out)

5.14
MS LYDIA NYAGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and for noting that the NAADS programme has become the main vehicle for attaining Prosperity for All. However, you will agree with me that the success of NAADS greatly depends on extension services. Nonetheless, it seems as if the traditional extension workers have been left idle. I wanted to know from the minister why we have not restructured the production departments in districts. These departments were not restructured during the restructuring exercise that was carried out sometime back. There was a ban on recruitment and promotion of extension workers at the district level. 

In most sub-counties, there are no extension workers. You may find that a NAADS coordinator may be a veterinary officer who is also supposed to carry out extension services of agriculture, fish and so on, and this has brought a big problem to the success of NAADS especially in the rural areas. I wanted to know from the minister when the restructuring exercise will be done in the production department at the district level.

On page 11, the committee talked about FITCA but I wanted to know from the minister what the criterion is for selecting the districts where FITCA is operating. In Iganga District, the FITCA programme came mainly because of Busiki County. If you happen to visit Namungabe Health Centre in Iganga and Namugongo Health Centre in Kaliro, you will find that most of the sleeping sickness cases there are from Namutumba District so I wonder why Namutumba District is not among the FITCA districts. 

Lastly, when you look at the processing of NAADS yields, I wonder why the Government does not assist the local farmers to put up processing plants for themselves instead of supporting foreign investors. Of recent, there was a processing plant for fruits that was put up in Nakalama in Iganga District but it is for a foreign investor and foreign investors are after acquiring profits. To that extent, it means that our local farmers are going to be exploited by these investors. I wonder why our farmers are not assisted so that they put up processing plants to process their yields themselves. Why can’t that be done? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.17
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee chairperson for this report, but I have some observations to make.

On page 7, I am happy that the committee actually came out with this challenge, which had arisen one time on the Floor of Parliament, about the release of funds. Allow me to read this last paragraph: “The release of limited funds in the first quarter, which coincides with the start of the rainy season, and the substantial proportion of funds in the fourth quarter of the budget year, that coincides with the end of the first rainy season, together cause substantial unspent balances by the end of the financial year.” 

It is good the Minister of Finance is here. when I raised this matter, he tried to inform me that things were going on well, but there is a big problem of finances released to NAADS outside the season, and this really is as good as wasting money. So, I agree with the committee that most of the money is released late when the season is over and most of the money ends up being unutilised. I want the minister to clarify on this matter. 

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, the release of funds in the first quarter of the year is based on vote on account. Is it in order for the honourable member to suggest that the Ministry of Finance should find other ways of releasing funds other than what is allowed in the law? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. The first quarter is really the vote on account and when we finish the budget process, that is when we release the balance of the money. I do not think he has other sources other than what we give him.

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I think I am very knowledgeable about that law. If the Minister of Finance refutes this challenge as presented here by the committee, I think the Minister of Agriculture will clarify on the matter. However, I have heard reports about this money; even His Excellency the President wrote complaining about the delayed releases of funds for NAADS activities. They are not in consonant with the seasons. I think the Minister of Agriculture will add more to that. 

Secondly, on page 7 there is also another problem of non-compliance to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets regulations. If this is a big challenge to the NAADS sector, I do not know whether they could request for a waiver. 

There is also another issue that I want to raise, about the allegations that NAADS is only for NRM supporters. When they were identifying the six homes, there were a lot of allegations that NAADS officials were only selecting NRM supporters. I really want the minister in charge to assure this nation that this is a programme for everybody, in spite of your political affiliation -(Ms Amongi rose_)- in the interest of time I think the honourable member will raise that information later. I would really like the honourable minister, on a very serious note, to clarify on this matter so that the members of the Opposition from my constituency rest assured that this is a national programme and it is benefiting everybody despite their political affiliations. 

On the new guidelines for NAADS, these guidelines are not very clear and I am actually in support of the committee’s observation that the NAADS Act should be amended so that we can accommodate these new changes. These new guidelines for NAADS should really be disseminated so that everybody can benefit from this programme. 

Lastly, on the fish sector, in my constituency we have a lot of crater lakes; I request the sector minister to exploit the possibility of using these to boost the sector so that we really do not have to close our factories because of the depletion of the fish in the lakes. If you could exploit this opportunity of providing fish fillers to these crater lakes, it would help a lot in alleviating this problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.23
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

On the low funding of the ministry, I am hesitant to blame the government for the low funding simply because they have reported that the Ministry of Agriculture itself has very low absorption capacity, meaning that if you put more resources, they will not be absorbed. So, whom do we blame here? The ministry should put up proper strategies where these funds can be put. I am sure if those strategies were put in place, the government would be funding it better. So, I hesitate to blame the government but I entirely blame the ministry on that. 

There is an issue that the sector did not touch on. Of late, including the paper of the farmers, there have been constant reports that there is a problem of shortage of seed and what is on the market is very poor seed. It is not mentioned here. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, without good seeds you will never achieve the productivity and production. What is the ministry doing to make sure that that is done? 

Equally, prices of producer inputs like fertilisers, which are critical for productivity, have gone so high. Bearing in mind that these are petroleum based, the prices have gone so high and farmers cannot afford to buy them. For your information, honourable minister and honourable colleagues, last year most of the tea farmers, actually 80 percent of the farmers, never applied fertiliser because they could not afford to and yet this is critical for increasing productivity. What is the ministry or Government doing to make sure that this is addressed?

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, there is evidence of some deceptive figures. The report indicates that coffee over performed and that instead of 2.5 million bags we got 2.7 and so did other sectors like cotton, tea and so on. These figures can be deceptive. You say coffee got 2.7 million bags and yet at one time we had produced four million bags, and I know with the potential of this country we can get over 10 billion bags. How can I celebrate that we have come to 2.7 million bags and then I say we have over performed and yet we are not anywhere near the fraction? So, the best thing would be to request that proper strategies and plans be put in place to reach that target or that potential that we have. 

I may not talk about everything but I attribute the issue of fish decline in the lakes to the so many fish processing factories. I am wondering whether any research was done when these factories were being designed, to see how these very many factories would be sustained by feeding on this fish which is got from the lake. When we visited around, some are operating below capacity, as low as 30 percent. So, I think in future there is need to establish the capacity of these and work out the sustainability of such resources so that they are not depleted because now we have gone back to square one.

Finally, on the design of the projects, the committee reported that poor performance of some of these projects is because these projects do not address all the issues when they are designed. The projects are approved and after they have been approved, that is when they start looking at the nitty-gritty issues. You find that most of the time a project is approved before it is properly conceived. When you look at this fisheries project, for example, after it was approved that is when they started to do most of the work that should have been done so that it is implemented, and it has ended. I have heard my colleagues saying, “Oh they have started”, but they have started at the end of the life of the project. 

I recommend, and I think that this House should insist, that before a project is approved, all mitigation measures are put in place so that such projects perform to the expectations of the people in Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

5.28
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the report and the recommendations made. I will begin with that one regarding the fisheries department.

There is a general public outcry in the country over demands for fish fillers and fish fries - I think it is the minister who can differentiate because to a lay person, it is not easy to differentiate the two. People have dug dams and we have fish ponds all over but the fish flies are inaccessible. It is our prayer that we expedite this process of supporting our farmers with fish flies. 

I want to find out from the Minister of Agriculture what strategies they are putting in place to protect our farmers against falling prey to the so called elite class or those who are informed. Every year, we find different crops that are storming our country; we have Moringa, Citronella, Aloe Vera and Cardamom. When the few who access the internet go read that a certain product is selling in India or Italy, they begin encouraging our people, “grow this and you will earn this much”, but a peasant from Bulamagi or Budiope cannot access market for a product like cardamom. You find them falling prey. The ministry should come up with protection measures. Like we always protect industrialists, farmers should be protected too.

Madam Speaker, there is an issue that was mentioned about fisheries enforcement officers. These people have become, I can call them, broad daylight robbers. I am sorry to say this but when you go to all landing sites, people are complaining. As they tend to enforce their regulations, they confiscate fishing nets from Point A and they go and sell them at Point B. After three days, they go to that same place and confiscate them and terrorise those people after they have parted with and paid lump sums of money -(Interruption)

MR BALIKOWA: The information I want to give to this House is that on Lake Kyoga we have what we call the Kiboko squad. The team from the ministry is busy beating up people and extorting money. Actually, last month we lost one fisherman who was thrown in the water during a scuffle. Thank you. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you for that good information. Madam Speaker, it is that serious. We wanted to know whether the minister or the ministry is aware of the type of suffering our people are undergoing. 

There is an issue regarding cotton farmers. I am well aware that in Uganda we have a liberalisation policy - people are free to sell their products wherever they feel like or wherever they can be paid highly according to the forces of demand and supply. However, I wonder why cotton in particular is so restricted that somebody cannot go to Bulumba and buy from Bulumba ginnery or Nakivumbi? If somebody is growing cotton in Pallisa, someone from Iganga cannot go and pay or buy from Pallisa. I wonder why we are denying our people better prices, better seeds or better yields from whatever they have harvested. It is my humble prayer that the ministry and CDO get interested and save our farmers. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

5.33
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is most kind of you to give me this opportunity and I would like to thank the Committee of Agriculture for the work well done and researched; they have really given us the issues that we should handle as Parliament.

In my opinion, I find it very difficult to see the impact of the provisions and services that government gives to the Ministry of Agriculture in respect to crops and livestock. This is simply because I am confused between agriculture and veterinary. It is louder on agriculture than on livestock. When you look at the budget, you will realise that there is too much talk about the improvement of cotton, tea and so on, but nothing about livestock. I think it is high time we get to be realistic. The portfolio of veterinary should be given attention so that we can handle its issues.

There is a lot that has been said about improvement. However, as we talk about improvement, nobody goes to the field to demonstrate to the farmers how to improve. Who are the technical people there, for example? Does the ministry send people there?

On page 4 of the report, I am surprised to read that Government is purchasing medicine for the vaccination of livestock. In our area, these services do not reach there. Do you really monitor to see who receives these services? Do you monitor how they are availed to the people? I want to tell you that these services are not on the ground. Related to that issue, I think you are doing research, because you talked about controlling animal diseases, but are you aware that we now have a new skin disease and that no medicine has been so far prescribed for this kind of disease?

The ministry has misplaced one item; how come the Ministry of Agriculture does not provide water for livestock? I am saying this because these services are pushed to the Ministry of Water. How do these ministries cooperate on the need for water? Apart from water, there is the issue of seeds for pasture. Yes, the provision of water is there, but how about the seeds for pasture for animals in the areas we call arid areas. 

I would like to inform the ministry that we, the people from arid areas, were expecting the Minister of Agriculture by this time to have found the seeds for the crops that can mature in a short period. I am saying this because the rain in such areas, including my area, lasts for only two months. So, is there a way the Ministry of Agriculture can find us seeds – maybe from India, Egypt or Israel – for crops that can mature in a short time? 

The other issue regards the medicine that the Ministry of Agriculture supplies to the farmers. This medicine has now become a commercial commodity for the people in the ministry. I think this is due to the fact that the ministry is too large to be audited. So, as long as you keep these ministries together – veterinary and agriculture – we shall never develop; there will be no change. We shall pass a huge amount of money as it is stipulated in here, but the activities that are prescribed will never be implemented. I thank you.

5.38
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I also thank the committee for the report. 

I have four areas to focus on. One of them is DDA. On page 3, the report says that the under performance of non wage category for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries at 67 percent is likely to constrain the operation of the ministry and its agencies like the DDA. 

If I am not mistaken, DDA is referring to Diary Development Authority. This authority started about ten years ago and is headed by one doctor whose name I will not mention. It is true that they have done a lot especially in improving the quality of milk in Uganda. However, the problem that we have with them – and now that they are saying they are under funded – is how they spent the money collected from milk vendors. These people collect money for licenses, inspection and penalties from all coolers in Kampala including the small ones. I would like to request the Committee of Agriculture to check on who examines the accounts of this authority. 

On page 3 again, it is said that district agriculture officers performed up to 91 percent and that they spent all the money they got and that this was commendable. Sometimes I get perturbed because we are all from predominantly agricultural areas but our farmers do not even know who their district agricultural officers in their sub-counties are. You really wonder why these people are paid and facilitated with transport, and these include the agricultural extension workers, veterinary officers and there are also the extension farmers’ leaders at sub-counties. I would like to inform the House that all these people do not have a presence in their areas. There is an agricultural officer at one of my sub-counties who owns a shop in Kampala, which sells farm implements and drugs. I would like to inform you that this man is always in that shop and not in the village. The farmers in that sub-county never see him. That is why I wonder why these people are being paid by Government.

The other issue that I would like to comment about is NAADS because a lot of money is spent on NAADS. In the five sub-counties in my constituency, it is only during the last financial whey they chose one sub-county. Imagine there are about 314 constituencies, but in mine, NAADS is in only one sub-county. Now you are telling us, on page 6, that NAADS has achieved a lot; achievements in only one sub-county! How can I accept that NAADS has achieved anything when its presence is in only one sub-county with hardly anything being on the ground to show that they have really improved the standards of farmers?

Lastly, let me say something about the National Livestock Productivity Improvement project. The report tells us that this project is funded by the Government of Uganda and the African Development Bank to a tune of US $29.6 million. However, the semen that our farmers use is paid for. How will they get this money yet government is putting in money including that from the donors? We also at times borrow for this purpose.

Madam Speaker, around 1990 I used to travel to Mbarara; I would see exotic bulls in a herd of cows, which would, I think, serve them in order to multiply. As we talk, Mbarara has changed -(Member timed out)

5.38
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, but I would like to seek clarification from the minister on three issues. 

One issue is on page 4, about the livestock sub-sector. My understanding about vaccination of animals is that it should be routine and there should be a national campaign for it.  Now, if out of six million animals, we are able to vaccinate only one million, that is about the number of animals in a district. I would wish to know the privileged district which had its animals vaccinated. If it was covered nationwide, then I think that one would be able to tell us the importance of privatising veterinary services. I am saying this because it means few people were able to access the services; they could not afford them.  

On page 6, the report says that in addition to NAADS’ direct support, the farmers will also be provided with micro finance credit under Prosperity for All Programme. We quite appreciate that agriculture is highly seasonal, but these micro finance loans, you get them this morning and tomorrow morning you are expected to begin paying.  Now, what crop is that you are going to grow overnight in order to harvest it next morning and begin paying the loan? I do not know why government is shy about creating a scheme, say in Uganda Development Bank, so that people who can access such loans for long term planning would go a head. I hope your people have that in their minds. Otherwise, short of that, this micro financing is not going to take us far and agriculture will not benefit us as a country.    

On the issue of cotton, I would like to say I was privileged to share a meeting with a board member of CDO. In that meeting, he told me something about the composition of the board. According to him, there are two people on that board who are also ginners and that the same people are in charge of supplying agricultural inputs and zoning. Now, I would wish to know from the minister, if I am competing with a board member who is a ginner, let us say in Apac, what chances do I have, and especially if he has supplied inputs there, to go and buy cotton in Apac? I think you can see that this puts our farmers at risk. The farmers are highly dependent on the ginners and so long as our farmers are going to be dependent on the ginners and the sale of cotton is not to be liberalised at all, you will always be put under conditions. If the man offers you Shs 300 per kilogramme, you will to go by it because he gave you inputs. 

Not until we revive cooperatives - even government cannot supply inputs, and farmers become independent, we shall always have low cotton production because farmers will shy off from growing cotton because of low prices. It is the prices to give incentives; once the prices are high more people are bound to grow cotton. Otherwise, as long as the prices remain low, no one is going to grow cotton. The 300,000 bales you are talking of, even after giving CDO billions of shillings you will never realise them as long as the price of cotton remains low. I thank you very much. (Applause)

5.48
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this comprehensive report that they have prepared to the best of what they could.  

Going through this report, you discover that much of it is actually deceptive; it lacks strategic approach and the tactical approach through which this government would rejuvenate the glory that we had before in agriculture. I notice that the committee only relied on the technical staff. If you look at page 10, on CDO, the committee states: “The committee was informed that …”; this shows that they entirely depended on what they got from the technical staff. I would have preferred to see the committee go further to analyse the information it got from the technical staff and what they could have developed as a committee. This would help them direct this government. 

I will give an example of No.1: the committee says that they were informed that the collapse or the decline in cotton production is due to the collapse of the zoning systems. To me, and I think to many, it is the zoning system that has caused a sharp decline in cotton production. I am aware that sometime back, there was a company called Dunavant that was zoned to manage cotton production in Northern Uganda. Everything that related to cotton production in Northern Uganda was being supervised by Dunavant. I am surprised to see that the committee absolutely accepted what the technical staff said about the sharp decline in cotton production being due to the zoning system, which is very wrong. 

I would advise government where possible to remove the zoning system because before the zoning system, cotton production was very high. From the time Government brought the issue of zoning, we have failed; the results are here and are seen. I want the minister or the chairperson to challenge me on that. 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, hon. Ross Euku is my good friend and I thought he would have read the report in totality to be able to discuss it from an informed angle.  

The committee looked at the policy statement of the ministry. I would not know how the committee would generate a new set of policy statements for them to come to this House with a new initiative to redirect the policies of agriculture. But the best thing the committee would do after analysis is to put recommendations. I thought that was something I would seek clarification on from you.

MR EUKU: I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleague hon. Odit for that. I think the work of Parliament is to review the policies that have been brought forward. But if Parliament entirely relies on the policies, which may not redirect this government, then I would have a lot of questions.

I would like to talk on the issue of loans that the government is proposing to give to farmers in terms of agriculture. Unless the interest rates are reduced, especially for agricultural production - because, when the President was moving in Eastern Uganda on Bona Bagagawale tour, he earnestly discussed with the peasants and told them that Bona Bagagawale was going to be given through SACCOS, and there was a component on agriculture.  But the interest rate, under which the money is going to be given to peasants, is between 13 to 18 percent.  A peasant who is going to borrow this money may borrow about Shs 300,000, but when I analysed the calculations sometime back, I noticed that if you produce one acre of cotton, you may get something to do with about Shs 400,000.  

5.55
MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The whole of last week, I was not here; I was in the constituency, busy planting cotton.  I did not see CDO anywhere, and it is not the first time that I have been planting cotton, from ploughing to planting, to harvesting, to marketing; I have never seen a CDO officer in my constituency. So, I wonder what CDO does in this country that it should deserve these billions of money. It is actually a briefcase organisation; I would say so.  

Madam Speaker, the organisation I saw on the ground last week was Nyakatonzi Cooperative Union. If we could revitalize the cooperatives, we shall achieve the 300,000 bales of cotton we are aspiring to get this season. The union was providing tractors to the peasants at subsidised rates. I have seen the same union provide transport to the peasants, delivering the cotton to the ginnery; I have never seen the CDO in any action in Kasese. The union herself had a lot of problems because in 1985, around August, our union was attacked by rebels and they took our Lorries; they took the coffee; we have never been compensated. But still, it is the organisation, which is still assisting the peasants at home.

Secondly, I have read through the policy statement - I have read through the report of the committee, and I am a bit worried. At such a time last year, I mentioned in this House that we are still cultivating and looking after animals the way our grandfathers used to do in a primitive way. We have not modernised, and I am not seeing anything new in this report in regard to modernising the way we do our things. I am particularly disturbed because there is no mention about the climate change that we are facing today.  

Some of us who come from rural areas and participate in farming have seen a very big change in our climate, most especially in the rain season.  The rain season has changed, it rains for a very short time and very heavily so that rain which used to be spread in a period of three months, is now received in one month, and it is so heavy, so intense that there is a lot of soil erosion; there is earthquakes; there is a lot of winds which destroyed almost all the banana plantations and other crops and the committee is quiet about it. You are not suggesting how peasants are going to adapt to this climatic change, which is a reality. It is happening, but government is quiet about it.  We have seen it happened in Teso area, there were floods.  What is in place for the farmer to prepare for the next flood?  We are very quiet about it.  

The effects of short heavy rains to us who are farmers are, one: the soil is washed away and two, there are landslides. And because we do not have the capacity to harvest this water and keep it, you find that even the amount of harvest also reduces.  

So, I propose that we should now start thinking of how we can assist our peasants especially those from mountainous areas like me to work on terraces, on ridges and other methods of water conservation.  Otherwise, should we continue the way we are doing today, I am afraid and I shudder to imagine again that we shall come back here to seek for emergencies when the whole country has suffered this climatic change that we are not prepared for!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello and then hon. Otto, hon. Amongi and then I will go to Onzima.

6.00
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was a Member of the Sixth Parliament and I vividly recall that in 1998, we debated CDO here. We lamented the decline in cotton production, and now ten years down the road, the situation is worse. I am not prepared to debate this matter anymore. My only debate today is that I demand that the leadership of CDO be removed immediately. That is the only thing I can say – (Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Cotton Development Act, Chapter 30, sub-section 2(i) says: “There shall be a Managing Director. Section 22(iv) says: “The Managing Director shall be a Member of the board.  sub-section 6 (iv) says: “The Member of the board shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for reappointment but his or her tenure shall not exceed two consecutive terms.” Since 1992, she has been in this office; it is more than six years, which is as per the Act. Is she in order to still continue in office given this?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Okupa for that information. For more than a decade, one lady has let down the country. For more than a decade, she is still in the office. What is miraculous about this? Are there no other Ugandans that can do that work? I think this must really stop. Otherwise, those of us who got education in cotton will form a belief that it is a deliberate policy to kill cotton growing in this country and to kill growers economically. This must be brought to an end.

There are two groups in NAADS that I would like to talk about. One group is called facilitators. Facilitators are the people who had worked in the ministry of agriculture; they were locally hired by District Agricultural Officers to teach farmers. Some of them worked for two years without getting any salary. They were promised Shs 10,000 per month but they were laid off without payment. I followed some two cases up to the ministry. The ministry said that they did not hire anybody. When you go back to the district, you will find that the agricultural officer who had hired them had been transferred many years ago. These people have not been paid. Who will pay these people?

The second category is called service providers. These are the people who supply seeds, farm implements and so forth. This practice has really promoted tribalism in this country more than anything else. If a District Agricultural Officer in Kitgum for example is from Kotido, all the service providers in Kitgum will be people from Kotido. It is a very sad thing. It has caused a lot of discomfort in my district. Can something be done about this?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we had a workshop in May in Gulu on what they call the new NAADS. And we were informed that 70 percent of the funds for Prosperity-For-All will go through NAADS. I want to say this that it is none of Government’s business to go around giving cash to make people prosperous. No Government can do it in this world. No Government has done it and no Government will do it. It is the responsibility of Government to only provide enabling conditions so that our people can work and become prosperous. There is no country in the world where all the citizens are prosperous. You will never get that country. What will happen if we all become prosperous here in Uganda? Who will sweep the streets? (Laughter) 

6.05
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good report. I believe that was a very impressive interlude but it leaves a lot to be desired on how we are moving as a country. 

I want to give a brief reflection of our economy in 1967. [Hon. Members: “Where were you?”] When I was still in my mother’s womb. (Laughter) Uganda’s economy in 1967 was ranging from 7.8 percent to 8 percent. And we were the best performing country in the whole of East Africa. 

In Africa we are a model and it was basically because of our investment in agriculture. Since then, the subsequent governments, especially the current government, has not prioritised and invested enough in agriculture. And agriculture at some stages has been deliberately ignored. 

Madam Speaker, if I give you another reflection. In the early 1980s in the UPC’s second Government, Government deliberately procured 3,000 tractors and provided them all around the country at sub-county levels. And these tractors were being hired at a subsidised rate to the farmers to facilitate large scale farmers because of increased costs of production in agriculture. 

But up to now, we have not had any deliberate strategic approach to provide subsidies to farmers that can improve on agricultural productivity in this country. 

The co-operative unions that were destroyed, that were closed, were part of the strategic methods and approaches that Government by then used to help the farmers sell their produce at relatively higher prices and also to help in providing cheap and readily available seeds to the farmers. 

Upon the introduction of CDO, some of us do not even want to talk about cotton production in this country. CDO came into force and CDO had been getting appropriations from Parliament to carryout specific roles like providing seeds to the farmers and other services. But I want to inform this House that the seeds that are being given to the farmers are very poor quality seeds and that is one of the reasons as to why cotton production has gone down. That is true. 

In Lango now most of the farmers who were growing cotton have now moved away from cotton growing. Not because they do not want to grow it but because the environment is very hostile to them. There is absolute segregation of cotton ginners in dealing in cotton in the whole country. Donovan, Lango Cooperative Union, Twin Brothers and so many were chased out of Lango and I do not know which other company or ginners are going to buy cotton from Lango? -(Member timed out)

6.11
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from page 8 of the committee’s report. First, on observation where it notes that “Whereas NAADS seems to be widely taking over the responsibility originally under PMA framework, the guidelines for the proposed restructuring and review of the programme have not yet been brought before Parliament for scrutiny.”  And then it recommends that “Government should expedite the process on modification of the new NAADS guidelines and avail the same to Parliament for scrutiny.”  

Madam Speaker, I want to concentrate on NAADS because recently when I was in my constituency distributing CDF in Nambyeso and Alito sub-counties –(Interjection) - people are wondering. 

Prior to my programme and after my programme, the RDC of Apac had been on a tour of PRDP and NAADS and during his rally; he made it categorically clear that the Cabinet had already adopted guidelines on NAADS and in those guidelines, the chairperson of NRM of the sub-county is supposed to be chairperson of NAADS and the chairperson of the NAADS at parish level shall also be the chairperson of NRM. 

But the contribution made by my colleague from Fort Portal Municipality when I wanted to give him this information, his argument was that NAADS is a national programme which I agree with that NAADS is a national programme that to my understanding should be detached from a political party. 

What I want to know is whether the committee in noting that the guidelines have not been brought before Parliament, whether they were given this information that the Cabinet has already adopted the guidelines and whether these guidelines are already operational? And I have already seen the acting Prime Minister, I do not know whether he is the Leader of Government Business now, agreeing with me that it is true the guidelines provides that the chairperson of NRM at sub-county and parish are the automatic chairpersons of NAADS.  

The other time when hon. Toolit raised the issue, the Minister of Agriculture indicated that the issue is still being discussed and that they had sent information to the chairperson of the sub-counties to develop and get the committee that should handle NAADS. 

So, I want to know from the committee whether they have these guidelines already because they are noting that they do not have it. I am seeing too much consultation [Mr. Kirunda- Kivejinja: “Can I give you information?”] Yes you can give me information. 

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much for giving way. You do not need to labour on that. It is true guidelines are in the reorganised NAADS approved by Cabinet and we think that this is operational and therefore the composition the way you are giving it is wrong.  

The chairman is actually the LC III Chairman and one of the members is the chairman of the NRM for obvious reasons.  This is a manifesto pledge which has to be implemented and therefore this one only sits there because if it is not fulfilled, he is the one you are going to roast that you did not fulfill your promise.

MS AMONGI: Okay, thank you for that information. I am sure by now the committee is aware that this is in existence and it is unfortunate because at the moment you are saying something else from what your people are saying. I have never seen these guidelines but this is what the RDC of Apac is preaching. And he is going ahead to actually say that the six Members per parish to benefit must be NRM supporters. That is what is on the ground. So, it is now your responsibility hon. Minister to know how to discipline your errant officers on the ground. [Mr Bwambale: “Information”.] No, my time is off. 

But still through the NAADS there is indication that there will be the Prosperity for All micro finance through the NAADS programme. And still if you look at the interest rates proposed between 13 and 18 percent for an ordinary farmer, even me, to borrow at that rate is not practical in agriculture -(Member timed out)

6.17
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My problem with the Ministry of Agriculture in regard to the ever changing climate, you know shifting climatic changes is that all along Uganda as a country has not put in place how better we can use the abundant water we have in the many large bodies of water in this country. If countries like Sudan and Egypt, which are actually desert countries, can optimally use the water of River Nile, why can’t we as the source of the very river these people are enjoying, use the water that we boast of as being the source of R. Nile for agriculture purposes?

In the report there is no mention of the word irrigation. This is a very big shame. If we complain of the changes in the climate, then Uganda should be able to put in place mechanisms for irrigation and our farmers will have no problem with increased productivity in this country. So what are you going to do about it? Already, we are suffering from very severe food insecurity. Food has become very expensive. I live in Kampala but I know what is taking place in Maracha. Food is just being sold. There is less productivity and we just fold our hands and as a government we are doing nothing about it. We really need to revisit our strategies as far as food productivity in this country is concerned. 

On Prosperity-for-All, just before I left for Maracha two weeks ago, I received a copy of a letter which the President had written to the Minister of Agriculture expressing his frustration on what is happening at the NAADS secretariat. This was a strongly worded letter where I think the President I think used the word “must” about six or seven times. 

Therefore, I used the opportunity of the priestly ordination in Maracha by the Catholic Bishop of Arua Diocese to explain how the President wants the six homesteads to be selected in each sub county. However, the information is still scanty because what happens after these people are selected? How are they going to benefit from Government and how are they going to transmit this benefit from Government to the other people who will not have benefited in the first round? We need a detailed literature on what is going to take place in NAADS, in transforming our household incomes so that we can also relay this information to the people. 

Finally, on the last page, the money for this ministry, I see CDO and UCDA, people will have a budget and that budget is only for recurrent expenditure -(Member timed out)

6.23
MR CHARLES OLENY (INDEPENDENT, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I have two quick issues. 

One is on page 12, where a very strong observation has been made by the committee in respect of National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project (NLPIP). I do understand that this project is looking at the cattle corridor districts and it was aimed at enhancing livestock rearing. 

Just like the committee has observed, on the same page, that “The information provided in the policy statement in the above projects was inadequate.” The two projects are NLPIP and the vegetable Oil Development Project. I will speak on the first one -(Telephone ringing)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have a mobile phone here and can’t you really have the discipline to switch it off? Someone has brought a mobile phone here. I think we just arrest it.

HON. MEMBERS: It is in the gallery.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Upstairs? Okay, proceed hon. Oleny.

MR OLENY: Madam Speaker, I was continuing to make a point that has already been made by the committee in respect of that specific project that no adequate information was even available in the policy statement. So, I presume that the committee was constrained in looking into the details of how this project has been operated.

In addition to that, I come from Katakwi which is one of the districts in which this project had identified some work to be done, specifically the livestock kraal which was supposed to improve the cattle kraal at the market called Ocoli Mongin. As you will agree with me, probably in the 1980’s, this could have easily been one of the biggest live stock markets in the country, but obviously now it occupies a different position.

This has been long awaited. It is over two years; we have been told this project will be implemented by this project but nothing is taking off on the ground. Therefore, my proposal in agreeing with the committee is that it is not just adequate for the committee to only ask the Auditor- General to carry out an investigation on the Vegetable Oil and Development Project, but as well as on this NLPIP. We know that we have benefited with some livestock but there has been a big issue to do with the quality of the livestock that has been supplied under the same project.

Another point, Madam Speaker is on page 14, where the committee observed that “an income tax exemption arising out of new agro processing investments will be established commencing 1 July 2008.” 

The committee has strongly recommended that this should be given to all projects that are in agro processing; they should be treated equally. I do not think this is the right thing to do, because this tax measure I suppose was supposed to direct and attract investments in agro processing, but it would be very difficult for Government to generally say that even those agro-processors that had been established before should benefit from this income tax measure. That is an area where I would not agree with the recommendations of the committee. This is on page 14. I thank you.

6.28
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chair of the committee for the good report presented. My problem is the food production in Uganda and the committee notes on page 4 that the food crop growth rate was at 2.4 percent. This is just to improve from what it was before. These are very bad statistics because the population growth of Uganda is over and above this rate. It means that as the population increases at about 3.5 percent per year, the food availed to the increasing population is less. And this is very worrying. 

In areas, which have been relying on good soils from the mountains, the situation is even worse. The chair may not have captured this. She is nearer the hill; it is worse in the lower parts of Bugisu where I come from. The soil production is very low and that means therefore that the land cultivated to get food should increase but the population is increasing and the land is not available. It is becoming a normal issue for people not to have the normal two meals, lunch and supper, in some parts of Bugisu because of the soil. 

People are trying to grow some food and sometimes they get good production but the price at which they buy the seed is very high. For example, they buy bean seeds at Shs 2,000 and when they produce, the market available offers Shs 500 and sometimes even less. People cannot keep the food because they have to sell some of it cheaply at that time to take their children to school and some of them cannot keep it because the chemical for preserving the food is not available, or if it is, it is very far and very expensive and unaffordable. This has made our people live in abject poverty even when they have tried to produce. It is a very bad situation.

Under NAADS on page 7, government should ring fence the NAADS funds because if it continues the way it has been where the sub-county authorities were sometimes spending this money the way they wished, the situation is not very good. 

And the people of Bugisu because of the interactions with our brothers from Northern Eastern Uganda have reverted to farming and sometimes goat rearing and piggery but we have a problem of these diseases that affect the chicken. It is a viral disease that affects the eyes and there was no treatment in my constituency last year. All the birds died even when the peasants had tried, having lost their cows as I have mentioned, to rear the chicken. 

It is my request that government creates an environment, avails the drugs, the agricultural officers and extension workers so that they can help our people because up to now, some sub-counties in my constituency do not have qualified people to help them in their efforts to embrace the Bonna Baggagawale”. 

Even the SACCOs, which we thought would avail money so that our farmers would be able to keep their crops up to such a time when the market is better and sell, the money is not available. I request Government to work very quickly on the issue of enabling local societies or SACCOS to be able to get this money because the money is available -(Member timed out)

6.33
MR SIMON MENYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for presenting such a wonderful report. I have three issues in form of clarification from the minister. 

I wish to find out from you, who is responsible for the monitoring, inspection and supervision of seed companies. Many of these companies which are mushrooming are trying to extort money from the public and I am made to understand that the germination is sometimes 100 percent failure. 

This also means that our farmers are perpetually attached to these companies for provision of seeds year in year out. So, I wish to find out from the minister whether there are regulations and control measures in the ministry to regulate the activities of the seed companies.

In my constituency in Kamuli and in parts of Jinja and Iganga, there are no animal products in form of meat and milk and this has been going on for the last four months. 

And on page 12, there is a project in the name of National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project for which some money was borrowed and one of its components is to ensure that our animals are healthy. I wish to find out when the quarantine will be lifted to the supply provision of these products especially in Kamuli and Jinja.

On page 15, No. 6, I note with concern and I wish to read, “The committee expressed concern over the rampant and persistent land encroachment and conflicts in Kawanda, Ikulwe, Kitgum, Mbarara, Sanga, Kasese and Njeru and in many other areas where there is Government land”. 

The recommendations were that Government should, as a matter of urgency, make efforts to survey this land and process land titles in order to curtail the encroachment. There is another recommendation therein.

Madam Speaker, the question is, why are these encroachments taking place? In my opinion I think that they are taking place because this land is idle. I remember these were district farm institutes and they were good sites for skilling and re-skilling our farmers and also retooling them especially in modern agricultural practices. 

I want to find out from the minister whether these former district farm institutes are being put to use and if they are, then there should be no reason why their land should be encroached upon. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.38
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for the good report produced this afternoon. I will start with page 4 on the livestock sub sector. 

I represent a district whose livelihood depends a lot on livestock. I would have loved to see in this report something to do with the improvement of the livestock sector especially cattle movements. As I speak, some of my sub counties are under quarantine because of the Foot and Mouth disease. Much of this emanates from the uncontrolled cattle movements. 

The Ministry of Agriculture has not faired very well as regards the control and licensing of movements of these animals and for this reason, my people are missing out on income by not being able to sell their animals because of the quarantine. This happens every year and I wish to report to the minister that this is not acceptable in my district.

Secondly, I would have loved this report to say something about the improvement in the meat sector. Many of you who see lorries on the roads and the way our animals are carried to the city from their various kraals to the slaughter houses. I am talking about the animal rides. I would have loved the ministry to tell us what they plan to do about slaughtering these animals in the various districts instead of transporting the animal with all the hooves and horns to the city. That is a more scientific way of managing this sector and this would also improve on the grade of the hides and skins. It would also create employment in my district as well as leave much of the dirt and waste products that are brought to the city every day.

Furthermore, the committee that I sit on that is the Committee on Public Service and Local Government visited the districts of Amolatar and Katakwi and we were told that the National Livestock Improvement Project in those districts leaves a lot to be desired. The district leaders in those districts told us that the suppliers of these animals come from the Centre and the districts have no say in what is received in those districts. 

They were commenting about the types of animals that were delivered in these districts and said that they are supposed to be in calf but many of them were not. When we visited these districts, the leaders asked us to inform the ministry that there is a lot left undone concerning the quality of these animals that are delivered.

In my district, we are also beneficiaries of this project because we also belong to the cattle corridor and our case has been largely goats. The story is the same. On a Tuesday you are told animals are arriving and the recipients have no say in the process of how these animals come. They are not satisfied with the standards of the animals that are delivered to the farmers.

Finally, I would like to say something about the encroachment of government land that has been mentioned in this report. In my district, all the land that used to be called Government land and that had dip tanks has been encroached upon simply because we did not have land titles for these lands. 

Also, much of the sub-county land has been encroached upon because we have not been able to acquire land titles. I would like to ask the ministry responsible to ensure that we secure our remaining lands, which have not been encroached upon and even recover the land that has been encroached upon. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.43
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for this report. I want to go straight to page 4. I would like to request the minister because I know that whereas they are telling us that they vaccinated one million animals, we were informed here that the population of cattle alone is Shs 6 million. 

I would like to know because they should have given us the animal types in percentages so that we know where we are moving, whether we worked properly or whether we are below our target. When you just give us a figure of Shs 1 million, we don’t know the exact figures. 

Also, we should have been given in this policy statement the population of our animals. You are also talking about only two diseases. What about the rest? Are we vaccinating or not? What about the poultry sector? I don’t see anything here about vaccinating poultry. I know CBPP, Foot and Mouth disease are the rampant ones but Newcastle is also rampant in poultry. How about swine fever? I request for a detailed report to show that as you care for the crop sector, you are equally caring for the livestock sector.

You gave us your target for coffee and what you got but when you come to the livestock sector, you have told us that this sub-sector registered and licensed 150 cattle dealers. What was your target? You are telling us 25 hides and skins dealers and 25 milk dealers. What was your target? Did you get your target or are you below the target? So, Madam Speaker, I would like the ministry to somehow give us more detailed information on the livestock sector. 

When I go to page 5, this is about the fishing sector. We are being told that there is depletion of fish stock from our lakes and the factories have closed. Can we just get a strategic plan and go into aquaculture so that we target that because we are not the only ones sharing lakes. Even if we control ourselves, may be our neighbours with whom we share the lakes will not. What are we going to do? Still our factories may close. So, can we strategically target fish farming? We should also have fish brooders so that we can get fish fries; and we can also decide to have a fish breeder in every district while the others can get the fish fries. 

This is the same thing that I am talking about even in the cattle sector. Can we get milk coolers? We can strategically say that let us get milk cooler in every district to help those farmers. If we know that our target for milk is so many millions of litres, how are we going to get those millions of litres and how can those farmers transport their milk? Where can they keep their milk before they can take it to the factories?

Lastly, I want to talk about these farms on page 15. It seemed a deliberate negligence from the government side because most of these farms were Government farms but because they were neglected, they attracted encroachers. So, can we also strategically see that we rehabilitate these Government farms because getting titles alone without putting them into use will still attract encroachers on that land because it will be idle, as hon. Menya said? 

Njeru stock farm was a model farm and you could find other farmers around that farm and they were producing a lot of milk. As we speak, most of these Government farms, just like Aswa ranch and Acholi ranch – (Member timed out.)

6.48
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, two years ago, I did bring an early warning to this House and to the Committee on Agriculture that there was a looming crisis in the fisheries sector. The Committee on Agriculture even came as far as Buliisa. The Minister of Fisheries attempted to intervene but his commissioner and department said he was interfering; they said he should only keep eyes on and hands off. 

Today, the committee is confirming very late that we have a problem, when factories are already closing. Can I request that some action is taken because we cannot continue lamenting? Even if I agree that we should go into aquaculture, we cannot fail to replenish our God-given resource, just because we are thinking of fish breeding. 

When you talk of fish breeding, the countries doing it like Egypt are using the very water for production to even put in the breed. So, it is really a big crisis and our factories have been employing a lot of people and we have been getting a lot of money; but we are losing all this because the technocrats in the sector did not even allow the people of the districts around lake Albert – all the districts agreed and the minister had come out to support them. Unfortunately, the technocrats for their own personal reasons and conflict of interest interfered and messed up the whole attempt. 

I would like to know from the Minister of Agriculture, do you really care about these marauding animals in the country importing Foot and Mouth disease, causing us a crisis? There is quarantine in Buliisa now for almost five months, the lake is depleted, and we cannot sell animals. What do we do? Please, can you do something about these marauding animals all over the country? 

The other issue is that I also did report to this Parliament two years ago that there was a problem in the Ministry of Agriculture with the aquatic weed project in Lake Kyoga, River Nile and Lake Albert, where some dredging of the lake was taking place, yet the same ministry should have harvested the same water for production. To date, the post-mortem environmental impact assessment has not yielded. I am hearing that a renewal of this project at a cost of US $4.5 million is being pursued; yet the same ministry could really use water as a multi-purpose resource. 

They could use this water for production and encourage water harvesting because the same dredging equipment is actually the same equipment being used in Egypt to make fish ponds around the water resources. So, it is very unfortunate. Can we hear from the ministry what this is? Why would you want to renew this project before we know the effects? Some of us have lost breeding grounds because of this project and we are very concerned. We think somebody is becoming a saboteur in this sector. 

The other issue is the question of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture vis-à-vis NAADS. If this country is going to transform, the solution is in the PMA. Unfortunately, between agriculture and the tourism, trade and industry, there seem not to be enough linkages because the post harvest handling, the value addition and the agro-processing is in the area of tourism, trade and industry. 

What are we doing to ensure that Uganda is not just producing everything but that we specialise, focus and put our resources in producing what we can export to the EBA, AGOA and even for neighbours? If we do not go into nucleus projects and go into perennial crops, Ugandans are going to continue scratching land using seasonal crops which cannot transform the community, and we are going to remain perennially poor because we are failing to focus and we are failing to go into nucleus projects which have everything from agro machinery, inputs, the value addition, the storage and the marketing component which is a full PMA that I think we should be focussing on.

Finally, I would like to ask what the farm income enhancement project is doing in agro forestry so that we also see serious production of fruits in horticulture and orchids, if we are to move forward in this country. 

6.55
MR JOWALI KYEYAGO (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I wish to thank the minister for his policy statement and the chairperson for the good report. 

I am seeking clarification from the minister through you to help me understand and appreciate his report further. I was looking at page 2 about the sector priorities for 2007/2008. I further looked at the expenditure performance for 2007/2008 and looked at the sector priorities for 2008/2008 but there is something that I am missing which I wanted some clarification. 

One, in the sector priorities for 2007/2008, there was an idea of constructing the ministry’s headquarters in Kampala to facilitate cost effectiveness, including cutting down the costs of renting of office premises for the agencies such as PMA, NAADS and other externally supported projects.

Two, there was also a priority of re-centralising the ministry’s staff carrying out disease control and regulatory services for crops and livestock and local governments.

Three, implementation of our agricultural census and the strategic interventions for tea and coffee to increase production by 30 percent: I was trying to look at the performance so that I can appreciate to what extent the minister has gone. I am defeated; I have not seen it.

I thought at first that maybe the funding was not enough. So, I checked the sector priorities for 2008/2009 so that I can see whether they are reflected back. It is not anywhere. I just seek clarification on that.

The other thing is still on page 2 where the minister is talking about underscoring in the wage component for extension workers. I wonder what the problem is because even in Mayuge, we have very few extension workers and of those few, some of them have died and up to now - it is over three years - no recruitment has taken place. 

I am aware that the NAADS programme is supposed to address Prosperity-for-All; a lot of money is being sunk in sub-counties but with no extension workers. Why can’t we increase the number of extension workers so that they can easily and effectively monitor our programmes? Even the few extension workers that are there, they are not well facilitated. You just see motorcycles moving around with uncoordinated programmes. So, I think if the minister can go and enforce that programme so that extension workers are there and are heavily facilitated, then we can have our target.

I have looked at the fishing problem - the depletion of fish stocks; I do not have any big comment, I only suggest that the ministry of fisheries look for funds and get some nets at subsidised prices so that we can have a strategic move to address the depletion of stock. I am told that fishermen do not have money to buy these nets that you want; they end up buying nets that you term bad which when arrested, they sell to the neighbouring landing sites. So, maybe if you can come in and buy for them nets at a good price, it would be good.

Thirdly, I wanted clarification from Minister of Finance because we removed the road licences and left vessel licences. We thought the compensation was from fuel consumption, but even these boats use fuel; why can’t you handle that?

Lastly, I thank the Minister of Fisheries for accepting to transfer back the ice plants to the respective landing sites because I am told that the ministry officials had removed the ice plants from the landing sites to district headquarters, which was unviable. But since the minister has taken up the initiative, I thank you so much for that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has he written? I haven’t seen any letter.

MR KYEYAGO: He has written a letter and I am expecting a formal letter from the Permanent Secretary next week according to his office. 

7.00
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee, the ministry and colleagues who have contributed to this report.

First of all, I am standing to make an appeal to Government, particularly the Ministry of Agriculture, to ensure that the second NAADS phase works out as much as possible to our wishes. I know that this House has received a report as far as the performance of the first phase of NAADS was, but we do not want a repeat on the second phase. I am saying this because of the absence of preparedness as far as the second NAADS is concerned.

Last week I went to Kawanda, I went to Kawempe, I went to about three other shops to buy maize seeds and there was nothing. There were no Maize seeds and yet this is the planting season. This is a time when we should be looking at how production can be improved upon. There are no maize seeds and this is why I am making this appeal to ensure that the Ministry of Agriculture takes this as a special step to provide seeds at the right time for the people to produce so that NAADS’ production can be improved upon.

I just want also to make a note as far as fishing is concerned. I actually wrote a letter to the Minister of Fisheries; I invited him 10 times to come to Masaka to visit the landing sites where fishing is mainly done. I told him that we are lacking toilets, but it is a shame that actually now the industry is even closing down when he has not visited our landing sites and has not given us the toilets that we could use at the landing sites. 

My people actually are using whatever they are using to spoil the environment because the minister failed to come to the landing site. It is a shame that there has been over fishing without giving an opportunity for the people of Masaka to gain something out of this industry.

It is a shame because in 2000, I wrote to government from our Canadian Embassy. I wrote to Government because of the article which had appeared in the newspapers that Spain, Canada and the Soviet Union were going to war because of over fishing the lake. I sent this article to the Ministry of Agriculture. This has happened without taking into consideration what that article said. Where have they been to go to this extent? Madam Speaker, I beg to rest my case. 

7.04
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I wish to, first of all, base myself on page 7 under the challenges for NAADS and with a specific challenge, No. 2, if I may be allowed to read, the committee noted one of the challenges as, “The NAADS programme has become the main vehicle for attaining the Prosperity for All objectives. As a result, there are significant political interests and expectations. These will require to be managed effectively at both the central and local levels.”  

Madam Speaker, many people have mentioned this and I want to request the Cabinet that if this programme is to benefit all Ugandans, like we are all seeing that it is the big bus that is going to deliver us from the land of poverty to the fertile land of prosperity, then we must really use our constitutionally established organs to deliver services to the people.  

In most of the districts, I think the RDCs are aware of this provision that the committee will be comprised of the sub county chairperson and possibly now the NRM chairperson. Take an example of some sub counties where the chairperson is NRM and then you put the chairperson of the NRM committee to be a member and you are telling them to select beneficiaries, what do you expect? The chairman will look for his members who are NRM, the chairperson of the party NRM will also look for his members and where do you leave the other Ugandans who are not members of NRM?  

I will give a vivid example of Kasese where in some sub counties, if possibly the chairperson is not NRM then he is FDC and has selected some individuals to benefit under NAADS - there is an activity where they were giving out goats and the RDC came and said, “You know, those of you who have got goats I want you to first say you belong to NRM” and in the evening he went on radio and said, “Members of this sub county have crossed from FDC and are now NRM.” This is intimidation of the highest order and of untold weight which leaves some members with no option but to frustrate the programme.  That is why I am saying that your officials at the district level should be told that this is a non-partisan programme and that it is a programme designed to deliver all people into prosperity and this can only be attained if we are not going to use it for political ends by including sub county chairpersons of NRM on the committee.  Let us use the sub county leaders, the chairpersons of the sub counties, the Gombolola chiefs, the parish chiefs, and then we leave these other party members aside.  I would be happy if all parties in the sub counties were involved in the committee so that we say, “Let us have a member, may be a chairperson of DP, a chairperson of FDC, a chairperson of NRM,” so that we know that all parties are incorporated.

Another issue is about the identification of enterprises by these committees. Some sub counties have identified enterprises which they have low capacity to manage. I think according to the information given to the NAADS coordinators and the trainings they have, the programme may not help us at all. In some cases, for example, where they have taken up the enterprise of local chicken management or chicken management, some sub counties have gone ahead to give people off-layers and I do not know how this is going to help them. Some sub counties have gone ahead to give farmers who are interested in the pig projects some pigs without sensitising them on how to look after these pigs. Eventually the ones who are handling the business are also giving their animals. So, I am seeing that the people you are using are actually not technically in the know to handle the project and to assist the farmers and it may not help us so much to lead people to prosperity.

Our extension workers are not facilitated and so they are not going to help people to improve their methods of farming. In some circumstances, the NAADS coordinators are much more facilitated than the district coordinators of agriculture that you will find that getting an extension worker in your garden requires that you facilitate someone and this is not easy for an ordinary farmer. So, I request -(Member timed out)  

7.10
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by bringing out some export figures for some key exports. In the background to the budget for this year, the Minister of Finance mentioned that export had increased because the Clonal coffee which had been produced was now something or other but the figure for export for coffee for the fiscal year 2007 is 164,540 tonnes. 

According to the committee it is 2.7 million bags which will come to 162,000 tonnes. For the financial year it will be 149,225 and this is supposed to be an increase in a vital sector where the majority of Ugandans depend on agriculture. But the export figure for coffee in 1982 was 174,700 tonnes. Somewhere along the line it has declined. So, our productivity and our production levels have declined somewhere along the line. I do not understand where the growth is.  

On cotton and also on maize, here I would like to go further back in history and get some of our peak production figures. Under the second five year development plan which I highlighted on areas of health, coffee production went from 65,700 tonnes to 232,500 tonnes in 1969.  Cotton went from 48,900 tonnes to 84,400 tonnes compared to 14,403 tonnes for the last year. Maize production went from 46,000 tonnes to 152,000 tonnes in 1968.  What we exported in the last year was 101,223 tonnes.  

The point I am trying to make is that, if we are serious about agriculture as a vital engine for growth or for poverty alleviation, it may be prudent that we try methods which have actually worked.  If after 22 years, these are the figures we get for production you consider the population has increased yet in a period of five years, the UPC was able to increase production to levels, which have not been reached at this stage. [Hon. Members: “Yeah!”] Let us be honest with ourselves! We had a population of less than nine million people at that time, but the production was far greater. Now we are over 30 million people and the production has declined yet 80 percent of the people who base on agriculture have less to share in quantity. How can we say that the whole idea is “prosperity for all” when we are not meeting production figures?  

Now we are coming up with an idea, which as far as I am concerned, may not work yet we have in writing methods which have worked. Let us be honest! Let us do what is best for the people of Uganda. We cannot continue with experiments that are not giving the people the benefits, which they deserve.  

There are areas where we have got increases, for example, fish export, but at the same time Ugandans are eating what is known as mugongowazi.  The protein intake per capita is reducing and yet you say, “There is growth.” 

I would advise those in charge to look at some of these programmes. With a 7.8 percent growth, we were able to build roads, which have lasted practically for 40 years; we were able to expand health facilities and increase agricultural production; all the areas of the economy were thriving. So, what are we doing and what is history going to judge us for? These figures do not add up.  I do not know where the growth is.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.15
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank, whole heartedly, the committee for having played the oversight function of Parliament and brought out these issues, which are national issues. Thank you very much, the committee.

When you talk about the fishing sub-sector, it is very disheartening to see that this sub-sector has declined up to negative 12.4 percent. This is terrible! I would think that this government with the Third Deputy Prime Minister, whom I know was in the first UPC Government, should learn from at least - I have not come here to praise UPC but I give credit where it is due. In the first UPC Government when I was a young man, the Nile Perch, used to come from Lake Albert. The country was really doing well. Why can’t the government learn from the previous regime although they may not like it? And you now hear that the lakes are depleted. What is the programme of government to replenish these lakes?  

Madam Speaker, when we had the late Babiha as the Minister of Agriculture and Livestock - Prof. Kabwegyere, I know you were an adult during that time, can’t you see the difference? (Laughter)

Let me say something about NAADS. Members of Parliament are supposed to be conversant with policies before they go to their constituencies. I remember very well, sometime back the Minister for Finance was in Masaka launching Bonna bagaggawale yet here in Parliament we do not have any policy on that. Dr Suruma, you were in Masaka with the President and the host of ministers launching Bonna bagaggawale.  Now you are telling us that NAADS is part of Bonna bagaggawale, but as a Member of Parliament when I go to my constituency, I look a fool. As a Member of Parliament, what policy do I tell my constituents? This is important because I am supposed to tell them that we are following a, b, c, d.  

I am very glad that the committee has said, “Government must expedite NAADS guidelines so that Parliament can scrutinize them.” Why do we, as leaders, look fools before our electorates? You tell us that Cabinet has passed this. Do we sit in Cabinet?  Why were we elected as representatives of people? It is a shame, Leader of Government Business, for a Member of Parliament to look ignorant in his constituency. What do I give as a guideline on NAADS and Bonna bagaggawale, as a Member of Parliament?

Madam Speaker, I now go to UCDA –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to say that government has said nothing and he has no idea about the Prosperity for All programme, when in the budget speech for 2007/08, pages 11, which are entitled, “The Strategy for Prosperity for All,” paragraph 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46 up to paragraph 53 speak and indicate fully what the Prosperity for All programme is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe you have forgotten, but during the State of the Nation Address, this matter came up. The Minister for the Presidency undertook, on the Floor of this House, that she was going to bring the guidelines. We have heard nothing; nobody is saying anything. (Applause) That is a broad statement; they are not the guidelines – (Interjections) - no, today is not your day; you will have to tell us.  You conclude.

MR NSUBUGA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was wondering as to when the minister’s speech became a policy for this country.  I am glad you have directed well.  

I would like to commend the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). I can see that coffee over performed. I am very glad. I come from a coffee growing area. But I am disappointed that the budget they have given them is very small; CDO should have been given more money than this because they have performed and their work can been seen and felt.

Lastly, I want to talk about horticulture. I am glad that the committee has brought it out very well. Maybe people do not understand what horticulture is; horticulture would even be the engine for Bonna Bagaggawale. If you visited Kenya at this point in time, and visited the airport, you would see the produce leaving Kenya for the European markets from farmers – I am talking about crops that grow within three months, which this country has forgotten. Third Deputy Prime Minister, you know very well that in the 1960s, we used to have plains from Mityana road taking horticultural products from this country; even tomatoes. But now, this government is thinking about only six families in each parish and that is all.

7.23
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (INDEPENDENT, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned that on page 10, paragraph 2.8, bullet 1 No.4 and in particular that unfortunate piece of information which reads, “Massive introduction of organic cotton whose yields were substantially lower given the past challenge and inadequate training of farmers”.

The first information I want to give is that, this is a very serious statement to Lango Organic Farming Promotion. Lango Organic Farming Promotion has been dealing in production of organic cotton since 1992. And in 1994, this Lango organic farmers’ cotton was second to California USA. And now, when we are talking about the training of farmers, the question is who should train the farmers? 

Fortunately, for Lango Organic Farming Promotion, they have their own system. Last year, 16 field staff trained the farmers and we had no problem about that. But the problem that has arisen has been the distribution of the quality cotton seeds in the district, which went late. And you know also that last year there was frost as a result of excessive rain. This has not been captured by the committee yet it should have been given to them by the CDO. And because of the introduction of DDT, we are now no longer describing CDO as Cotton Development Organisation but Cotton Destruction Organisation. Something must be done. We are now sparing only Lira and Dokolo, but Apac and Oyam are gone. So I want to get assurance that they are not going to tamper with Lira and Dokolo; they moment they tamper with them, then there is not going to be cotton production is that area. 

The case we are trying to address is just like a patient. We have these patients called farmers already bedridden and the medicine we are looking for from the government is the inputs, especially the quality seeds and the rest. Now, for the organic cotton, they need organic pesticides which are in the market and government has not done anything to provide this. But we have reliably depended on an organic insect called Nyini-nyini which actually is responsible for the production of these organic products especially cotton. And we have been doing very well, year in year out. So this statement is very unfortunate. 

I remember going to the CDO’s office to complain about the cotton seeds, and she told me that even though government had given her money at that time, she was not able to release any cotton seeds. But later when we grilled her in the Parliament Conference Hall, we were able to realise substantive amounts of cotton seeds which were distributed although late. So this year, we are expecting low production because of late distribution of cotton seeds and – I do not know about the quality because they were telling us that they were packing three kilos per bag. You can image the kind of problem we have in our sub region. Can three kilos of cotton seeds plant even an acre? And you are supposed to plant only three seeds; unless on is using a machine but for the children that are employed to plant these cotton seeds, it is just impossible.

So, my prayer is that we get technical officers, say at the ministry to deal with organic production at the district level. Can’t we have organic agriculture specialist to help the farmers? We have a private organisation in the name of Bore-Weevil, which has been organising the farmers; we have registered the farmers and we have registered three staff. They are also paid by this private organisation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today I think we have done very well; 31 Members have contributed, and I think we cannot do more than that. Can I invite the Minister for Water to talk on the water for production, very briefly and then I will call the Minister for Agriculture. 

7.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee for the report and I want to thank the colleagues for the observations they have made.

First of all, I have a comment on this committee report on page 13 where they make a recommendation under paragraph 6.1. The recommendation is that the basket funding, where the development partners do contribute money, that this money should be shifted to agriculture. Incidentally, in the Ministry of Water and Environment, our development partners did agree among themselves to come together and contribute as one. And every year, they choose a lead donor. Last year, we had Austria as the lead donor and this year, we had the African Development Bank. We use that money for various activities like water resource management, urban water and sewerage, rural water supply and sanitation, and water for production. 

And apparently, what we are doing as a ministry is working on strategic and multipurpose dams. And even when we did a study by three government ministries, a copy of which I have, to South Africa, Ethiopia and Egypt, it is a fact that the issue of water for production cannot be handled by one ministry; it is a shared responsibility whereby in these countries, the issue of off farm, where you have to construct reservoirs like what we have in Olweny, what we have in Kachinga; what we are doing in Rubaale in Ntungamo, is done by the Ministry of Water. Then the Ministry of Agriculture comes in to support the farmers on farms to decide which particular irrigation system to use, be it furrow, sprinkle or drip, and they do the extension of the pipes. And indeed we did agree with my colleagues in the Ministry of Agriculture and just last week we had an inter-ministerial meeting whereby we have to work together. So, if the committee comes up with this kind of recommendation - and they did it even last financial year and this caused a lot of confusion because Ministry of Finance went ahead and made a corrigendum, where they were shifting all the money and taking it along with the staff from my Ministry to Agriculture. And yet you find that each ministry plans its own activities within their ceiling and we had also planned ours. So, it becomes a bit tricky. I wanted to advise the committee that they should interact with us, the different ministries, to ensure that this thing is understood other than bringing this kind of recommendation. 

Secondly, the issue which was brought up by hon. Bwambale on climate change. Yes, it is a reality, it is a global issue and it is hitting especially Africa hard because, as much as we are the ones who are contributing even less to the green house gas effects and the developed countries are contributing more, we are suffering more just because we are less prepared in terms of mitigation and adaptive measures. But it is again my ministry, which is mandated to handle this issue and right now the meteorology department is being transformed into an agency of government where they will attract not only more resources but even more personnel to ensure that they give data or information to our people in as far as weather forecasts are concerned. But also the ministry has formed a climate change unit which will also help us to make sure that we come up with adaptive and mitigation measures on climate change. 

We also appreciate that the ministry has come up with a number of activities, like you are aware, we have gazetted the tree planting days. All these are geared at mitigating or coming up with ways to fight the issue of climate change. 

Madam Speaker, there was a question from hon. Balikowa from Budiope County. It is true we had a consultancy going around and designed 100 facilities throughout the country. And again we are doing this in conjunction with Ministry of Agriculture but right now we are mobilising resources to ensure that we cover these facilities. We are not going to do everything at once; we are going to phase them and ensure that they are covered. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, you know the matter which the Member from Budiope raised. Really, I wrote to you and you have never answered me. You have taken four years without writing to me about that and you are now telling the House. You have never written to me about that particular matter of de-silting of the two dams. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister in charge of Water has not really clarified the issue of water for production. This issue has been demanded by Parliament for over five years. But when the minister comes here to tell us that her ministry, the Ministry of Agriculture and Finance have not harmonised, and therefore we should go to the Ministry of Water, that is not right actually. And that implies that there is a problem with the ministers. 

Regarding water for production, that money should be transferred to Ministry of Agriculture because there is no way you are going to irrigate cotton or beans when it falls in two ministries. We must really be helped. As we talk today, Uganda should stop relying on rain while our counterpart, Egypt, is using the Nile waters. So honourable minister, if you do not have the answer, seek for time; go and reconcile with your ministry. But for us as Parliament, we want money for water for production to be under the Ministry of Agriculture.  

MS NAMUYANGU: I will start with the question raised by hon. Nsubuga. First of all, I will give the definition of water for production. Water for production is water of rural industries, water for energy, water for irrigation, water for livestock, water for tourism, water for wild animals, aquaculture and recreational services. So, that is why we are telling you that you cannot put that in agriculture. (Laughter and Applause) Yes. So, if you are talking about irrigation, we are telling you that that component right now is in agriculture and that is why the committee pointed out that the money under farm income enhancement for irrigation is in agriculture. So that is a fact and it is the definition. 

Secondly, let me answer the question from the Deputy Speaker. It is true I received the letter but that is hardly one year ago because even in the water sector, I have not been there for four years. I have only served for two years there. But as I said, we are working on it. Thank you.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to clarify the issue of the allocation of funds to the agricultural sector. I would like to indicate that domestic resources given to the agricultural sector have increased substantially, specifically NAADS, which was increased by 68 percent. So, on our part we have done, I believe major effort from the resources available to us to make resources available to the agricultural sector through NAADS. 

I would also like to point out, Madam Speaker, that the resources - and I think this was acknowledged by the hon. Leader of the Opposition although I may not have understood him well, that the substantial resources which have been given to the road sector which include the opening up and maintenance of upcountry roads help substantially in marketing of agricultural produce and helps the ordinary people to be able to move their goods and commodities to the market. And I think this should be acknowledged although it is not specifically in the agricultural sector. It is a catalyst to agricultural production and marketing.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister of Finance. I just wanted to inform you that the point I made did not bear the same interpretation that you gave to the House. The point I made is that, if you look at many agricultural projects, there are components for road infrastructure. And when you look at the MTEF ceiling for Agriculture, which your ministry is very keen on upholding normally, if all the components that were for roads were removed and given to the Ministry of Works, the void or the new space created under the Agriculture MTEF ceiling would mean that you can give a lot more money for research; a lot more money for even subsidy which we need to do and a lot more money for those elements that are really agricultural because roads are not agricultural. A road is just a required condition for agriculture to be done just like roads are required for commerce to be done; just like roads are required for education to be done. That was the point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members you arrived late.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, for the information. Madam Speaker, the point I am trying to make is that there are complimentary allocations, for example, we have put in the budget money for agro processing. It is not part of the agricultural budget; this money, Shs 20 billion will go to the Uganda Development Bank but its purpose is agro processing. 

Madam Speaker, we have put Shs 32 billion for microfinance. This is not in the agricultural sector but the purpose is to assist the savings and credit cooperatives to provide credit to farmers so that they can procure inputs.

We have given incentives in the budget; we have removed taxes for industrialists who want to engage in agro processing. Again this is an attempt to boost the agricultural sector.

I do not know exactly how the Maputo Declaration calculates the proportion that is going to agriculture. But I want in conclusion to say that as hon. Guma - I think he has left – said, it is very important to recognise and to be clear that the agricultural sector is really a private sector. And the role of government is to facilitate; to assist through research, through infrastructure both financial infrastructure and physical infrastructure. The infrastructure for agriculture is very important just as it is important for commerce and for industry. So, I believe that government is putting the proper emphasis on agricultural development and facilitation and this should not be seen merely in terms of the percentage that is actually going to the Ministry of Agriculture. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the clarification.

7.44
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done and for the comments, observations and recommendations that they have forwarded to my ministry. I would like also to thank you Members for your critic of the ministry’s performance because to me and I think my ministry, we are open-minded. We borrow all the good points that you raise, for example, hon. Nsubuga Mathias the Secretary General of DP brought the issue of horticulture, which is a money minting business. I believe that it could be one of those enterprises under NAADS that can be financed in particular areas where vegetables can thrive.

Briefly, let me respond to some of the queries raised. There were concerns initially which were raised by the committee that the growth on the ministry by only 0.7 percent as compared to  last year’s 0.1 percent, to me is an improvement; it is an indication that we are not sinking, at least we are above.

Given that actually most of the figures reflected in the GDP and also most of the transactions in our country here are agro based, so we are significantly really contributing to the commerce, the industry and to our economy effectively although  not as much as we would have wished. 

The declining fish stock.
Yes, I agree with some of your comments that there has been some indiscipline by those who should be regulating the fishery industry particularly the lakes and then coupled by increased processing factories. The number of factories went up dramatically. Demand for fish has gone up and also the export demand for fresh water fish in the regional markets et cetera if you take into account the illicit fishing and trade in immature fish which we are battling with our understaffed capacity. We also have, as you observed correctly, inadequate resources to really manage. On top of that, there is a lot of smuggling of our fish which is harvested from Ugandan waters to our neighbouring countries mainly Kenya and it has been very difficult to deal with it because we really need a number of speed boats and personnel to keep patrolling in order to make sure that the fish does not cross on the other side. 

So, those are some of the challenges we face and to me, it constitutes tasks before us as a ministry to do better. Promotion of aquaculture is one of the methods which was proposed. I would like to report happily that since 1999 up to 2007, during the last eight years, aquaculture alone, fish harvesting has increased from 285 metric tons to now 50,000 metric tons annually. 

We have deliberate attempt to increase fish farming as a way of curbing or reducing on dependency on our lakes for harvesting fish. For this actually, we have requested a few of friendly countries to support us and we have put in our budget, but it is still a very small budget. We would wish to have a number of equipments in the country so that throughout the various regions of our country, we can develop fish ponds for farmers and go to it massively. We have a beach management unit but which is not functioning optimally. We have difficulties also with the quality of feeds for fish and fighting wrong fishing here and so on. Those are challenges that we face. 

Following cotton production, I want to give you briefly short history of cotton. I have been there only two years in the ministry but what I found is that about nine years ago, because cotton production had declined tremendously in the country and not only that, the state was having challenges because of the low revenue to finance adequately all sectors of production which included cotton. Now what happened with cotton is that an agreement was reached. I am talking about eight to nine years ago. An agreement was reached whereby the ginners would finance the provision of seeds and also pesticides to farmers. Therefore, the cotton growing areas were zoned in a manner that ginners would have particular territory within which they operate and they register those farmers and buy cotton from those farmers. That practice continued until a year ago, and the challenges we face with that practice is that our farmers were being underpaid for the cotton they produced, for their labour, because the ginners were controlling production and they were the ones supplying those seedlings, they were the ones giving pesticides.

All this went on and then two years the craze for organic cotton came up -(Mrs Ogwal rose_) - I do not accept that because she is an interested party in cotton. Okay, I give you a chance but – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I would wish you to clarify to this House whether it is actually true that from nine years ago ginners were the ones supplying farmers with cotton seeds. It is in the declared policy of the government that government is the one that provides seeds to the farmers and this has been going on for years. So I do not know which other seeds the ginners have been supplying to the farmers. 

Secondly, the CDO bought very expensive machines for de-linting and processing seeds and CDO have been requesting funds for distribution of seeds. So we would want to know, if the ginners have been the ones carrying out these duties financing and distributing the seeds, where has CDO money been going? Can you clarify this, please?

PROF. LATIGO: I thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I just needed supplementary clarification because in the last Parliament, for three years, I was a Member of the Committee on Agriculture and we know that CDO even got cess from ginners to sustain its activities. Part of the reason why the ginners were giving cess to CDO was because CDO was involved in seed distribution. Can we be clarified which particular time in the last nine years the ginners have been giving seeds to farmers? 

Secondly, I know a big company that was brought into the country under the advocacy of the President, House of Dauda, invested heavily in cotton ginning in Soroti. Dauda had to abandon his participation in the Ugandan industry because he was completely frustrated. In fact, even his soft drinks and biscuit factory eventually he had to sell his interests to the Libyans and return to Mombasa. Can we then know how the cotton ginners who had wanted very much to participate ended up being frustrated over the period that you said they were the ones in charge?

MR ONEK: Thank you very much. I said ginners were distributing the seeds or providing the seeds. Really, they were involved in the distribution and so on, which was a cost to them. It is true that maybe I did not express it well, but CDO was basically processing the seeds and giving it – [Mrs Ogwal: “Point of order”] - I have accepted your order, go ahead. But we are not going to spend all our time on cotton. There are so many other questions.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is unfair for the minister to make this kind of statements on a very sensitive matter. I think let the minister be honest and tell us at what point did the ginners get involved in the distribution for seeds which belong to CDO? This is the point I would like the minister to make very clear. At no point were ginners involved in the processing and distribution of seeds because all the cost elements were absorbed by CDO. And I want to raise an order because we have audited accounts of CDO which clearly highlight those cost elements. Is it therefore in order that the minister would consistently insist that the cost and the distribution and processing of seeds were done by ginners when the audited accounts of CDO clearly indicate that CDO has been involved in this exercise? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know much about CDO and I have not seen their audited accounts. So, I cannot rule on that order.

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My statement that ginners were distributing seeds meant that they were involved in the distribution of seeds and I have been advised that for that they have been paid by CDO when they have been given seeds to distribute.

The ginners provided pesticides, spray pumps, some technical support like extension service in cotton areas in their zones and in some areas like Northern Uganda, they also opened land for farmers. All this put together made our farmers dependent on the ginners and therefore the reason for low cotton pricing at that time. So, until 2006/07 that was the scenario and even last year the ginners in their meeting decided that there would be no more zones and since then the ginners relaxed and never supported farmers because they would not know which ginner would buy cotton from which area. This made cotton production suffer because the pesticides were not distributed as it was before coupled with the floods that affected eastern and Northern Uganda. And because of the unclear policy at the time, when that decision was made by the ginners, that affected cotton production and it dropped to 65,000 tons.

Government, therefore, decided then to take over the responsibility of distributing seeds, pesticides and all the other inputs which previously were being distributed by ginners with effect from the current cotton season. This will enable the farmers dictate the price to the ginners and that is the state of affairs today. That explains why the cotton production dropped drastically last cotton season and we are hopeful that the current change in support to farmers will generate better production.

Without labouring too much on cotton, because there were very many valuable questions, I wish that if the Members still want explanations on cotton, we can have another occasion where we can just discuss cotton and leave other things out. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Can the minister deal with the question raised by hon. Okupa on the current legal status of the MD?

MR ONEK: That is just one of the questions and there are over 30 questions here. I will reach it. 

Well, on appointment to cotton board, at the moment we are in the process of appointing a new board and the position of a managing director in CDO. In the statute Okupa read, the position of the managing director as a chief executive and a technical person in the ministry – he is only supposed to be an ex-officio. He is a member of the board but by being the managing director – [Mr Okupa: “Order”] - what are you ordering now?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to state that the managing director is an ex-officio yet the Act - if I can read it and you help to guide us as a lawyer, Cap 30 Section 22 (i) “There shall be a managing director.

(iv) A managing director shall be a member of the board.”

Sub-section 6(iv) “A member of the board shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for reappointment but his or her tenure of office shall not exceed two consecutive terms.” 

Madam speaker, you are a lawyer, please help us. The minister is an engineer. So is the minister in order to say the managing director is an ex-officio when it is very clear here under Section 22(iv) that the managing director shall be a member of the board?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think even if I do not rule on it, you should take into account the concerns of the Members that the MD has been in office for nearly 20 years – 16 years since 1992. I think you should take note of the Members concerns.

MR ONEK: I have listened to the concerns and as I said, we are reviewing the CDO as of now and definitely it is not Parliament which is going to appoint the managing director or the board. So really I can only note your concern and we shall see what to do in consultation with the Attorney-General - (Interjections) - the law is best interpreted by the Attorney-General but not by the back benchers - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have been in this House long enough. The issue of the cotton sector not growing and collapsing has been recurrent since the Sixth Parliament. I think that is the matter the Members are raising that the sector has collapsed and they want change of leadership. Do not say that they should not interpret; just say that you are going to take their concerns into account. 

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, I have noted the concerns. Is that enough? - [Mr Okupa: “Apologise”] - For what?

MR BIHANDE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The Members of this Parliament including the back benchers make the laws. It is not only the frontbench which makes the laws. Is it in order for the honourable minister to belittle the Members in the back bench that they have no authority, neither do they know the law which they participate in making? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Members know the law but as I have asked the minister, take into account the concerns of this House continuously on the cotton sector. It is on the record on the Hansard and it is not a secret. Please! 

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, the law is interpreted by the Attorney-General. Not all of us should interpret laws. That is what I meant. You can interpret but in the House, the final authority is the Attorney-General. I withdraw my statement because in this House we are all equal and there is no question of being in the front bench or wherever. And when I stated that, I actually meant the Attorney-general is the authority not anybody else. But I withdraw the statement.

The effect of pests on crops has been asked and that is being handled. I will take the advice. The floods in eastern Uganda during the year 2007/08; we procured seeds and planting materials worth Shs 4.82 billion. And this was distributed to all the districts. When I went to tour part of West Nile and the Northern region, I was checking on whether all these seeds reached the destinations and I am glad to report that the districts all accounted for these seedlings and the ministry reacted on time and the effect is there.

Coordination of restocking programme. That is being done. There were some allegations in Adjumani that the seeds distributed there all failed to germinate and the goats supplied under NAADS also died. I went there and established that the rice fields germinated and they are growing healthily. I visited about three gardens but I remember one vividly, that of Ibrahim Lagur at Bachere village of Ofuwa parish. The NAADS helped him as a lead farmer to plant 10 acres and he opened five acres on his own. All the rice germinated and is growing very well. So, the allegation brought to the House was false.

There were also cases of goats. I went to a few farmers including Michael Ndrombwe in the central village of Ofuwa parish. He was given three goats; one male and two females and the goats are doing well. The House was given the impression that all these NAADS supplies were fake and not functioning. I think those were misleading statements. 

I found out that in the districts the leadership is sharply divided amongst political lines and they were not on talking terms. I tried to talk to them and advised them that the NAADS project is not political. It is for our people and the government is doing this to remove poverty from amongst us and the leadership has to work together.

There were questions raised about affordability of the goats and the animals being distributed. That did not arise because these were already procured under the restocking programme. 

Water for production.
We have formed an inter-ministerial committee on water for production with the ministries of Finance, Agriculture, and Water. We are going to jointly develop the water for agricultural production, irrigation, animal and fisheries together with our colleagues from the Ministry of Water. On top of that, we have got five scholarships to train irrigation engineers in Egypt and we have Chinese experts coming to the country to assist us in developing irrigation. 

As you are aware, since 1999 when there was commotion over the water for agricultural production, the Ministry of Agriculture had been not doing much and as a result the capacities waned. Most of the people who knew this trade retired and we are currently trying to develop the capacity.

On one zone production strategy, we have moved towards enterprise selection depending on the geographical area and the rainfall climatic conditions. We normally recommend not only one product but three most appropriate for the farmers that would generate more money.

Financial performance during the year.
We go back to Cotton Development Organisation, which was bringing us heat here. It is reported that they performed 360 percent but the budget for Cotton Development Organisation during last financial year was only Ugshs 2.2 billion. What happened is that they got a supplementary Vote of Ugshs 4.256 billion in order to finance this year’s ongoing season cotton in terms of inputs and supply of seeds. This is because this year they are going to provide pesticides and other inputs that go into agriculture directly to allow farmers autonomy when they are selling their cotton. When these are lumped, it comes to 360 percent but in fact they never utilised the entire 360 percent. They utilised their Ugshs 2.2 billion and the Ugshs 4.256 billion is actually for the current season of cotton.  

Physical performance.
The information is available here in our policy statement and I request that Members spend more time to read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, honourable minister, I do not know what you are responding to.

MR ONEK: Now on the questions raised on the Floor. One of the questions was, what is National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) all about? NAADS is playing a critical role in Prosperity for All. The resources of NAADS are directed towards provision of seeds, inputs and primary processing to farmers. 

My colleague here mentioned - the LCIII chairman and all the other members are from the sub county and the election of members for these lead and demonstration farmers are done by the population and not by these leaders. The leaders are just observers. The parish will call a general assembly and select among themselves the most competent people that can carry out the lead and demonstration farmer role.  That is something, which I thought must be made clear. If in Apac the RDC is saying that it is only the Movement chairman and they do not follow the directions that we indicated, we are going to re-hold the election of the members. We are going to make sure that the selection is done afresh because it has to be the population not just -(Interjections)- well, it will be brought here but as we said, that is a working document for government -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Agriculture, you are really causing unnecessary problems in this meeting. How can you say that the document is for the Cabinet? Where is the rest of the country? Where is Parliament? Why are you talking about it here if it is not part of our business? Why are you keeping that secret?

MR ONEK: We shall table the policy statement here tomorrow. Basically there is nothing much. All that you have raised here are information and observations, which we are going to consider when we are reviewing our policies and programs. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Fisheries, can I place you on the Order Paper sometime next week concerning the landing sites because it is really crucial. Are you ready?

MR MUKISA: We are ready. Next week will be okay.

8.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Oliver Wonekha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for enriching our report. We have taken note of your comments. I would only like to assure you that when it came to cotton in the committee, it was hot. The kind of sentiments that you have raised here were also experienced at a mini level within the committee. We recommended that we support the budget because the ministry has put forward proposals to revamp the cotton sector. Otherwise, I thank you very much, colleagues. (Applause)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for all the work you have done. The Commission will continue to sit tomorrow so we shall not have plenary. We shall reconvene on Tuesday morning at 10.00 O’clock to consider the Presidential Affairs Committee report. Thank you very much, I wish you a good weekend and I hope it is raining. (Laughter)

(The House rose at 8.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 September 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)
