Wednesday, 22 August 2007

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have the pleasure to welcome you. Today in the visitor’s gallery we have 18 members from Kira Town Council together with their speaker, Ms Betty Naluyima. They are welcome to Parliament (Applause)

On this side of the gallery, we have students and teachers from St. Joseph Secondary School, Bukoto South, represented by hon. Mathias Nsubuga. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda (Applause)

2.45
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With your permission, Sir, I can only talk about general principles on whether the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda qualifies to be nominated for the post of chancellor of a public university. If that is acceptable, I can talk about it.  

Mr Speaker, I refer to Section 26(1) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act No.7 of 2001. That section provides that there shall be a visitor of each public university.  Section 30(1) of the same Act provides that: “There shall be a Chancellor for each Public University who shall be appointed by the President…” The issue therefore becomes whether reference to the President in Section 26(1) extends to the Vice-President as well. 

I refer to Article 108 of the Constitution which provides for the office of the Vice-President in particular. Article 108 (3) states:

“The Vice-President shall- 
(a) deputise for the President as and when the need arises; and 
(b) perform such other functions as may be assigned to him or her by the President, or as may be conferred on him or her by this Constitution.”  

In my view, the Vice-President acts at the instance of the President.  

I will again look at Section 26(2) of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, where the role of the visitor is spelt out. It says: “The visitor shall perform an overall supervisory role over the affairs of each Public University.”  

Section 26 (3) says: “The visitor shall, as often as circumstances may require, in respect of any of the affairs of a Public University -
(a) conduct a visitation of the Public University; or 
(b) direct the Chancellor of a Public University that a visitation be conducted by a person or persons that the visitor may appoint.” 

I will also refer to the definition of “visitation” in Black’s Law Dictionary, which says that visitation means inspection, superintendence, direction, regulation. 

From the foregoing, it should be noted that the contemplated responsibilities of the visitor as laid out in Section 26 of the Act are not anywhere near what is delegable under Article 108 of the Constitution. In Article 108, one can infer those day-to-day functions of the presidency, which the President is unable to perform due to his busy schedule or when he is out of Uganda, whereas the functions spelt out in Section 26 of the Act are specific and not time bound and therefore not to be delegated.  

I therefore consider that the Vice-President is not barred by the Act from being considered for appointment as a chancellor of a public university simply by virtue of his function under Article 108 of the Constitution. Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I beg to advise.

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Attorney-General for the timely interpretation he has given about the laws of Uganda and for guiding this country. I really appreciate and thank him very much.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES 
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007;
(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008

THE SPEAKER: This motion was brought by the Minister of Finance but the Opposition was given a chance to make its case before we could proceed. So, what we have presently is the motion by the Minister of Finance that we resolve into a Committee of Supply. So, there should be a general debate on the budget. 

As I indicated yesterday, we had hoped that committees would have by now given copies of their reports to us to use them during the general debate. Unfortunately, this did not happen. As such, you will have to use whatever information you have to debate the motion. Once you accept it, we shall go into the Committee of Supply. Perhaps the committees will come in on the part of the budget to support the supply. So, the Floor is open. 

DR MAKUBUYA: Pardon me, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I do not mean to begin debating the motion but I need to lay a copy of the statement I just made on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: There are complications in this issue. You gave us your opinion; so what? A decision was made by an agency under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, but what happens when you simply make an interpretation? If you think the agency that dealt with the issue was wrong, the best way to handle this issue is to proceed to other fora and ask them to review the matter. Merely giving an opinion is not helpful. We may not command people at Makerere to do anything because the Attorney-General has made this interpretation. This is my worry. 

2.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I intend to be as neutral as possible for obvious reasons. I was also going to ask, when the Attorney-General makes that interpretation, so what? However, you have pre-emptied me. You cannot just interpret the matter and leave it hanging. There are consequences. He may, for example, advise that H.E the Vice President be interviewed because the eight people have been interviewed. In other words, there are consequences of his interpretation but he has left us hanging in the air. We need assistance. He is learned but many of us are not learned.

THE SPEAKER: The question is whether you can command them. If they seek your advice before they take a decision, you can give it to them. However, now that they have taken decisions and you have made that interpretation, what happens? You can only challenge that they did not conduct this properly and then there is another tribunal that could come in. Otherwise, I do not know what happened. 

2.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, many of us have had interviews and the short-listing is at the discretion of the people who are doing it. Supposing they have decided not to short-list the Vice-President, it does not necessitate that because the Attorney-General has given legal advice we force them to do it. Supposing they agree that he qualifies but argue that as far as short-listing is concerned, he is not qualified, what then do we do? 

MR BANYENZAKI: The information I want to give to this Parliament is that as far as I understand and as far as I know, the Vice-President had qualified and was among the first six people that were to be interviewed for the post of Chancellor of Makerere University. However, an interpretation was made that the office of the Vice-President was the same as the office of the President and Prof. Gilbert Bukenya was therefore disqualified. 

Now that an interpretation has been given by the Attorney-General and the Vice-President had been disqualified on the grounds that his office is the same as the office of the President and that they act in the same capacity, I would request that the body which is reviewing this process perhaps takes this into consideration. I am not directing them to so, I am requesting them. 

As you have noted, Mr Speaker, there may arise a tribunal in the future that will appeal, so it is up to the body which is undertaking this process to either reconsider its decision or not. However, the fact that a wrong precedent was being set and a legal interpretation has been given, I think in future if I am a Vice-President of this country and I want to be the Chancellor of Makerere University, nothing will bar me. It could even be you, Mr Speaker, or anybody else. The fact that the law has been interpreted correctly will guide whoever will be conducting that process in the right manner and using the right procedure.

THE SPEAKER: The matter becomes contentious. It is not as simple as that.

2.59
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that now that we have heard the interpretation of the Attorney-General we should let the process go on as it is. The question is - is there anybody who is aggrieved by the way the process is going? If there is somebody who is aggrieved, he can then take action as an aggrieved person rather than making it a national issue. If somebody is aggrieved, he will pick it up and can use whatever process there is to have his grievances addressed. Otherwise, I think we should let the process go on as it is and leave it at that.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the Attorney-General’s interpretation is not a judgment of court and so some other person may contest it. So, should we really continue with this debate?

3.00
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, I can hear the chorus that I am an interested party. It is true; I have been interviewed for the same position but I think we have to protect these institutions. I think politicising these issues is a danger to the institution. There were many names that were proposed for that same office and none of the other names have interested hon. Banyenzaki as to why they were dropped. 

Indeed even those of us who have been nominated were interviewed. The position is only one and there are going to be five people who will not get it. So, is this going to mean that after the selection of one person some other person can come to the Floor of this House and ask why someone was not made the Chancellor? 

I believe that, Mr Speaker, as you rightly said the question is - what follows? This is a question that hon. Banyenzaki should answer. In the whole enterprise of raising this matter on the Floor of this House, what was he intending to achieve?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I took an oath to uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Where things are not clear to me as a Member of Parliament regarding the Constitution and the rules of Uganda, the only fallback position is the Attorney-General. Where have I gone wrong in asking the Attorney-General about a legal matter that I do not understand? (Applause) I request my honourable members and my professor – (Interjection) - Sir, you are still my professor; this is not a personal matter. I only wanted to know, as a matter of principle, the legal implications of this so that when I am going to say anything on this matter, I say it with a legal basis. The Attorney-General has now interpreted this provision, he has done his job and I am very happy that he has responded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have got the Attorney-General’s opinion on this matter; the question is what do we do?

3.04
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much. I believe the whole thing goes to the effect of the opinion of the Attorney-General; does it bind anybody? If it does, then I believe the ministry in charge of the particular department should take action and advise the body responsible to comply with the opinion of the Attorney-General. If it does not, as my learned friend stated, any aggrieved or any interested party may challenge the decision of the tribunal, but that may also drag us far.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I must confess I was not here when this happened. Was there an official communication from the body concerned to Parliament or to the ministry about what was done? Was it a matter that was picked up from a newspaper? This is the problem. If the matter had come to us, we would think through and write to them and tell them the position. I do not know the circumstances under which this matter came. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to seek your guidance. If it is true that one of the major reasons why the Vice-President was disqualified was because they could not interpret the Constitution, the people who disqualified him would have sought the opinion of the Attorney-General because I am certain that the Attorney-General is the advisor to Makerere University as well. If they never sought the opinion of the Attorney-General, maybe it is one of them who got him disqualified. Supposing you discover that there is another reason as to why he was disqualified, what do we do? 

On this matter, I believe the best thing to do is to follow what hon. John Kawanga has said. If there is an aggrieved party, let them go to court and seek redress. Thank you.

3.06
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, this matter is about the Constitution. When the University Council disqualified our Vice-President, it was on the grounds that his office is the same as the office of the President, but that was contrary to the Constitution. The Constitution is very clear; the office of the President is different from the office of the Vice-President. If you are inconsistent with the Constitution, then your decision is void to the extent of the inconsistency. I believe the action of the University Council is contrary and inconsistent with the Constitution and their decision should be void to the extent of their inconsistency. 

Mr Speaker, as a Parliament of this country, we cannot sit back and look at our Constitution being interpreted differently. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Okot Ogong. I listened to you and I would like you to help me; who determines the extent of the inconsistency that we are talking about? Who has the mandate in that Constitution to tell us or to interpret, judge or arbitrate? Who has that power?

MR OKOT OGONG: The Attorney-General has made it abundantly clear that the Vice-President cannot be disqualified by virtue of his office. He is competent and can be selected or nominated to be the Chancellor of the university. Now we have heard the interpretation of the advisor to Government and this Parliament, and it is abundantly clear that the major reason as to why they disqualified the Vice-President was because of his office. Now that the position has been cleared by the Attorney-General, we want to appeal to the vetting committee to interview – (Interruption)

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: The information I want to give to hon. Okot is that we heard from hon. Banyenzaki that he wanted to seek legal advice from the Attorney-General, and it has been given. I am yet to know whether H.E. the Vice-President officially communicated his concerns as to why he was left out. Maybe he communicated to the Attorney-General saying he had been left out on grounds that his office is the same as that of the President. Otherwise, if the Vice-President did not communicate his grievances to the Attorney-General, it means the Vice-President is satisfied. So, I do not think that it is necessary for us to go very far by investigating the reasons as to why the Vice-President was left out. I believe the Vice-President is around and he has the potential to get this kind of situation addressed by the courts of law. We have received the legal advice from the Attorney-General, let us continue. 

3.10
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have received the opinion of the Attorney-General and his interpretation is that the Vice-President deputises for the President and performs other functions assigned to him by the President as he so wishes. Considering the institution of the presidency and the vice-presidency and the way the public considers it as one office, my concern is - suppose the Vice-President sits for an interview and he is not taken, will the office of the President and the Vice-President not be brought under ridicule? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have sufficiently dealt with this matter. Hon. Banyenzaki or this House sought the opinion of the Attorney-General and the Attorney-General has given his opinion. The question is - what do we do with that opinion? This is what I was asking you. Was there communication from that body to us or to the minister so that we can now use the opinion of the Attorney-General to reply or did we just pick up this thing from the newspapers? If we did, how do we use this opinion to influence those people at Makerere? 

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have no official communication from Makerere University asking for a legal opinion. However, to make the picture complete, I received a letter dated 9 July 2007. It is addressed to me and it is on a letterhead of Makerere University Convocation. It says: 

“Dear Sir, 
Re: Seeking Legal Opinion on Makerere University Chancellor. 
I have received inquiries from various alumni of Makerere University seeking to know whether the nomination of H.E. Prof. Gilbert Bukenya for the above post is within legal boundaries. Their argument is that as Vice-President, he is barred by the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act as amended in 2003 from being appointed a chancellor of a public university since he is considered to be part of the presidency that occupies the position of University Visitor. 

The set perimeters or requirements by the University Council and the search committee are silent on this position. As the publicity secretary of the alumni, I find it very imperative to be guided by your office on the eligibility of Prof. Bukenya for the purposes of clarity. As stakeholders, the alumni are interested in seeing a free and fair process. 
Yours, 
Tayebwa Thomas, Publicity Secretary.” 

This letter is copied to the Chairperson, University Council; Chairperson, Chancellor Search Committee; Vice-Chancellor Makerere University; University Secretary, Makerere University; Legal Officer, Makerere University; and Chairperson Makerere University Convocation.

When I received this letter, I wrote to this Mr Tayebwa and I asked him to supply me with certain information, for example the fact that this dignitary has been nominated, the perimeters set, etc. I copied my reply to all these people to whom he copied his letter; I have never received a reply. (Laughter) I beg to lay this letter on Table. That is all I know about the matter. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I personally consider that we have exhaustively dealt with this matter. Our Hansard carries the opinion of the Attorney-General on the relevant Articles of the Constitution. Since our Hansard is a public record, whoever is interested, including those who made the decision, can access and use it. Otherwise, we have no way of communicating because we do not know the addressee. We might as well say that what you saw in the newspapers is not true, they were speculations and our records say differently. This is the dilemma we have. Since we have got the legal opinion, let us see how best we can use it.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES 
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007;
(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008.

THE SPEAKER: The debate is open.

3.18
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Minister of Finance for the budget speech. On page 31 of the budget speech for this financial year, when the Minister was making a presentation about constitutional self-accounting bodies, he did not mention the Act that we just passed some few months ago. The Equal Opportunities Commission Bill was passed by this House on 12 December 2006 and it was assented to by the President on 1 April 2007. This Act is in place. When the Minister was presenting the Bill for the first reading, a certificate of financial implications was presented and laid on Table. I want the Minister of Finance to inform this House when this commission is going to be operationalised. We have been passing laws and Acts and the Minister seems not to be in consonance with what is in the Budget Act. 

On page 39, the Minister talked about the local service tax. This is a new tax that is going to be introduced. I am a bit worried especially as a Member of Parliament who represents people from the rural districts. This tax at the end of the day might end up making some people pay twice or thrice. I will give an example of a businesswoman who pays income tax, who will pay the URA tax, and again here you are introducing another tax. I want the Minister to assure us and this House how he is going to synchronise all these other taxes that people have been paying.

Mr Speaker, on page 19 the Minister talked about energy investment. I am happy to note and appreciate that Bujagali hydropower station was commissioned yesterday and it is going to be constructed. In the Minister’s speech, he talked about the construction of Karuma hydropower station. He said that this hydropower station is expected to start in the near future. We want to know what the near future is. Can the Minister tell us what he means by “the near future”? The roadmap might indicate even after 2011 and yet we want to solve the power crisis in this country. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister and the Ministry of Works for having upgraded Kafu-Masindi Road, which is nearly at its completion stage although it has taken more than the expected duration. 

The Northern highway is in a bad condition. You can hardly take that road without getting vehicles parked by the roadside just because of the poor state of the road. I know there is construction going on, but they are just filling potholes. I wish the Minister could consider an overhaul programme for the road and not only fill potholes. Before they complete filling the whole stretch, the place where they started filling from will again have potholes because of the rains. So, I want the Minister to develop a plan of working on that road. 

We are happy that Southern Sudan has opened up its roads and we are busy transacting businesses, but the trucks that are using that road are really very heavy and then we get these people filling the potholes. I do not think it will last even a year. So, I want to ask the Minister to develop a plan for that road so that it may last and stand the test of time.

Mr Speaker, I appreciate the work being done on the Kafu-Masindi Road and the Busunju-Hoima Road. However, the mid-western region, that is, Masindi, Hoima, Kibaale, Kyenjojo and Buliisa is where we expect to start earning and where our economy will be based especially when we start drilling and refining oil. So, the roads in the Bunyoro region, and of course the West Nile region and Kanungu, should be worked on. 

I want to ask the government and the Executive, in their plan to upgrade those roads where at one time the economy will be based, to start working on a programme to upgrade the Kigumba–Masindi–Hoima–Kibaale-Kyenjojo Road to bitumen standards. I want to ask the Minister - and I have seen him shaking his head - I know this road will be worked on especially in 2009 when we expect to start refining oil. 

Mr Speaker, in the Minister’s conclusion, he stated that he was optimistic that people who have been able to grow at a rate of about six percent per annum for 20 years while at war and without oil can grow even faster when there is no war and when we have oil. I am happy that the Minister is optimistic, but I want to ask him and the Executive that as we become optimistic everyday, let us work on policies that will help the people from the regions where the oil is going to be refined, so that we do not get problems. 

I know the consultations on the oil policy have started and the regions of Bunyoro and West Nile have been consulted and other regions will be consulted. However, I want the Executive and Government to handle those issues which might curtail this project; issues like the land policies. We need to deal with the land policy issues expeditiously especially in those regions where we are expecting our people to reap. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday there was an issue on compensation that was brought up. Compensation is really a big issue especially where the government has been carrying out its programmes. I want to talk about the programme of the Masindi-Apac power line. This power line was constructed and people along the area where it was constructed were assured of their compensation. To date, the people of Masindi and Kigumba have never been compensated. I want to ask the Minister: What programmes do you have for these people? They have been in touch with the ministry and there is no response at all and yet in the agreement when you were displacing them, you assured them of compensation. This does not only apply to those people who were displaced from where the power line was being constructed. 

In 2003, Masindi District gave the Uganda Police Force land to construct Kabalye Police Training School. The people who were there - almost a whole parish - were asked to leave and construction is going on. I have seen in the budget of the Ministry of Internal Affairs that there is money allocated for construction of the police training school in that area but the people who had settled there before - the owners of the land - have never been compensated. I think we need to really look at the issue of compensation thoroughly because so many programmes are going on and people are being displaced but they are not being compensated in accordance with their expectations. 

Lastly, I want to talk about the issue of the majority who cannot speak for themselves, and these are the children. The children are being taxed because they are children. The babies are being taxed because they are babies. They are paying taxes through their mothers. What do I mean? The mothers who have babies use disposable diapers but the government has gone ahead to impose VAT on them. 

I want to ask this House to help the woman who plays both the reproductive and productive role not to be taxed because of that creation but should be assisted to sustain it. I want to ask this House to come out and support me in asking Government to waive this tax. I know under the East Africa Common Tariff, Kenya has removed the 15 percent VAT on disposable diapers. I know Tanzania is on the way to remove the same VAT. So, I want to ask the Ministry of Finance, please, help the mother who is playing a dual role. Help these people who cannot speak for themselves and scrap VAT on disposable diapers and withholding tax. Thank you.

3.30
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to respond to a few aspects of the budget speech. I would first of all like to thank the Minister of Finance for the budget presentation. I would also like to thank the Shadow Minister of Finance for a highly detailed response. I think it was a very beautiful response and the powers that be need to take note of the salient issues that are raised therein.

The policy of the National Resistance Movement was the creation of an independent, integrated and self-sustaining economy - (Interjection) - I have said very clearly – it was. The way things are going, it is apparent that this vision is being abandoned either because of mere failure or because of other reasons that we must know. 

Mr Speaker as you are aware, when you take a close look at the economy, no one can claim that today, 22 years down the road, the NRM has been successful in building or integrating the economy of Uganda, neither do we have evidence that this economy can be self-sustaining without the massive borrowing and grants that we are receiving year in year out. I would like to use this opportunity to call upon Government to return to this vision. It is important that Uganda builds a self-sustaining economy but apparently all records and figures show that this is not the case.  

The budget speech introduced a tax called the local service tax. The population is very worried that this tax appears to be a return of the dreaded graduated tax. You are aware that it was this Parliament that pushed so hard for the abolition of graduated tax because of the manner in which it was being collected, mismanaged and because of the extra burden it was laying on the ordinary taxpayer. The Minister of Finance did not explain thoroughly the rationale of introducing the local service tax. The people need to be sensitised or else what they are going to receive again is resistance on the ground during its collection. We are worried as to how this tax is going to be implemented. We hope that it is not going to be a reoccurrence of the scenarios we experienced during the collection of graduated tax.

Mr Speaker, this budget pays attention to many aspects of the economy. However, as a Member of Parliament representing an urban constituency, I see that it pays so little attention to the crisis in urban centres. We have got the crisis of urban poverty in Uganda. When you traverse areas around Kampala and around rapidly growing urban centres, you realise that the people living in urban centres are living in worse conditions than even those in rural areas and yet most Government projects are targeting areas outside Kampala. In Kampala, little attention is being paid to the plight of people living in these urban centres; they are living in squalid conditions with very poor housing. Even these so called micro-finance projects that we are being told about are not targeting this important population stratum. 

I would like to call upon Government to pay more attention to the plight of Ugandans living in urban centres. We would like Government to come up with substantive programmes to deal with urban poverty. Yes, Government is doing something about the plight of the rural poor, but we would now like Government to focus on addressing issues of urban poverty.

Mr Speaker, it is great news that the Northern war is nearly coming to an end. We pray and wish that the peace talks the government of Uganda is engaged in with the Lords Resistance Army leadership bear fruit. As all of us are aware, the Northern war has had a lot of pressure and push on the economy. We look forward to the big chunk of money that has been funding this war to be diverted to public projects and programmes that really benefit the majority of the people. We would like to see an improvement in spending on health and education. I hope this time round when we talk about investing in health, we are looking at building more hospitals, having drugs in hospitals and buying genuine ambulances and not pick-ups as we see today.  

Mr Speaker, we are very concerned about the aspect of experimentation that has been prevalent in the past. When the National Resistance Movement came in, one of the driving forces of the economy was the cooperative movement. In the 60s, 70s and 80s, the cooperative movement was a big mobilising factor. [Mr Byabagambi: “Were you there?”] That is why we write history. (Laughter) Those of us who have gone through nice schools access this information. (Laughter) I do not know which school hon. Byabagambi went to? (Laughter) 

The cooperative movement was a very great stimulant of the rural economy. It was a great mobilising tool for Government towards economic independence and sustainability. Unfortunately, our leaders did not see this aspect at the time. They destroyed the cooperative movement. The first victim was Masaka Cooperative Society where actually assets and even goods were looted. We later saw a nationwide structure of the cooperative movement being destroyed. 

Today, 22 years down the road, what is on the lips of every NRM leader is, “If you want to come out of poverty form a co-operative society; if you want ‘Bonna bagaggawale’ funds we are going to bring them through co-operative societies” yet they are using the wrong methods to re-build the co-operative movement. In fact, instead of appointing a minister in charge of micro-finance, they should have appointed a minister in charge of co-operative societies. This way the money being used for ‘Bonna bagaggawale’ would have been channelled to the rural poor through the co-operative movement.  

Mr Speaker, we are very concerned about this experimentation. We do not think that the strategy Government is embarking on through the Minister in charge of Micro-Finance will work. Let the National Resistance Movement not behave as if it is the first Government in Uganda and neither should it behave as if they are going to be the last. Uganda did not start in 1986; Uganda begun when the colonialists took charge. They left systems and Milton Obote and Idi Amin inherited those systems. Now you have destroyed some of those systems. We would like Government to get more committed to re-building the co-operative movement, which it destroyed and we would like it to take substantive measures not mere lip service as we see today.

Mr Speaker, we welcome CHOGM and in fact we must do everything to see that we hold a successful event.  Let me tell you one thing, CHOGM is good for all of us. Look at the new face of Parliament. For 22 years, what have you been doing to repaint Parliament? Look at the new face of the national theatre; look at the roads being redone; look at the new face of city square. Even we, in Makindye, are going to benefit because one road is going to be tarmacked, care of CHOGM. In fact, I wish CHOGM was every year; we would have better roads, our Parliament would look so beautiful, state house would look nice, the roads would look good, the flowers would be redone every year and ministers would be busy. 

I am told everyday they are saying, “CHOGM is coming, the Queen is coming”. We are waiting to see the Queen. We welcome CHOGM, Mr Speaker, and we would like to do everything to support a successful event. However, let the preparations that we have done for CHOGM not end with CHOGM. Let us have this effort continued yearly to see that our city looks good. We do not have to wait for the Queen to repaint Parliament; we do not have to wait for the Queen to renovate the national theatre, which was left by the Governor. Let us undertake projects and prepare our country for bigger events to come after CHOGM.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I have looked at the budget and I know the policy of the National Resistance Movement concerning gender issues. It is very unfortunate that the gender ministry, which concerns women and youth, is one of the least funded ministries. In fact, we do not need a Minister for Micro-Finance. We simply need more money in the Ministry of Gender and specifically more money for women and youth programmes. This so-called Ministry of Micro-Finance, which is using our cars, resources and office equipment, is just a waste. Let us give more money to hon. Syda Bbumba to embark on youth projects and women programmes and let us put money - I know the majority of people are moved. I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. 

3.46
MR ALBERT CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the motion that he moved. I would like to challenge the minister on two aspects of the budget speech.

The first one is about the growth of the economy. I agree and believe that the economy of Uganda is growing as reflected by the growth in the GDP per capita.  However, as highlighted in the statement of the shadow minister of finance, whereas the economy is growing at a faster rate than the rate of population growth, the number of poor people living below poverty line is increasing year in year out. My question to the minister is, who is benefiting from the economic growth in Uganda? Because if you have a constituency and you are exposed to the plight of the people in rural communities, you will see that day in day out people are getting poorer and poorer. This is what I see in the constituencies, so who is benefiting from economic growth?  

I would like to tickle him and say that it appears there is a leak in the economy. It appears that that basket, which keeps growing every year, as reflected by GDP growth per capita, has a leak. There are holes in that basket that must be plugged because I do not have any other idea of where the growth could be going. Whereas the minister attempted to say that income distribution is improving, on the ground it is different because of those leakages. Some of the leakages are the handouts, which are given by this Government to people who are handpicked, to the chosen like Basajjabalaba and handouts for capitalisation. These are the leakages in the economy that I am talking about and that result into growth in the economy not going to the poor but going to those who are chosen.

Mr Speaker, today I was attending a seminar of accountants -(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, the information is that, the number of people who are living above the poverty line in absolute terms has grown and that is where the increase in growth is going. Furthermore, the same statistics of the 2005 household survey show, and I think that is what he was alluding to, that the level of inequality has been decreasing. Thank you.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, for the information, hon. Minister. Mr Speaker, the data that I am using is the same one the minister is using. Therefore, we might need to table the data here and see where the interpretations are differing. 

On inequality, hon. Minister, yes you have means of measuring inequalities using certain indices but some of these economic measuring models may not be an extremely good guide for us rural MPs. That is the same problem that Prof. Yunus Mohammed of the famous Grameen Bank had with his PhD in Economics. It was not applicable in the rural areas so he had to abandon it and start from scratch. His problem was very simple; that there are people who are poor and his economics was not helping them. This is in writing and that is how he came to build the Grameen Bank.

What I am saying is that, in our communities, the situation is getting worse yet the economy is growing. I want to know because I have access to the poor but I don’t have access to the rich. May I know where the growth is going if my poor people are not getting better? My question is very simple. 

I was starting to say that today I was attending an accountancy seminar, which is taking place in Entebbe and where all accountants are gathered for a three-day workshop. The concern echoed there is about the reversal in the trend of the privatisation programme. When the PERD Act Cap 98 was created, the idea was to divest public enterprises because Government is not a good business person. So, they were to get out of business and only regulate. Also in the PERD Act, the types of enterprises Government would retain control over were provided for. Among these were those where Government had a majority stake. 

There is no instance in a privatisation process where a company is retained when Government has a minority share holding. Why? Because that removes control from Government, from the taxpayer and from the Auditor General. However, what is happening now under the capitalisation initiative and with the likes of Phoenix Logistics, AGOA and Speke Resort is that Government is reversing the spirit of the privatisation programme and creating enterprises where we have a minority stake, outside the eye of the taxpayer. These are some of the leakages, which I am saying are in this economy and which must be plugged if our taxpayers are to benefit. These are leakages that the honourable minister should seriously look into and see how we can redirect the benefits of growth of the economy to the poor people we represent.

The second area that I want to take the hon. Minister on is on agriculture. Mr Speaker, yesterday the minister made very serious statements about the contribution of agriculture in the economy and the share of funding of the total budget that goes to agriculture. This is a very serious area. I got worried about the statements that the minister was making because we know that the main stake of the Ugandan economy is agriculture. 

I want to tell the House one thing about the experience of China. In 1961, Mao decided in his vision that his country must move on a fast track as regards industrialisation. He went ahead to announce to the public to stop cultivation and the people stopped cultivating. That was part of the Great Leap Forward Revolution that he started in China. People stopped cultivating and he started what was eventually termed as the Backyard Steel Mills where each household was expected to carry on steel milling as one way of industrialisation. That is what he believed in and that was his vision. 

What happened one year down the line? There was no food in the country and it was a total mess. That was in 1961-1962. There were ten years of turmoil and by 1976, the big gang of four was arrested and Mao removed from power. This was all because of the vision that was driven by Mao as a person, which vision was that agriculture was not going to take the country anywhere. He argued that people must industrialise, stop cultivating with immediate effect and engage in steel milling activities. 

Mr Speaker, what we heard yesterday is something very similar. As this country grows, the share of agriculture in the economy is going to decrease and there is no doubt about that. However, at what rate? What is the speed at which we are throwing out agriculture from the main stage? In terms of funding, it was made very clear that the contribution of agriculture is declining for now because of the deliberate little investment in agriculture by Government. It is deliberate, Mr Speaker. 

There is a document here termed “Vision 2025”, which is similar to Mao’s vision. Mao’s vision was a one-man’s vision. This document here called “Vision 2025” is a document that contains a systematic road map on how agriculture is going to be down graded in terms of its role and contributions in the economy. It is all here! This document reads, “Vision 2025: prosperous people, harmonious nation, beautiful country, a strategic framework for national development, March 1999…” going all the way to the year 2025. Every Member received this document. The forward was written and signed by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda and the preface was written by hon. Samuel Kahamba Kuteesa, Minister of State, Planning and Investments, Kampala, March 1999. 

The vision in this document is that, by the year 2025, the contribution of agriculture would have been downgraded by about half. It is all here. This document, Mr Speaker, is not a national vision for this country. Just like Mao, this vision is a one- man’s vision. This document does not represent the national aspirations of the people of Uganda and this vision was not approved by the Cabinet of Uganda; it was only presented to Members in their pigeonholes about five months ago. The vision that is driving this country is a one-man’s vision and that is the vision that the honourable minister is following of down grading the role of agriculture, knowing very well that the people we represent up to now are in the villages.  

I am also aware that there are initiatives in Government now to prepare a share division. In the ministerial policy statements, there are funds appropriated under national planning to coordinate the efforts to coin a shared national vision for the country. This vision is effectively abandoned; why is the honourable minister continuing to refer to this document in his enthusiasm to down grade the role of agriculture in the country? Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member in spite of the information I provided yesterday, which I am willing to re-state showing that the expenditure by Government on agriculture is increasing, for example, from last year to this year is going from Shs 146 billion to Shs 184 billion - it is showing that agricultural output has been growing in absolute amounts. There is a positive rate of growth and output in agriculture. Is it in order for him to continue saying that we are down grading agriculture? Does he want us to stop industry and other sectors from growing so that agriculture can remain big? Is that in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think his statement tantamount to saying you are not doing enough; it is an assessment of the situation.  

MR ODUMAN: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Fortunately, for the minister, I do not intend to go beyond that. Basically those two concerns, who is benefiting from the growth of the economy - because under there you also have CHOGM.  Mr Speaker, CHOGM is one of the holes in the basket of the economy. I support CHOGM and I welcome the heads of Government who are coming for the meeting.  But, on the other hand, CHOGM is a whole carcass.  While some of us or some of you are planning for the meeting to make it a success, people out there are fighting over the carcass. They are cutting each other, left, right and centre. Information has been in the press on how tenders have been struggled for.  Nobody has refuted it. 

I am also aware that there is another document circulating somewhere among Members talking about an additional increase of funds from whatever has been proposed to the draft budget of another Shs 117 billion. In principle, if we do not take care of the carcass side of CHOGM, we are going to witness the biggest scandal ever in this country on corruption emanating from CHOGM.  People are fighting left, right and centre over our funds on CHOGM and I bet you, we will still be here and we shall talk about the accountability. My senior colleague, the shadow minister for finance, has promised a full audit of CHOGM transactions. We shall still be here and we shall see.

A certain document is also circulating saying we are going to come again to the House; I do not know why it is circulating among only a few Members of Parliament. But I am just blowing the whistle that CHOGM is really a direction –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But at least you have seen yours; you have received a copy apparently. Proceed.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have not got it; I just happened to see it over the corridors. Hon. Minister, CHOGM is also one of the biggest punctures in the economy. It is one hole through which the growth of this economy is going to some people rather than my people I represent in Bukedea County. Where is the growth going? Two, let us reduce the enthusiasm on diluting the role of agriculture. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute towards the budget speech. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the budget speech. Also I would like to thank the shadow minister for his response.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the increase in revenue collection of late. I understand we have doubled actually and the minister is so happy that he would want to reward the revenue authority persons who are collecting.  I support the idea because, definitely, if you are doing some good work, you must be rewarded on top of what you have. I think it is a good idea.

Mr Speaker, Koboko is one of the areas where you receive a lot of money because it is the border of Congo and Sudan. You get revenue from Congo and from Sudan, and yet the border post is dilapidated.  Since we had been recovering from insurgency, I expected Koboko-Oraba border post to be rehabilitated and in the near budget there is nothing for Oraba border post. I would like to invite you to come and see the transaction of business in Oraba and Kaya so that you can really justify and give finances to develop that border post.  

Mr Speaker, it is good we are collecting money.  But the method of collecting money, from what I have seen in Koboko is not fair. First of all, at the border post there, they are extorting a lot of money from people going across. I do not know if there is a standard or a formula for getting the amount of money. From what I have learnt, it is from Shs 700,000 to Shs3.0 million if you have to get your lorry pass with the goods. As a result, people are reluctant especially those who would like to engage in business. They cannot make it because of the demand from the border post there. So, I would like to know what the formula is so that we can arrest those people who are over extorting money from the traders.

Secondly, Koboko is at the border and some people live across Congo, others in Sudan and they are all related. Now, when you are bringing something across from Congo, maybe you have grown your cassava with your relatives, the anti-smuggling unit are on your neck. They will take away your food because they feel you are smuggling any item.  The worst situation is with these motorcycles bought across from Congo. They are very cheap and the users have raised money to buy for doing boda boda. But when we would like to clear it to get registration, it is very expensive. They can buy the motorcycle at the cost of Shs 900,000 but when they come to clear from the revenue, it is even double the price. As a result, the youth have decided to smuggle motorcycles across to do business. 

Then the process of chasing them is causing chaos in Koboko. On the 7th of August, when the Vice-President was there in Koboko, one of the anti-smuggling unit’s personnel started chasing one boda boda person all around until the person fell and had an accident. Because of anger, the other youth converged on that personnel who was dressed in army attire – I do not know if the soldiers are the ones now collecting those things – they beat him almost to coma and I think you heard of the story. 

Today, at 2.00 O’clock, I got a message from the deputy speaker of Koboko town council that there is a person from the anti-smuggling unit who is now shooting into the town and the whole town is in chaos. People took cover. Actually he was again chasing one of the smugglers of motorcycles in the town. As a result, Koboko is very insecure.

I would like to know why we cannot reduce this registration tax on the motorcycles. These are the boys who have just returned from somewhere as soldiers and they are very busy trying to do boda boda but because of this cost, you are frustrating them and they will be redundant and they will begin thinking of other things. Can we reduce the cost of the registration so that our young men and women can get those motorcycles at a fair price?

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on domestic arrears. I am happy that about Shs 280 billion has been allocated for domestic arrears, including clearance of pensioners. Our elderly people are suffering. Many have died without getting their pension because of long procedures in the Ministry of Public Service. I have tried to assist some people but I have given up because of the process. I would like us to bring this procedure here to see why it is taking two, three or even ten years to secure your pension. I think the problem is with the personnel there; either they are asking for bribes or they are too lazy to do the work. I would like the Minister of Public Service to look into that section of pensioners. We cannot continue making our people suffer when actually they deserve that money. 

I would like to come to the strategies which –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, there is information from the Minister of Public Service. 

MR HENRY KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem that we have had in the past about pensions was not caused by any other reason other than shortage of funds. For the past financial year, the total funds we had amounted to Shs 51 billion out of the required Shs 300 billion. Distributing Shs 51 billion to so many pensioners became a problem. Now that we have been given a good chunk, we have also introduced the electronic system whereby the funds will leave the central bank direct to the branches of the banks and to the pensioners’ accounts; these problems of inadequate accountability have been solved. 

For this first quota, I think we have paid about 1,000 people to the extent of about Shs 15 billion. We are hoping to get a little more, maybe Shs 30 billion, for the next quota and we shall pay accordingly. So, I see a ray of hope in solving the problems that the honourable member has been referring to. I thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. We shall see. Time will tell -(Laughter)– when they will have them. I will be happy if the process is made easier and the older people get their money.

I welcome the idea of “Wealth for All” and indeed the government is going to direct all its energy to ensure that every person in Uganda has money in his pocket. From what I have seen, the money allocated, that is Shs 10 billion, is not enough. We need more money in that section if we have to realise Bonna bagaggawale, which I do not know how to pronounce. 

First, I will talk about production; we are already mobilising our people to produce. Indeed, people are very happy but we have a number of bottlenecks: One is the mechanism for opening the land. Up to now, our people are still using the hoe handle for digging. Definitely, we cannot open large pieces of land. We have tried with the programme of sim-sim; even opening one acre takes a lot of time. So, I would like resources for Bonna bagaggawale to be used for securing tractors and ox-ploughs so that my people in the village can ease the way of opening the land. Without that, we are wasting our time. 

Secondly, the issue of processing our materials to add value. It is good for areas where there is power but in Koboko - I understand Nyagak power plant will be there in December, but I do not know if it will be big enough to handle factories where we can process our production. That means we need more than the Nyagak plant for effective industrial activities in Koboko.

Another part of “Wealth for All” is micro-finance. We have been encouraged to mobilise our people to form SACCOS. Indeed, the SACCOS are all formed especially in Koboko; we have over six SACCOS, which are registered and the members are already saving and borrowing. But from the policy of micro-finance, I understand we are going to start with only 30 persons in the sub-county. What shall we do to the rest of the people who are already saving and borrowing? Why not share this money so that each SACCO can borrow and lend to its people rather than just selecting few families to benefit? We are tired of these pilot projects, which end up in pilot projects. The little from micro-finance should be borrowed by all the SACCOS who have registered so that they can benefit.

Mr Speaker, I would like to support the idea of using the Uganda Co-operative Alliance. It has been working with many cooperatives for sometime and they know what to do for people, what things to give and what training to provide. Instead of using a unit in the Ministry of Finance, which we call the Micro-Finance Outreach Plan, better we use these ones. I do not understand how that plan will work. For example, do you have personnel to implement that programme? Why not provide the work to the Apex Co-operatives so that they do more effective work rather than holding the funds with Micro-Finance Outreach Plan? 

Anyway, I would like the minister to explain what this Micro-Finance Outreach Plan is doing. It is important because, for example, the SACCOs in Koboko that I know have managed to secure three saving accounts from Uganda Co-operative Alliance, which our micro-finance programme has not started doing. I have already secured training for the leaders of those SACCOs from Uganda Co-operative Alliance, which our own programme has not done. So, why not support Uganda Co-operative Alliance to do the work and support this programme?

Mr Speaker, I would like to go on education –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we started, I saw there were no interests displayed for contribution, but now people are taking 20 minutes or so; that will not be possible. But for hon. Baba Diri, please wind up and then I see what to do with time.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But allow me to complain because the former contributor spoke for almost 30 minutes. I heard him –(Laughter)- okay, let me now hurry up.  

Mr Speaker, I welcome the idea of universal secondary education because it is helping our poor children to go to school. There is no doubt that Government is spending a lot of money on universal secondary education. So, we need to support and ensure that we benefit from it. The only problem is that sub-counties that occupy big areas cannot effectively benefit from universal secondary education.  

For example, in Koboko, there are seven schools, which are now under USE but most, if not all of them, are within the town council. As a result, an area like Kuruba Sub-County that has no secondary school has many students suffering. I hope this financial year Government will have one school in Kuruba otherwise, it is a big sub-county without a secondary school.  

In other sub-counties like Rudera, there is only one secondary school, which is very far from the remotest part of that sub-county. That means majority of children cannot benefit from universal secondary education. Though the parents have decided to send their children to this one school, with a hope that they will enjoy free secondary education, they have to accommodate and feed them, which is more expensive. I hope the Minister of Education will expedite the issue of providing a secondary school in each sub-county in the country, including those in Koboko, so that all of us can benefit from that programme.

Lastly, let me comment on the issue of health. I thank the Minister of Health for providing some facilities and additional money to Koboko Health Centre IV.  However, last time on this very Floor of the House, the Minister of Health said that Koboko and Katakwi hospitals would be accorded district status and that Mubende would be a regional hospital. What happened to the issue of having Koboko and Katakwi hospitals upgraded? I am asking this because when the minister went to Koboko, he announced that Koboko Hospital would soon be a district hospital. However, to my surprise, when we came to consult him in his office, he denied. Honourable minister, why did you a shame us in front of our people? We had told our people that our hospital would be upgraded to a district status only to be deceived by the honourable minister? If you had told us that it would not be possible, we would have found ways of talking to our people and it is only good that you explain why you deceived us together with the people of Koboko, otherwise that was not a good approach to that situation.  

Mr Speaker, I thank Government for initiating the reproductive health programme. I think this is a very important programme because so many women are dying during delivery. We hope that all the sub-county health centres will be facilitated, including the health centres at parish level, to help mothers deliver normally.  We are dying for a noble job but please rescue us as women especially those in Koboko. Each time I go there, I hear a woman has died during childbirth. So, I hope that that money will be properly used so that health centres at sub-county level and those in the parishes are functional. This will hopefully enable our people to benefit from that Government programme. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, too. I think hon. Kawanga can contribute next, but let us agree on time. 

4.27
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Is seven minutes going to be reasonable?

MR KAWANGA: Yes, I will try to be very brief. I am normally very brief.

Mr Speaker, I want to make a few comments on this budget speech. One of them is the lack of reporting progress on what happened to Government programmes in the previous year.  For example, in the budget of the previous year, there had been a mention of roads that were supposed to be worked on, where commencement of works would be severally mentioned. In this year’s budget, no mention whatsoever is made about those roads; you do not know whether anything started. 

I will make a specific example of the Masaka-Bukakata road, which starts from my constituency. People had learned last year that some work would start on it; they waited but nothing appears to have been done. One would have thought that at least a survey of the road could have been done to convince people that some work would be done.  I would want the minister to make a comment on that one.

Secondly, let me talk about land. The minister promised to set up a land acquisition loan facility and in his words he said, “The facility will be disbursed through Post Bank and participating SACCOs, and will be secured by the land that is acquired. I have allocated Shs 3.0 billion for the programme, which will initially cover 30 districts with each district getting Shs 100 million.” That is a wonderful idea, but one would want to know how it is going to work out. For example, which districts does he have in mind? What kind of land does he have in mind? Will it be individual ownership? What will happen in areas where the land is owned communally? One would want some guidance on these matters to be able to assist. 

It is urgent because in areas where I come from, the issue of people who own bibanjas and have no title to them is a big crisis. It is urgent that these people be assisted to acquire land titles so that they get independent from this unknown amorphous Kibanja issue. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, allow me comment on micro-finance. In the minister’s words he says, “Out of the 970 sub-counties only 381 have SACCOs. Government plans to strengthen the 381 SACCOs already in existence and create new ones in the 589 sub-counties.” That is where my problem starts. Co-operative societies are commercial organisations; they are commercial enterprises; they should be organised by people who come together to do business and not to be created by Government. This matter should be well understood. If it is not understood, we are going to run into problems. Co-operative societies will be looked at as Government organisations, created by Government and if that happens, then the whole process will die. 

The reason why I am saying this matter should be taken seriously is that, as we talk, we hear - I do not know whether it is true - that there is going to be created a SACCO for members or people who stood for elections and did not succeed. They are going to get Shs 2.0 billion. So, you can see that the idea of creating SACCOs to give money is starting at the very top. If that is the concept to be created, then we are going to run into a very big problem. If we are going to have SACCOs, let them be formed the way they should be and let them be run the way they should be.

Mr Speaker, let me also say something on local Government financing. In the words of the minister he says “ Mr Speaker, I am proposing that the new taxes for local governments take effect from 1 July 2007. The new taxes have been carefully selected because unlike graduated tax, they are productive, equitable, easy to collect and levied on wealth and incomes not individuals.” That sounded very good, but I want to be told whether these taxes started on the 1 July this year? If so, then have they been carefully thought out? As I talk, people in my district do not even know how the whole thing will work out; the whole local structure does not know how the whole thing will work out. 

They were also very amazed about taxes on lodges. Everybody is amazed because in some districts there are no lodges but even where there are lodges, levying tax on a lodge is an impossible task. This is so because we are not told who thought out this thing? Who decided on it and how it is going to work out? What guidance has Government given to the local governments to be able to implement this, though the statement says it is equitable and worth and that it has started working? I want to be sure that we are not making a statement, which we cannot implement.

Finally, let me comment on transit parking yards. I think on this one the minister was extremely insensitive; he just abolished the tax without a clear analysis. In his statement he said, “Mr Speaker, in 2002, we introduced taxes on transit parking yards to help in the control of transit vehicles.” Then he said he had stopped it without considering what would happen to the investments in transit parking yards? 

In my constituency, a whole sub-county expended money to set up a transit yard at very great expenses and it had only worked for about a year or so at the time the minister abolished transit parking yards. It is now suddenly closed. So, what is going to happen to this transit yard? What is going to happen to the losses that have been incurred in the process? What alternatives do you have to offer in this kind of situation? 

The minister may have had a very good reason for closing transit parking yards but at least it should have ameliorated the losses that these people are going to incur. With those few remarks, I want to say that I am very happy to comment on this motion. Thank you very much.

4.36 
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to commend the minister and congratulate him upon presenting the budget for this financial year. However, I was surprised that the minister gave us confidence that the interest rates would be going down yet in reality many people who are borrowing are expressing complaints about increasing interest rates on ordinary loans. So, for us as citizens of this country, we feel that the minister has not lived up to the people’s expectations. In that regard, I would like to know what strategy the minister has, in making sure that this is taken into control.

Mr Speaker, the other issue I would like to comment on is pensions. I would like to agree with the hon. Baba Diri that this situation is very bad and that people have really suffered while processing their pensions though in the budget statement, the honourable minister promised that he was sourcing around for a system with “the best practices” -to quote his own words - and that this would be the one to help our people in this situation. 

It is true the minister has come up to explain what he has in his strategy, but he should also try to establish a system which enables citizens of this country to know that the Shs 50 billion that has been apportioned to this sector has actually gone into the pension scheme for the people. This is very important because we really do not know whether this little money that you allocated to this sector actually does what it is intended to do. You can let people know of this say, through the newspapers or any other communication channels that these people can access.

Mr Speaker, the honourable minister, on pages 10 to 15, talks about opportunities that are available for many Ugandans because of the improving situation. I have taken special interest to see that actually what is put in place by these opportunities leaves out the bulky of the young Ugandans. When you analyse our households, you find that there are many young people who do not have opportunities. Even when I look at the Bonna bagaggawale system, I see that it has left out many young people both those who have qualifications and those who have just attained some level of education. 

So, I would like to suggest that we let this programme have a specific component that focuses on young people. This is very crucial because you find that even young people who have qualifications cannot easily fit into the employment sector or cannot contribute to creating wealth in this country because of the system that is in place. We need to look into this so that we can, for example, in this co-operative fund, set a side a certain fund specifically for training young people to access these opportunities. This will help us to focus on the real issues that are on the ground. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will agree with me that young people come out of the education system but they do not have facilities to access capital. So, we cannot tell them to create jobs; it is not possible because the training that they get does not enable them to create jobs. Therefore, when we talk about good opportunities that are available, then we must examine how these opportunities are going to be taken up by the young people whom we have not prepared and assisted to start up. 

In the same vein, when you look at the education system, you realize that it is not working hand in hand with our Ministry of Labour. If this were the case, we would be able to produce people who fit into the labour market. I think that is why we keep bringing out people who do not fit into the labour market let alone those who our economy actually needs. 

For example, you are all aware that we have trained so many social workers and teachers but when an advert comes for joining say the Uganda Police, you find that most of the people who apply are teachers yet they are trained in some other sector. So, I do not know whether it is true that we are focusing on the labour market. Therefore, I would like to suggest that we look into that sector and ensure that there is coordination between the labour sector and our training institutions.

Mr Speaker, about co-operatives, I would like to say that I appreciate that Government has put them in place. But then, just as many people have commented, you find that the training was put in place for our sub-county chiefs and some of our commercial officers. When they get out there, the kind of mobilization that they do is just around their selfish interests. They put aside what they were trained to do then they start promoting their own interests. This is very evident in the rural areas and I would like to emphasize that it does not really point out to whether somebody belongs to the NRM or UPC, provided they are in that position, they start mobilizing according to their personal interest. 
So, I would like really to call upon our minister in charge of micro-finance, to try and orient the people who are in charge of these programmes so that they do not promote their personal interests. Let the programme be general for the people so that we can achieve what it was intended to do.

Mr Speaker, when I was looking at our last budget statement, I realised that the Minister of Finance had actually raised our hopes by saying that there is plan to develop water for production and consumption for our people. So, when I tried to follow it up in this year’s budget speech, I found that nothing much has actually been brought out to make us know in what direction Government is moving as far as providing people with water is concerned. The people in my area have been waiting patiently. Part of my constituency is bordered by Lake Victoria and many of us who come from near water bodies know that the water banks are normally very hard places to drill - even to access water. 

So, I have been looking out and hoping that at least at one time, Government is going to have a programme specifically focusing on areas of people who come from near water bodies; those places are hard rocks because they provide support to the lakes. So people do not have water, they cannot even drill their boreholes, and so it is a problem that needs special attention and I would really be interested to see that the honourable Minister of Finance focuses on this particular problem in future. I thank you very much. 

4.43
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to add my voice in thanking the minister for the well-articulated budget speech and especially for the theme, “Re-orienting Government expenditure towards prosperity for all.” Every citizen of this country will agree with me that it is the desire of all of us for every Ugandan to prosper. Therefore, I congratulate the minister for that theme!   

On the part of the National Resistance Movement, this will be a yardstick to measure our success, as to whether the economy is doing well. Even a blind person can feel it that the economy is growing. I know people will complain here and there, but what is clear is that we are a third world country. There is no debate about this. So, where we have failed, it is because of the nature or the situation we found ourselves in and we may not blame anyone for that.

For the investment in human resources, I commend the government for investing in primary education and post-primary education because for every country to develop, it must develop first the human resource, and essentially this is what our Government is doing. 

Concerning the infrastructure, especially roads, we are still lagging behind and here I would like to call upon the honourable Minister of Finance to see that we invest so much in the road infrastructure. When we go to our rural areas, we find very bad roads. Therefore, even if you invested so much in agriculture, it may not work when we do not have a clear road network system. 

Concerning agriculture, what the minister has argued that we are moving towards industrialization is true. But we cannot say we are moving towards industrialization when the majority of our people are still in the agricultural sector and actually we are still using a hoe. So, I think we need to be realistic and invest more in agriculture than we are doing now. 

Mr Speaker, concerning NAADS, which we think will do a lot to uplift the standards of our local people, it is unfortunate that we are investing so much in the advisory services without focusing on the inputs. I happen to be a Member of the Agriculture Committee and we have moved almost throughout this country; but NAADS has not trickled down. There is not much that you can really show on the ground. 

Mr Speaker, out of the budget speech, there are a number of issues I would like the minister to clarify. Our economic is growing at a rate of 6.5 percent and this is what was also projected in 2006/07. When you compare this with Tanzania, which in 2006/07 projected 6.2 percent and now has projected 7.3 percent, and Kenya which projected 6.1 percent and has now projected 7 percent, it shows there is stagnation on the part of the Ugandan economy. So I am wondering what happened, honourable minister. 

The gap between the rich and the poor is increasing. Yes, when you go to the rural areas –(Interjection)- someone is complaining that I said the economy is improving. Yes, there is a difference between economic growth and economic development. The economy may grow when some people are getting poorer and others are getting richer. By the time we compute the per capita income, you find the economy has gone up yet people are going down. I think I am precisely correct. Despite the economic growth, the per capita income of our people has remained the lowest in the region. So, I think the honourable minister will give an explanation to that.

Value addition to our crops is moving at a very slow rate. Honourable minister, if we moved at this rate and we say we are adding value, it may take us forever to reach where we want to reach. So, I am calling upon the honourable Minister of Finance to see that this sector of value addition, the rate at which we are doing it should be increased otherwise it will take us forever.

On the issue of corruption, I would like to commend our Government for the work well done. But again, I would like to caution that we need to do a lot more in the field of corruption. Corruption is still rampant despite the checks we have put there. Therefore, I call upon our Government to do more than it is doing. 

Coming to the response from the opposition, it is unfortunate that some statements that were made were really very unfortunate. For instance, I can quote: “My greatest concern is not whether you have failed, but whether you are content with your failure”. Mr Speaker, NRM has not failed. I think the opposition will take it clear that NRM has not failed. Therefore, we cannot be content with failure when we have not failed. So, that was a misplaced statement and no normal human being can be contented with failure. Therefore, when you tell us to be contented, in the first instance we have not failed and in the second instance it is not proper for a normal person to say that you are contented with failure. So, I think the statement was misplaced. 

Another statement was that the ruling party has a duty not only to hear but also to listen; but the NRM does both. I would like the people of this country to know that the NRM both hears and listens. And there is a contradiction, because according to this statement, NRM is adamant. But then, someone said concerning the removal of the Graduated Tax that it was in the manifesto of FDC and NRM took it on. So, if it does not listen, then it could not have done that, but since it did, then NRM hears and listens.

On the issue that “Bonna bagagawale” has been politicised, there is no way you can keep this issue from politics. The fact that the NRM included it in their manifest made it political. Unless we do not understand English clearly, but it is not true that this issue is being politicised.

Concerning the money for land purchase, it is again unfortunate that the opposition is saying that we are buying hoes instead of land. But if you do not have land and you buy hoes, then where would you use these hoes? It is very unfortunate, in fact you are telling us to start with the last thing instead of the first one; you first get land, it is the first factor of production. So, when you say that we buy hoes when the peasants do not have land, then it is unfortunate and NRM cannot take that up.

And keeping in mind the words of hon. Baba Diri, she said that we need to move away from the use of hoes. And if we think that the opposition is preparing to form the next Government and they say that hoes, which we want to abandon, is the alternative that they are bring, then you better give up and let the NRM continue modifying and improving things. For us we are saying that this is a barbaric way of doing things, yet you are encouraging it to the extent of saying that we even abandon buying land for the poor people and go to the barbaric and archaic method of using hoes.

Mr Speaker, other than blaming Government, let each one of us go down and educate our peasants about what they can do. It is unfortunate that most Members like criticising Government. But let us check our selves, have we gone down there to educate these peasant, our voters, on what they should do before we blame the government? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.54
CAPT. EMILLY OTEKAT((Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the very good budget speech. I would also like to thank the Shadow Minister of Finance; I was here yesterday and I listened to his speech. We cannot say that there were no points in the shadow minister’s speech.

But I would like to say that on top of what the minister said in his speech, there are some gaps that need to be patched. On the issue of financing local governments, this area of local Government is in problems and let me quote my own local Government. When we sent funding for these three months to help them, we did not send any funding to compensate for local revenues that they were earning through Graduated Tax, and as I speak now, many local governments cannot sit because they have no revenues to enable them sit and discuss issues regarding developing their areas. 

The budget presented by the Ministry of Local Government had no Graduated Tax compensation, yet they cannot raise the Hotel Tax and the Local Service Tax now. So, honourable Minister of Finance, you need to go and rethink, particularly on that portion of Local Service Tax, on how local governments  can be saved from collapsing, because they are not meeting and you therefore need to think about Graduated Tax compensation.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to bring to the attention of the minister the fact that when you compare the total that was given to the local governments last financial year to what they got this financial year, you notice that this years was lower. But I think we would now be thinking of supporting local governments even better. Last year, local governments were given about 23.5 percent of the total amount that we had, and the Central Government had 76 percent. But this year, local Government was given only 20 and Central Government retained 80 percent. Local Government, of course, appreciates that you have increased in other areas like unconditional grants and so forth, but still we should be thinking about giving local governments more funding because that is where the bigger population is.

The other issue that I would like to remind the Minster of Finance about is that there is still discrepancy in allocation of funds to local governments, principally because there is no substantive formula for sending funds to local governments. The allocation of funds is now being done haphazardly. If you ask anybody from the Ministry of Finance, they cannot tell you what formula they are using.

As members of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government, we asked the chairpersons of the local Government, finance and commission and they informed us that the problem is that some ministries have not yet accepted the formula that they derived from the local Government, finance and commission, particularly the Ministry of Education. The Minister of Education is here, and probably at the appropriate time she will tell us why the Ministry of Education is refusing – it is now two years down the road and the ministry has refused the formula.

Mr Speaker, still on local governments, women councils, youth councils and PW councils have been rendered un-operational because the funding being sent to them every financial year are not sufficient to operationalise their activities on the ground.

The women and youth councils were established through our Constitution; they are constitutionally recognised, and we need to support them. They are getting frustrated because their activities are not adequately financed. So, the Minister of Finance should look at those areas very critically.

On security, I would like to thank the minister because he gave a substantial budget towards ending the war in the North and ending cattle rustling in Karamoja. But then, there is a problem we are foreseeing, particularly us who come from Teso Region. While the guns are being removed from the Karimojong, Karamoja also needs to be developed, because if we forget about Karamoja then the cattle rustling will resume soon rather than later because they will not have water, food and other needs. 

Mr Speaker, you can also see that having been removed from the streets of Kampala by the Ministry of Gender, they have again come back. That shows that there is a perpetual problem that needs to be sorted out in Karamoja.

Lastly, the issue of payment of pension arrears has been mentioned by many of us. Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the Minister of Finance that many local governments are facing problems because the pensioners who are claiming their pension arrears are attacking their property. I quote an example of Masaka, Rakai and Soroti. Again, we need to give proper thought on that.  Whereas the Minister of Finance gave money to pay pension arrears particularly up to 2001, there are also pension arrears from 2001 up to last financial year amounting to about Shs 35 billion. The Minister needs to think about that because those people are not only taking local governments to court because of the pension arrears up to 2001 but also because of the pension arrears from 2001 up to last financial year.  So, again that needs to be looked at very critically.  

All in all, I would like to thank the Minister for giving a very forward-looking budget. I think if we continue at that pace, Uganda will move forward and we shall be able to reap even more.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to thank the Minister of Finance for his speech. However, I have few observations to make. The Minister mentioned a ban on the polythene bags. We support him on this because of the environmental degradation that has been caused by the polythene bags and plastic materials.  However, the Minister did not - although he said he had put ban on the buveera, he did not elaborate because currently our business community is confused.  

They are saying there is a type of buveera which the Minister banned. For example, we have black, yellow, white polythene bags and also those that people use to carry water. Therefore, the Minister has to explain so that the country knows.  He gave a deadline of 30 September 2007 and since most of business people had already ordered for these items and they had even taken bank loans, they now find themselves in a difficult situation.  The Minister should give them some transitional period, say by such and such a time your stock should be -(Interruption)

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for raising this question because I know there is still some grey hair but I want to assure Members and the public that of course this was a decision taken not only by Uganda, but the entire East African Community and Government.  We are not working alone. In fact, the concern that you are raising is the concern that we are addressing as the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

Today there is a workshop going on where the stakeholders have been invited to discuss the implementation of this ban.  Of course, we requested for a ban. The Ministry of Finance recommended 30 microns of polythene as the lowest.  However, we as a ministry went further and requested for 100 microns that makes it even bigger.  So, we are still trying to synchronise between ourselves because the East African Community recommended 30 per cent and yet we are talking of 100 per cent.  So, we are trying to synchronise between ourselves.

Secondly, we have also -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  You know China sells things here and these things come like – for instance bed sheets are already packed in a kaveera. We get sugar, which also comes in sacks with kaveera inside. We also get salt, which comes packed in a kaveera.  Are you saying that even the imports should not come with a kaveera or you mean just importing the buveeras in the country?

MRS MUTAGAMBA:  Thank you very much. Those are the considerations that we are looking at but in our request as a ministry to Cabinet and finally to Parliament we are saying both, because what we are trying to do is to get rid of kaveera and encourage other industries that can give their substitute to the kaveera. I think those industries are there and you can promote them.  

As for the manufacturers - the 30 micron and even 100 micron is very little and not recyclable.  We are encouraging them to produce those plastics that can be recycled and there is a wide variety of them that can be recycled.  So, we are encouraging the manufacturers who have the small business to upgrade.  Of course, we shall give them time to make sure that their stock is cleared and those are the negotiations that we are having now. If you think you have an input, if you have any experience, please feel free talk to us, to NEMA and to the manufacturers. This is a dialogue and it concerns all of us.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  No, the point was to give them a period to be able to clear the stock they are holding, because they were lawfully producing. You came up with an immediate decision to ban but you did not consider the stock they had and stock in transit where they have incurred loans?  He was inquiring whether the period of September is reasonable in view of the fact that these people were lawfully producing.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Of course those are the points of negotiation. We are trying to see, because we know that our friends in Kenya have actually asked for- up to December. We have got to consult the Minister of Finance and the various ministers of finance in the East African region to give one concrete time frame. If that is accepted-because the guidance comes from the three East African ministers.  But at the same time, we do not want to leave it open ended. Otherwise, if we leave it open ended others will start importing and we have already allocated duties. 

So, about the importation, URA is supposed to be vigilant so that they do not see any more importation. The local governments have also got to make sure that the stores that have – the Bureau of Standards have also – so we have allocated ourselves and Government agencies to make sure that each one plays their part in making sure that we get rid of these small microns of polythene papers. The debate is still on, and I welcome your ideas.

MS ALASO:  Thank you honourable minister and thank you hon. Nsubuga.  The help I really want is, while the ban is the most welcome thing, what is being done now? This is because we have too much quantity of kaveera already in this country which poorly managed. Drainage channels are blocked and soils are really badly affected. So, is there some upcoming programme from your ministry to help with what is already deposited everywhere in the city and the countryside?

MRS MUTAGAMBA:  I am sorry, hon. Minister of Finance, you will have to answer this.  What is happening is that we are designing these programmes together with the polluters and these are the manufacturers and importers and URA that sanctioned the importation, because it is one thing to say we are putting this when other agencies are doing something else.  So, we want to make sure that we are moving together.  

One of the measures is that the polluters must put in place facilities to make sure that whatever is in stock if it is to be exhausted, there is a mechanism to bring it back.  We can facilitate; we can advocate for them; we involve various agencies but the polluters, that is, the manufacturers, should have a mechanism to make sure that whatever have been put in the market has got to come back. Just like with National Water, we put water out, we make sure that we collect it back through sewerage system. So, that is what we are working on now.  

How do the manufacturers become part of the collecting agency, or can they support any other body that is willing to initiate business to collect these plastics?  So, we are working with all of them and the good thing is that they are also positive.  They are positive and they are putting up proposals and I believe in today’s meeting, which is going on- that is where I was in the morning -I hope that we shall come up with something. 

I know we shall come back to Ministry of Finance to ask for a possible extension because there is a lot of pressure from the East African Community. However, at the same time we also want to put proposals to Ministry of Finance which will be accepted, such that these manufacturers actually take on the responsibility of making sure that what has been disposed comes back. So those are some of the measures but at the same time it is advocacy. 

We have agreed that the Minister of Local Government and Minister of Information Communication and Technology should take on more serious roles of sensitising communities. We are also calling upon the civil society to be part of our vigilant movement in eradicating “buveera” and of course we shall come to you with a statement, honourable members, to tell you exactly what measures we are implementing and call upon your support.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much. I hope you have also noted what the Rt Hon. Speaker has said, the business community at least is asking as to negotiate with the other partner states, at least to give them some time, those who had made some importation orders, to be able to finish their stock.

Another point is about agriculture: As much as I appreciate the efforts made by the government in developing agriculture, we all know agriculture is the backbone of the economy and most of our people are in rural areas. The previous governments had organisations like Lint Marketing Board, Produce Marketing Board and the Cooperative Movement, which were marketing agriculture. The most important thing was marketing the produce for the farmer. This Government is now encouraging production. 

Even though I appreciate the achievements of NAADS and other agencies, the local farmer has no market. Honourable members, if you went to Nakasero – for instance, if one went into production of pineapples; pineapples used to come from Bugerere and Masaka. The moment you take them to Nakasero, the first thing the vendor does is to observe the quantity of produce brought. A pineapple that was selling at Shs 2, he will reduce it and give you only 50 cents. I think the government should have an agency. Take Kenya for example, they have the Horticultural Development Authority. It is an authority other than export promotion council, which can deal with crafts and many other things. We need a particular agency to deal with agricultural production and marketing. 

The Minister for Agriculture should make sure that we have a horticultural development authority in this country that will be responsible for marketing. You see marketing is the most important thing.

Mr Speaker, way back in 1987-88, I ventured into exporting matoke to UK. When I ventured, the Asians who were there – I used to stay here and send the Matoke.  The Asian the other end knew I was not there, so he would tell me my matoke was ripe by the time it was delivered. That way you lose a whole consignment. I think the Ministry should learn from other countries. If you went to Europe and visited these markets, you would see various centres of produce from different countries being sold in those markets. I think the Minister for Agriculture should be helped by the Minister of Finance to do this, to promote the export of our agriculture.

I am going also to “Bonna Bagaggawale”. In 1996 elections, we had Kulembeka.  In my constituency, I do not think there are very many people who gained from Kulembeka and I thought that that was a political terminology that was used during elections. In 2001, we had PMA and that one also went into the villages. You cannot see the difference between “Kulembeka” - those people who kulembekad that time - and the PMA. This time we have Bonna Baggagawale. This Bonna bagagawale is very difficult and the best way would be to use cooperative movements, which should not be interfered with Government. In 1986 the government that we replaced had a sick person and that was the cooperative movement. It was not dead. It was only sick.  

RTD MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you Mr Speaker and honourable Member for giving way. The information I want to give the Member is that actually Government is helping people to come together for a common good. We are not appointing managers as was the case and that makes a very big difference from the cooperative today. The co-operators appoint their own people to lead them.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, even before the Minister sits, you are getting all the sub county chiefs, taking them to Kyankwanzi, dressing them in military attire; you are giving them guns to go and manage SACCOS. There is no difference- [Members: “No”] of course, this is what is happening. You can challenge me if –(Interruption)

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, hon. Nsubuga. When you started articulating your point on marketing, I was quite impressed and I agreed with you but when you went further to allege that we have trained sub-county chiefs and armed them, I want to put it on record that you are not right. The sub county chiefs are like extension workers. When you are promoting an activity like “Bonna Bagaggawale”, you must have people to talk to our people. You know what our people are in the villages. The chiefs are going to be mobilisers; they are not going to be managers and this should be on record, for us to move in unison.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the Member is contradicting her boss. Her boss has trained sub-county chiefs to manage SACCOS on sub-county level. I do not see any difference between this Government and the government that used to appoint people to manage cooperative movements. So, I only want to say that –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to put it on record that the syllabus of the chiefs’ training is available and I will be happy to produce it. The chiefs were being taught to understand the principles of the cooperative movement so that they could sensitise and mobilise people to join cooperatives. They are in no way involved. They are being trained by the cooperative alliance. They are the ones who have been teaching in Kyankwanzi and this teaching does not lead to involvement in management at all.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, we have cooperative officers already who are in the ministry of cooperatives and commercial officers. You see -(Interruption)– have some time to listen. So, if these people are there, you are talking of sub-county chiefs as being the ones who are now going to become cooperative officers. You are putting us at a loss. The initial primary societies, which used to exist were not there because of the sub-county chiefs. They were there because the villagers had organised themselves and formed the primary societies. You people came and killed them and you want to revive them. We are saying, “No.” These people are aware. Let them go back and tell them that your cooperatives are there and they will be there. You do not need to dress somebody in army uniform and equip him with a gun.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, we all know that cooperatives had serious difficulties in the 60s, 70s and 80s. Government did not kill them; they died because they were ineffective and unprofitable. What we are trying to do is to teach them to avoid the past problems. If we do not teach them how to improve the organisation, if we leave the people on their own, they will not manage cooperatives. 

For example, a co-operator in my village went to a cooperative meeting soon after Christmas day.  When he came back, I asked him how the meeting went. He told me that when the profits were being distributed, he had been unfortunate; they started from the other end and before they reached him, the profits were finished. This is an indication of how our people need to be trained and taught that money must be properly divided. They must know the members before hand and profits given to everyone, not only where you stand in the line.  This is just an example that our people need training. Otherwise, they will fail again as they failed in the past.  

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, very much.  Mr Speaker, that is why some of us can recall history. If the minister reads the history of cooperative movements in Uganda, he will find out that the people who formed the cooperative societies were not forced or were not told by Government; Government came in only to show them. In fact, the moment Government came in, the cooperative movement died.  

We need cooperatives for the good of this country and we want the cooperative movement to thrive. However, when we say that Government should not intervene in formation of SACCOs and cooperative movements, we ask you to listen because we have experiences. Let people form their cooperative societies and the government can only come in, for example, to give them money for training, but not just to impose sub-county chiefs in army uniforms to manage cooperative societies.

I also want to comment on security and good governance.  Last year when I stood here, I did praise the government for the environment they had given, and also for the difference between the previous regimes and this government in terms of security. I encouraged Government to at least do well where things were not good. Today, Mr Speaker, from last year, when you see how the security agencies are behaving in this country, you shudder.  

Allow me to quote this paper; this is The Daily Monitor newspaper, written on Saturday, 21st July:” What it cost a tax payer to torture a Ugandan”. Up to today, the government of Uganda has never come out to challenge this paper. When you see the top organisation on the torture list, there is the Violent Crime Crack Unit; there is the Police; the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence, the Internal Security Organisation, the Joint Ant-terrorism Task Force, Local Government Prison, local governments, prisoners to prisoners. We are going to appropriate money to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and these security agencies.  Is this what they are going to do to Ugandans?

Mr Speaker, when you go further inside the paper and look at the picture -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD.) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable member that the specialisation is one way of effectively managing issues. That is why we have doctors specializing in dental, in gynaecology, in ENT, and in cardiology. So, these security agencies have a way of specialisation in order to effectively deal with the problem. 

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, with the experience I have, I do not see any difference between the VCCU and Naguru Safety Unit. I do not see any difference between Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence and Nakasero State Research. I do not see any difference between the Makindye Barracks and the Anti-terrorism Squad that we have. We know that there is an organisation like the Police and we know it, and we can appropriate money to it.   

Two weeks ago, a relative of mine, residing in your constituency, had a contract to build a house for somebody and he borrowed money.  The debt went to about Shs70 million and he paid about Shs50 million and there was a balance of Shs20 million. The man who had lent him the money went to the Violent Crime Crack Unit people; since when did the VCCU start collecting debts? 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Nsubuga, I think VCCU started with Col. Kayanja. Did it really serve us during that period?  

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that VCCU or Operation Wembley then did a good job but today we want an organisation, which is well known by this Parliament so that if somebody is arrested, we know who has arrested that person.  But for VCCU to take over the job of collecting debts, the Minister has to tell us. We cannot apportion money in this Parliament to go and torture people. 

I was showing you a picture, Mr Speaker, which I can lay on Table. This is exactly what happened in the regime we replaced. I have people during that time who were being burnt and this regime is doing the same.  This is a July newspaper and Government has not even come to defend or give response to this kind of thing yet we sit here and appropriate funds to go to these agencies to torture people. The minister concerned should be able to explain to this country the security agencies that are responsible for making Ugandans suffer again.

MR EKEMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for his speech, but I want to make a few observations relating to our social security system.  I have heard, from the contributions of members, about our pension scheme. I would like to bring to the attention of the honourable minister that we have workers in the formal sector and the private sector who make their contribution to an institution called the National Social Security Fund. I have been approached by some of the affected people, because they continue to remit 5 percent of their wages and salaries to this fund and of course the employers also contribute 10 percent to this same fund.  

The honourable minister may not be aware that the management of this fund, for three years down the road, has not shown any level of accountability to the beneficiaries of this fund. It has not sent them statements for over three years and it is raising serious suspicion that this huge fund is probably being manipulated somewhere because at the back of their minds, they are aware that this fund at one time was moved from the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development to Bank of Uganda, through the Ministry of Finance. 

So, my request, honourable minister, is that you enlighten us and inform workers in the private sector on how transparent you are, and how transparent NSSF should be to them because there are fears that the deductions that are being remitted may be dropped into a pool that will be mismanaged. 

Honourable minister, you have stated that Government has embarked on a policy of creating a financial infrastructure throughout the country to increase access to safe financial institutions, which I commend you very much for. But my request is that the workers who contribute to these savings fear that institutions such as NSSF are not safe. We would like you to give enlightenment in that regard, because workers have a right to know about their deductions from their salaries, and three years without statements from NSSF to the employees raises a lot of questions on transparency, especially on where these huge funds go.

The second remark that I would like to make is related to what honourable members have already said on polythene bags and plastic containers. I will just add my voice on whatever has been said, advising that we should harmonise our implementation of this ban with other trading partners because the biggest dilemma is that we are not likely to be in control of how those exporting countries package their products before bringing them here. So, unless we harmonise with them, I do not envisage how the honourable minister intends to handle this paradox. My advice is that that harmonisation is an important ingredient.

Lastly, the honourable minister proposes to raise more than Shs70 billion from the Local Government Services Tax and Local Hotels Tax, so as to make up for the steep decline in revenue in local governments. I do appreciate his efforts in trying to enhance local Government revenue but my concern is that whereas we abolished Graduated Tax, which was a direct tax, we are introducing Local Government Services Tax, which I fear is also a direct tax. 

The question comes: How less direct or primitive will this tax be from the Graduated Tax that we have now abolished? I have already envisaged that collection of such a tax is likely to be a problem and that might be the explanation as to why, as you had promised, you are not likely to realise that money this financial year. So, whereas your plan to augment local Government revenue by introducing local services tax is a good one, I still have fears that it might be ambitious and unattainable. 

The other remark is that I do not know how your ministry collaborates the releases that you give to the road sector. I am saying this particularly because I see us not taking advantage of the peace process that seems to be sweeping across and coming from the North. The roads and bridges there are completely bad. 

As we talk, I have received calls from some business people who are stuck on the road. There are about 500 vehicles in Pabo just because the bridge that was worked on a few months ago has been washed away; vehicles are stuck up there, yet we continue releasing money. My fears are that we do not have a monitoring mechanism on how these funds are used, especially after they are released to the responsible ministries. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you comrade, for giving way. The information I would like to give is about the road he is talking about, from Pabo to Atiak. This is where the problem is; people who use that road include people going from Kampala to West Nile, for example, to Adjumani and Moyo and those going to Sudan. 

As I stand, people from Moyo and Adjumani pass through Koboko and Arua to Kampala. That is how miserable and urgent the situation is. And on a very sad note, our colleague, hon. Dr Apiliga, the Member of Parliament for West Moyo constituency, got a terrible accident due to the bad situation there. Honourable ministers and colleagues, we need urgency to help rectify that situation. Thank you.

MR EKEMU: Thank you very much for that information. Honourable minister, my concern was that how do we translate domestic peace to economic gains for the people in that area because apparently their trade had actually picked up but because of poor workmanship on these roads and the bridges, we continue to have these kinds of embarrassments. Thank you.

5.40
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will start by thanking the Minister like all my colleagues have done for this Budget Speech. I want to comment first on the issue of development in the monitoring sector that is on page 5. We want to thank the NRM Government for the efforts it has done in trying to control inflation in this country. It is only unfortunate that over this short period, we have actually continued to experience a lot of inflation and I think the ministry should go further to see exactly how we can be able to control inflation which affects and really hurts the economy. 

The theme of the budget of this year 2007/2008 is really towards “Prosperity for all” and this cannot be achieved when we still have this high inflation. The most affected area or the most hurting area is the area of utilities, electricity bills, and water bills even where water is not provided. I live in the area of Bweyogerere; we have not had water for the all year and sometimes you get it at night but the bill still continues. This one really has to be checked.

On social security and pension reforms, I am happy to hear the Minister coming out clearly that there is going to be a good pension reform; we need this. Like in all other developing countries, people who serve in Government really depend on their pensions to continue the whole life but the situation in which we are is not good at all. People retire and go back to poverty. The money that is collected in the pension scheme should really be organised in such a way that it benefits the person so that when you retire after serving your Government, you should be able to enjoy your life. I really appeal to the Minister to continue to study this situation. I am not saying we should get to speculative business using the pension, but we should really workout and look at ways of improving that retirement package. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. I would like you, honourable member, to clarify to us the comparison of managing services like water supply, particularly electricity supply today in the hands of private individuals versus the management of the same services during the time when Government was in control of the same. Is there any improvement in terms of efficiency? Are we justified in our idea of privatisation to remove the management from Government because of the inability of Government to manage well and give it to the hands of the private manager so that he can manage well? Are we justified in that?

 MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member. I will speak for water because for that one, I am conversant with. I want to apologise to my colleague if for one year he has not been getting water and he has been getting a bill. I think as you drive around Kampala, we have put our customer care No. 977. If you develop any single problem, just call that number and we have a rapid response to your query within the next 24 hours. That is my guarantee to every Ugandan. If it is a matter of talking over the bill, we will make sure that we invite you, and if something has been done erroneously, we shall actually compensate you. That is the guarantee and that is my assurance because we have worked so much to get to that level.

Answering my honourable member on whether there has been a change in terms of efficiency, surely, I want to say that we have- because originally response would take maybe a week, but today, it is within 24 hours. Just call anywhere and say we have water running out, within 24 hours that will be rectified. Even the unaccounted for water has also been reduced. We have a problem right now in National Water because our new water pump developed a problem and got an overflow and as such areas of Kampala may not be getting water but that one is already being rectified and we believe it will soon be thorough. I think we have already sent out messages on radio and papers to make sure that people are aware of where we are working, when we turn off water and so forth.  

Finally, National Water is not a private company; National Water is a public company; we have never commercialised or sold it off. We are only hiring management but it is still under the Ministry of Water and Environment and I am responsible for it. The Board members report to the ministry and all that we do is to give them performance contracts to set standards and say we want you to perform to this level. In order for them to perform to that level, they also translate these standards to the individual employees; to the area managers and employees and in technical terms, that is what we call delegated management. But it is still a public company.  Thank you.

MR TOSKIN: Thank you, Madam Minister for coming in to clarify on what my colleague had said, but of course the question of electricity is still there. I do not want to commit myself to say whether the privatisation of the supply of electricity has improved the situation. Definitely, from my own point of view, I do not think the government still needs to look into this matter. The UMEME and all these other groups who have come in seem not to be under the control of Government. I think Government still needs to re-examine this issue, analyse it from the previous situation so that we can be able to enjoy. I know, of course, there are other factors that are responsible for the short supply of energy as all colleagues know here, but all the same, the management of the issue is questionable. 

On labour and extension, Mr Speaker, we are grateful. The Ugandans are grateful for the NAADS programme and the rolling out of the NAADS programmes to the many sub-counties. At least from my own district, Bukwa, almost all our sub-counties now have NAADS programme. This is a very important intervention by Government, if it can only be properly monitored. This is the only way we can train our farmers. The biggest problem in Uganda is the training of farmers to be given the modern technology to change from their traditional methods of farming into new ones. 

In NAADS programme, you get transfer of technology; people get inputs from the exotic products and use them to improve on the local ones. The only problem is the monitoring of the programme; the programme is very good and if we can monitor it properly and be able to direct it well, I think Uganda will completely change from what it has been, from subsistence into commercial farming.

Mr Speaker, the issue of cooperatives has come, hon. Nsubuga talked about it. The problem is that he is looking so much at the past. We know very well that cooperatives collapsed because of mismanagement; it was not a Government deliberate effort. We had cooperatives like the Sebei-Elgon Cooperative Union, which was one of the best in the country, but with a bad management team and it being over politicised, it collapsed. I am happy that in this budget speech, the minister has come out very clearly to say that cooperative movement has a lot of potentials for this country. I quite agree that when we revive the cooperative movement, we shall be able to organise our people especially in the marketing of their foods. 

The budget speech clearly says that Government is going to try every way possible to train the right people who will sensitise local people and revive the cooperative movement. I think the minister should be commended for this; we only pray that this starts immediately so that our people can begin to organise themselves and market their crops. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.51
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabusozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Finance for a very good budget that he presented. I think this is one of the best budgets that I have seen, at least in the last 5 to 6 years. It was very well thought; it is pro-rural development; it is for the poor and I thank him for that. I also think that it was well presented.

However, Rt hon. Speaker, I am not here to only praise the minister and his budget. I want to point out areas that I think deserve more attention. Quite often, issues are budgeted for, but when it comes to implementation, down the road, things change. I am particularly concerned about my road, the famous Kaguta-Ibanda-Nyakahita road, which has been pending for a long, long time.  Everybody knows how dusty; how rough and how busy that road is; that road deserves being tarmacked. The fact that that road goes to the President’s home, it should not be postponed because the other people who use that road also need services from Government. I, therefore, hope and wish that now that this road has been mentioned in the budget for the first time, it will be done, otherwise we are voters like any other people around this country and I think we deserve attention.

My second point, Mr Speaker is about water. I am glad the Minster in charge of water is here. I want to inform the minister that the whole of Kiruhura District does not have any point where there is running water; we have never seen running water in that district. That is why we have been crying out for it. Kiruhura is one of the driest areas in this country yet it has never been thought about in as far as running water is concerned. 

I want to once again make a genuine plea to Government to think about this very dry area, the area that is as dry as Karamoja. In fact some of the areas are, quite frankly speaking, drier than Karamoja. Therefore, we need water; we need areas where there are permanent sources of water to be protected to provide water to the people in that part of the country.

I want to once again make a genuine plea to Government to think about this very dry area, the area that is as dry as Karamoja. In fact some of the areas are, quite frankly speaking, drier than Karamoja. Therefore, we need water; we need areas where there are permanent sources of water to be protected to provide water to the people in that part of the country.

Thirdly, I want to add my voice to the voices of those people who have been talking about the cooperative movement. I do appreciate the rebirth of cooperatives in this country. I can bear testimony to the success of cooperative unions in terms of mobilising the population to fight poverty. 

I happen to have identified with livestock farmers in this country who came together and formed a cooperative union and literally saved Diary Corporation when it was at the blink of collapsing. These farmers need your attention; they have a viable cooperative union. These farmers have been crying to add value to their milk but instead of Government coming out to help them on the milk prices that continue to go down while prices in Kampala go up-I just cannot understand it. 

We have an investor in the name of SAMEER. We hear from speeches that SAMEER is processing more milk, but in our rural areas SAMEER is taking less milk than what the diary corporation was taking. So, is this a genuine investor; is he really helping the rural poor to add incomes to their livelihoods so that they can do better? We need to get statistics right; it must go on record that SAMEER is doing worse today than diary corporation was doing in terms of giving a service to the rural poor. 

All we hear is that even the rural milk collection centres most of which are in houses that were built with incomes from farmers will now be handed over to SAMEER; not only will the factory in Bugolobi be handed over to this investor, even the milk collection centres at the rural village level are scheduled to be handed over to same investor freely. What is so special about this foreigner who is treasured more than Ugandans who have been producing this product; who need to be empowered and who have shown that they can to do better than is expected of the said investor. 

Anyway, I am grateful that cooperatives are being revived and I would also like to think that Government should stop at training farmers to build their capacity to know what to do. If Government goes beyond that by controlling these cooperatives they will not yield benefits; after all, what is a cooperative union? A cooperative union is a union of willing individuals who corporate but once they are controlled then the corporation just cannot work. So, if Government goes into controlling these cooperatives, we might have see them collapse again. 

My idea is that if we train them- and I support that they be taken to Kyankwanzi for the training- to give them capacity, they can do well and once the farmers are back from the training, they should be left to manage their cooperatives by themselves. I thank you very much for the good budget.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we shall start from here tomorrow. But as I told you, I am worried that this time we may not be on time to finish the process as required by the law. The law requires us to finish the process of estimates by 31st August, but the way I see most of the committees have not produced the reports; there are only 2 or 3 and yet if these reports had been produced earlier they would have helped you in your general debate. We shall look into it and see how best we can handle the situation so that we do not violate the law. But I thank you for the very lively contributions. House adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 August 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)






