Wednesday, 23 August 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

PAPERS

The following Papers were laid on the Table by the Minister of State for Finance, Mr Kisamba Mugerwa.

The Audited Accounts in respect of Uganda Revenue Authority accounts for the year ended 30th June 1993.

The Audited Accounts in respect of Government Central Purchasing Co-operation accounts for the year ended 30th June 1993.

The Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30th June 1993, they are in two volumes.


MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION 
OF THE REPORT ON THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON 
PRESIDENT’S OFFICE AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Mr Chairman, I beg to present for the Council’s consideration and approval of the Report of the Standing Sectoral Committee of this Council on the Office of the President and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  This Report covers the Office of the President that is Vote 001, the State House Vote 002, the Office of the Vice President Vote 003, the Office of the Prime Minister Vote 004, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Vote 006, the National Assembly Vote 015, the Inspectorate of Government Vote 031, Karamoja Development Vote 035 and Cabinet Secretariat Vote 041.  

The report has been circulated and I will not read the whole report, I will only summarise the recommendations from these reports.  The report is in two parts; the first part as you will see as I proceed covers only six ministries and the other three are covered in volume number two which may be circulated in the course of this afternoon.

The Office of the President like other offices in Uganda, operates the cash budget and some of the money is approved by NRC - by the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning without consulting the Ministry responsible for this programme, this made the work of the Office of the President difficult because the money which is used by the Ministry of Finance monthly falls far bellow what is required.  

Regarding recommendations the Sectoral Committee in the Office of the President was very happy to note that the President has reduced his engagement with less senior foreign guests following our last year’s recommendations, some of these foreign guests now meet Cabinet Ministers and Departmental Heads and the Committee feels that this trend should continue.  

The Committee noted that cattle stocking in Teso has not yet taken place despite last year’s recommendation, the Committee thanked the President for the donations of money, vehicles and other items to the organisations especially religious organisations whose work is expected to contribute to spiritual and more improvement in society, however, the criteria for the nations individual person can sometimes be difficult to explain.  The first Presidential pledges now stand at 3 billion and it was a feeling of the Committee that this should be honoured preferably within this financial year, future Presidential donations should be based on the budget and should be paid promptly.  In this respect, the Office of the President is advised to respect recommendations on the NRC and its Committee.  Stage 2 of this report; we have talked about the Minister for Finance sustaining some votes without consulting the Ministries and it is suggested that this habit should stop.  

As we did advise that here, His Excellency the President is once again advised to take hint of the advice from technocrats and other public servants on matters which affect the operations of Government.  The Committee also expressed the view that the role of the Presidential Advisors and Presidential Assistants is rather vague and unless their schedules of work is defined and well know by the Ministries and the public the existence of these Presidential advisor can sometimes get difficulties to justify.  

The Committee was informed by the Ministry of State for Presidential Affairs that, hon. Dr Samson Kiseka has received letters of appointment and was happily carrying out his duties as a Senior Presidential Advisor, the number of Presidential Advisors and Presidential Assistants rose from 12 last year to 15 this year.  Regarding Teso Commission, the Committee noted with satisfaction that the security and food situation in Teso has improved tremendously, but observed that the economy of Teso cannot improve permanently without cattle -(Applause)- the Committee observed that and I quote, ‘Teso is not Teso without cattle’ and urged Government to speed up cattle stocking in this region.  

The Committee also made some recommendations on the Luwero Triangle, there are still many people who claim that their cattle and other items where used by NRM during the bush war and they have not yet received compensation.  Some of them are carrying letters to conform that NRA took their cattle. The Committee recommends that NRA/NRM should pay all the war debts within this financial year. (Applause)  

Regarding the state of the Luwero Relief Fund totaling to UShs 68 billion whose utilisation was not properly accounted for, the Committee was dissatisfied with the way government has handled this matter.  In 1994/95, the Committee has recommended that a Commission of Inquiry be set up to probe the fate of this fund.  However, instead of appointing an independent Commission of Inquiry, government decided to set up an Internal Committee of Civil Servants whose findings were not availed to the NRC Sectoral Committee.  

The Sectoral Committee, therefore, recommends that the Vote for the Minister of State for the Luwero Triangle totalling UShs 133,583,000- should not be approved by the NRC until the report and satisfactory explanation are given by the government regarding the expenditure of UShs 68 billion; and until government can satisfy the Parliament regarding the programme for the settling of Luwero war debts.  Similar claims in other parts of the country should also be settled.  The Committee again on Luwero Triangle was happy to learn that the exercise of burying human skulls in Luwero had ended.  The Committee also recommended that government should consider creation of some field officers under this Ministry, otherwise you have a hanging Ministry, the Ministry without field officers in Luwero Area.  

Regarding security, the Committee met the Minister responsible for the State security and the Directors of ISO and ESO all of whom assured the Committee that Uganda was secure internally and externally.  In order to improve national security during the forthcoming national elections, the Committee recommended some increases as you will be able to see to ISO and ESO.  The Committee was informed that government intends to introduce - has decided to introduce 780 intelligence officers, one per Gombolola, to be known as GISO.  

The Committee felt that there would be too many security officers at Gombolola level and duplication of work can cause confusion in the coordination of security operations which can sometimes lead to insecurity; there would be local Police at the Gombolola, at the same time, there would be Central Government Police, there would be LDUs, there would be RC security, there would be chiefs and there would also be GISOs all doing the same job in one area.  This is too much in an area where there is no insecurity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that government should review this policy because of its financial and security implications.  

The Committee recommended that increased contacts and dialogue with ant-NRM rebels might yield positive results as the case has been in the past.  However, the Minister of State for security expressed reservations about having dialogue with Itongwa, Kony and Juma Oris because of their past criminal records he said.  He also doubted the wisdom of giving general amnesty to former Ugandan leaders some of whom he said had committed grave atrocities against Ugandans.  The Committee expressed concern about inability of government to protect the citizens of Uganda and their properties; citing examples of murders of over 250 Atiak, 45 people in Pajide and other parts of Northern Uganda.  

The Committee recommended that money be availed to deal with some urgent areas of operation such as the repair of the elevator to the Office of the President, to this telephone exchange in the Office of the President, to purchase VIP red carpets and to provide vehicle for the Minister of State for security.  The above items had not been catered for in the budgetary proposals and, therefore, call for special mention to the House.  

The Presidential pledges to the individuals and to groups as well as Presidential pronouncements regarding development projects such as roads, institutions etc. should be made in consultation with relevant to departments.  Presidential advisors should advise His Excellency on these matters.  The Committee was happy to note that in line with last year’s recommendations, His Excellency the President has reduced his trips abroad, and these days sometimes Her Excellency the Vice President and Minister of Foreign Affairs do travel abroad in the place of His Excellency the President and we though this trend should continue.  For those of you who have got this report, I think, the stapling has not been done very well; you can now turn to page 11.  

Vote No.2, State House.  The Committee made a number of recommendations on the State House, especially, on the development budget, and these are all listed on page 11.  The Committee was concerned that the repair of State House in Entebbe has been rather low and expressed a desire to visit the area when time is available.  Now, we can go back to page 7, Vote 003, Office of the Vice President.  The Committee commended Mzee Dr Samson Kisekka for the exemplary services he rendered to the nation as Vice President and wished him happy retirement. (Applause)  

The Committee thanked His Excellency the President for keeping Mzee Kisekka in active service by appointing to the prestigious post of Senior Presidential Advisor to His Excellency the President. (Applause)  

The Committee also congratulated Her Excellency the President, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe on her promotion to the high office of the Vice President and wished Her every success. (Applause)  

The Committee was happy to note that a suitable official residency for Her Excellency the Vice President has been found in Nakasero as recommended last year, and recommended supplementary estimates of UShs 900,000,000- for the purchase of the house.  The Committee commended Her Excellency the Vice President for the way she is moving to different places of Uganda and recommended an increase to her Vote of contribution to local organisation from UShs 30 million to UShs 48 million to increase her donations to deserving groups especially, such as widows and orphans.  

The Committee also recommended allocation of UShs 10 million for the internal telephone switchboard because at the moment all telephone calls to the Office of the Vice President pass through the Post Office, even when you are going to call someone next to your office, because there is no telephone switchboard; this is very expensive and also insecure, it is very difficult to keep secrets within the Office of the Vice President.  

The Committee was, however, not happy with some of the public statement made by Her Excellency the Vice President on issues which are politically and diplomatically sensitive.  The Committee advised that Her Excellency the Vice President avoid being too confrontational and should use diplomatic language since she is a mother of all.  Consequently, the Committee recommended that she should be given competent Vice Presidential Advisors in politics and protocol.  

Page 9, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The Committee was happy to note that Uganda has opened new missions South Africa, Tokyo and Geneva and was also informed that for economic reasons, the mission in Lusaka is being closed purely for economic reasons.  The Minister of Affairs assured the Committee that Uganda’s relations with other countries was good.  He, however, admitted that relations with Sudan are not good and that relations with Zaire could be better.  He denied allegations that Uganda was aiding rebels from neighbouring countries; he said some of Uganda’s neighbours might be envious of he successes in political and economic development.  However, the Committee recommended that government should continue to explore avenues to peaceful solutions between Uganda and her neighbours especially Sudan and Kenya.  

The Committee was happy to note that Government accepted the Committee’s recommendation of last year not to close Uganda’s Missions in Havana, Cuba and Tripoli in Libya. (Applause)  So, these Missions are now open and will continue to be open.

Number 5; the Committee as we did last year urges government to pay all international debts to enable Ugandans delegation to participate in the debate in other forum.  The Committee repeated it’s last year’s recommendations that the education of children of foreign service officers should be reviewed because the kind practice of keeping these children in Uganda while one of their parents is in a Mission abroad tends to separate husband and wife and can cause social problems between the two.  

The Committee noted with disappointment the slow pace in the initiative to review East African Community and recommended the first pace in the revival of the same.  The Committee recommends that Uganda should start opening trade Missions in as many countries as it is necessary to assist Ugandans who are involved in business with many countries and to encourage foreign businessmen who wish to operate business in Uganda.  The Committee noted that since 1986; NRC Members and their spouses have been using VIP lounge at Entebbe International Airport without first getting clearance from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

Since early 1995 the Ministry of foreign Affairs has introduce new regulations requiring NRC Members to get advanced clearance from the Ministry of foreign Affairs, since there few NRC Members who uses the VIP lounge at Entebbe and because of the difficulties involves in the implementation of the new requirements, the Committee decided that the VIP status according to the NRC Members and their spouses since 1986 should continue. (Applause)  

Similar VIP treatment should also be accorded to cultural leaders and National Religious Leaders.  Karamoja, the Committee was informed by the Minister for Finance that this Vote 035 which we shall be discussing later refers to the Ministry of State for Karamoja Development and not to the Karamoja Development Agency.  In this Ministry, the KDA is programme 01, Item 6040; we are spelling out this very clearly because there has been some misunderstanding between the executives of KDA and the Ministry responsible for Karamoja Development.  Therefore, the previous - which regarded this Vote 035 as that one of KDA was faulty, the Committee noted that there is this harmony in the working relationship within the leadership of Karamoja, since the Committee strongly urges the leaders of Karamoja to work together for the good of the region.  

The Committee recommended that government should step up the funding of Karamoja programmes in order to reduce the current heavy dependence on the donor community.  Social recommends that there should be more transparency and accountability in handling all funds for Karamoja region.  The government should review the mandate of both the Ministry of State for Karamoja and the KDA with a view to stream-line their roles and relationships because some of the misunderstandings among the leaders of Karamoja is really the problem of the dividing line between the two.  The Committee recommended that the Minister of State for Karamoja should present to the NRC a Ministerial Statement on the current state of affairs in Karamoja region.  

We now move to volume two with the same report.  The Committee was informed that the development that the NURP Project in Northern Uganda has been disrupted by the rebels activities there and the Committee once again observed the dialogue between government and rebels should not be ruled out for possible solutions to the military and political conflicts in the region.  Regarding the responsibility of Prime Minister’s Office in possession of activities of the Uganda Veteran’s Assistance Board for the retrenched NRM Personnel the Committee observed that the final package given to each mobilized soldier is only 5,58935 shillings, 20 roofing iron sheets and five rigs.  That this final package is far below the minimum required to integrate the soldier in civilian life, the Committee, therefore, recommends:

(a)	That we have an up-ward division of the present final package.

(b)	Paying of the longer waited gratuity to all the mobilized NRA soldiers should be effected.

(c)	Government should give consideration to all ex-service men and women who have served in different armies of Uganda since Independence for the purpose of giving them all gratuity as indicated in (b) above instead of considering NRA soldiers only.

It was also recommended that the 20 iron sheets which are gauge 26 given to the soldiers should be repressed by the normal size used by ordinary people the size of gauge of 30 or 32 so that the soldiers can have some spare iron sheets if we use the same money because most of the ordinary people do not use gauge 26 in our houses in the villages.  

The Committee noted that the Minister of State resident in Northern Uganda that is Mrs Betty Bigombe, has not ben attending Parliament for a very long time, it was recommended that she makes a statement in the NRC about the pacification of the North.  The Committee noted that there is no official residence for the Prime Minister and recommended that government should provide residential premises fitting the status of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  The Committee noted the inadequate of the Votes on transport inland and transport abroad and recommended the supplementary provision.  The Committee expressed concern about the poor roads in the NURP area and recommended that the roads especially Kafu to Karuma and Karuma to Arua be repaired and surfaced immediately.  The Committee advised the Prime Minister to take step to ensure that NURP areas are not hit by famine again as was the case in 1994/95.

Vote 015, the National Assembly, observation by the Committee.  The Committee congratulated hon. Ekemu former Deputy Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Council for his elevation to the high office of the Minister of Justice and Attorney General and wish him success. (Applause)   

The Committee also welcomes hon. George Cosmas Adyebo as a new Deputy Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Council and wish him success in his new assignment.  The Committee noted that the top floor of the Parliamentary Building has not been repaired despite last year’s recommendation and recommended that it should be repaired immediately otherwise the whole Building may collapse on people working in here.  

The Committee was happy to note that many of the torn chairs that is the benches in the NRC Chamber have been repaired and recommended that all torn benches inside the Chamber and in the lobby should be repaired.  The Committee learned that fire expert have recommended that the Parliamentary Building needs fire equipments immediately. The Committee recommended that these requirements be put right immediately.  The Committee also recommended the speeding up of the production of the Hansard. It was also noted that the photocopying machine in the NRC rarely works and the duplicating machine is broken down now and again and the typewriters in this building are old fashioned.  The Committee recommended that secretarial service for NRC and its Members should be improved through replacement and repair of the old office equipments in the National Assembly because it is cheaper to do photocopying and typing internally instead  of paying for these services externally, it is also unsafe and some of the confidential work should not be done out side Parliament.  The Committee recommended supplementaries for the repairs of Parliamentary Building, furniture and office equipments and the purchase of new items as indicated in the above.

Inspectorate of Government.  The department has depended largely on external fundings it was recommended that government should step in so that we can introduce some independence in the department.  The Committee made the following recommendations that the IGG should find a way of exposing corrupt political leaders instead of harassing civil servants only, so far no political leader has been punished for corrupt practices through exposure by the Office of the IGG.  

Following decentralisation of services to district the Committee recommended that IGG establishes branch offices at regional levels initially and at district level when funds permit, corruption and GISO office are likely to be decentralised to districts as well.  The Committee recommended that the Leadership Code Committee to - corruption in high office should be appointed immediately.  The Committee as it did last year recommended that a person to occupy the office of the IGG should be similar to a Judge ideally he should not be a functionally of a political party or political group in power, the current IGG, Mr Ruzindana assured the Committee that if he is elected in the forth coming elections, he will not become IGG at the same time.  The IGG admitted that there maybe corruption by political leaders but it is difficult to catch them because the law is deficient on this subject, the IGG lamented that because of the deficiency, in the laws related to corruption it may not be easy to convict the alleged embezzlers of the public funds in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, equally it maybe difficult to convict persons who may have been involved in the disappearance of part of 68 billion shillings of Luwero funds.  

Cabinet Secretariat.  This is a small department whose projected recurrent provision shows a short fall of 42 million 447 thousand shillings excluding salaries and domestic arrears, no development money has been provided although the office equipment required would cost 17 million shilling.  The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance discuss this matter with the responsible department with a view to providing supplementary funds for the required goods and services.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

CONSIDERATION OF RECURRENT ESTIMATES

Programme 01

Programme 02

Programme 03

Programme 04

Programme 06

Programme 07

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to report that Programme 07 has been split into two security services, Programme 07 is not Internal Security Organisation and the Paper has been circulated.  And External Security Organisation is Programme 14 and the Paper has also been circulated, so as we discuss Programme 07 will not use this book, will use one which has just been circulated to the hon. Members.  It has been circulated, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Minister hon. Kisamba Mugerwa to clarify the issue.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, this is only splitting the Vote which are already in the estimate, so we have no objection as far as those items he has mentioned.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, we have circulated to the hon. Members the split of Programme 07; security services into two, it was found that it is difficult for the two security organisation to operate together, so Programme 07 now remains Internal Security Organisation and it has been circulated I think it is one Programme 07 and then after that when we come to 14, we shall discuss Programme 14, but then 7 is not shown here, it is a different one which has been circulated, and this was done by the Ministry of Finance. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Does it have any change in the figure?

DR TIBERONDWA:  It does not change the total sum, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, it has nothing -(Interjection)- order please, it does not change anything; then proceed.

Programme 10

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I rise to seek some clarification as the hon Chairman of the Sectoral Committee and on behalf of the Committee recommending that this particular Vote should not be approved until that is UShs133, 583,000 until satisfactory explanations are given by government regarding the expenditure of UShs68 billion.  I consider and I would like to conquer here with the Committee’s recommendation to this august House that this be - because normally when we are budgeting we make reference to what had earlier on been spent so that from that we know where we are going.  May I now know through you, Mr Chairman, whether the hon. Minister is in position to satisfy this House that we should pass this Vote?  I beg to question, Mr Chairman.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, in the rules governing this House and with due respect to the Sectoral Committee we can only recommend and the recommendation had been taken in not of by the Minister of Finance and they had been put before the Government together with many others in due course, as of now, we should only go with what was estimated for because that goes within the envelope available to us and I beg that the hon. Members should accept that explanation in good spirit.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 23,431,497,000 under Vote 001 of the Office of the President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 101 - OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

PROJECT NAME: GENERAL ELECTION 1995

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 13,000,000 under Head 101 of Office of the President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 002 - STATE HOUSE

Programme 01

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 9,178,144,000 under Vote 002 of State House be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 003 - OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT

Programme 01

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 866,522,000 under Vote 003 of the Office of the Vice President be provided for,

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 004 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

Programme 01

Programme 03

Programme 04

Programme 05

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 1,087,551,000 under Vote 004 of the Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)


DEVELOPMENT ESTIMATES

OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

PROJECT NAME: FOOD AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT IN NORTH WESTERN UGANDA

PROJECT NAME: NURP AGRICULTURE

PROJECT NAME: EDUCATION AND TRAINING NURP

PROJECT NAME: COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAMME NURP

PROJECT NAME: CO-ORDINATION, MONITORING AND EVALUATION UNIT NURP

PROJECT NAME: URBAN SERVICES

PROJECT NAME: FEEDER ROADS

PROJECT NAME: HIGH WAYS NURP

PROJECT NAME: URBAN AND RURAL WATER AND SANITATION

PROJECT NAME: POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROGRAMME

PROJECT NAME: THE MOBILIZATION GROUP

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 5,002,800,000 under Head 104 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 - MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Programme 01

Programme 02

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 17,072,665,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 015 - NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Programme 01

Programme 02

Programme 03

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 7,298,811,000 under Vote 015 of National Assembly be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 031 - INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

Programme 01

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 945,049,00 under Vote 031 of Inspectorate of Government be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 035 - KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT

Programme 01

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 420,936,000 under Vote 035 of Karamoja Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ANIMAL WATER SUPPLY KARAMOJA

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 173,700,000 under Head 135 for Karamoja Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 041 - CABINET SECRETARIAT

Programme 01

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 227,889,000 under Vote 041 of Cabinet Secretariat be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following Vote; 001,002,003,004,006,015,031, 035 and 041 and Head 101,104 and 135 and has passed them without amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.n.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 August 1995 Thursday at 2.30 p.m.)

