
Wednesday, 21 August 2002

Parliament met at 3.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today we are gathered here for a special sitting of Parliament. We are here to pay tribute to the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko, former Vice Chairman of the Military Commission, who died on 18 August this year. 

We would like to first of all apologise for the delay and inform you that we had a logistics mishap. That is what has caused the delay. We have started late because we expected the Police band to be here with us, but they are still on their way. Under the circumstances, however, we would like to proceed with the session. 

I would like to ask all of us to stand up for the National Anthem when the body is brought in. We shall sing the National Anthem, which will be led by Capt. Babu - (Laughter). 

(Entrance of the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko)
National Anthem (One Verse)
Laying of Wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE BRIG. GAD WILSON TOKO, FORMER VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE MILITARY COMMISSION

THE VICE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Dr Wandira Kazibwe): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to move that it be resolved by the Parliament of Uganda, duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 21st day of August 2002 that:

WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the demise of Brig. Gad Wilson Toko, former Vice Chairman of the Military Commission, which occurred on Sunday, 18 August 2002, and;

WHEREAS the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko has had a distinguished career as a political leader, pilot, administrator and golfer, who deserved recognition of this Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda do hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the entire nation upon the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda;

And do further register its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that he has, in the course of his life, rendered to the people of this nation. 

I beg to move.

PROF APOLO NSIBAMBI: Seconded!

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Madam Speaker and honourable members of this House, before us in this august House lies a son of Uganda who has distinguished himself.

As we sit here and recall the history of our country, we know that many before us have been called to have their metal tested. Many have been called to go through fire for the sake of the people of this country. The late Gad Wilson Toko is one such Ugandan. So, it was with great shock that I learnt of his death. Being a noble son of this country, great shock went through all of us who knew him. 

I must say that I had personally not known him as a leader, or worked with him for a long time. I however testify here that during the presidential elections, I had the opportunity to chair the advisory team that was co-ordinating His Excellency’s election campaign. I found him, old as he was - much older than me - to be a man of humility. 

He was a man who actually respected authority, because as you know, in this country, there are many people who do not respect authority of whatever level. He would listen, give guidance and give his advice free of fear or favour. I want to say that during that time, I did learn to respect him greatly. Not only did he show humility during the meetings, but he went down to the ground and sat with the people, moving from house to house to talk to them. 

He believed that there was a future in the Movement Government. He believed that there was a future in the kind of leadership that we have at this time and that it needed to continue.  

Madam Speaker, this is a time when we should actually salute all those Ugandans who at one time or another have been part of the struggle and have been humble enough to say, “I have served, there is a leadership now, let me sit down with this leadership and see what we can do for this country together.” 

As a country, we do indeed mourn a statesman whose contribution to this nation will always be remembered and applauded. 

The late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko was a man of great achievement, who indeed excelled in his service at whatever level in the country. At this time, while we are struggling to educate our children and show what professionalism is, and to show ethical conduct in our profession, the late Brig. Toko’s contribution in this endeavour will remain tested and re-tested and found not wanting.  

He did make a big contribution to the profession of pilots. At the time he joined this profession, many people did not know that you needed courage, you needed to be a person of valour, you needed to be a leader to go into a profession which at the time was thought fit for the white man. 

In the choice of our professions, let us emulate Gad Toko in the way he has shown leadership in what professionalism should be. In whatever you do, whether as a leader, a pilot, an engineer, a doctor, a teacher, a nurse or a sweeper; indeed we cannot do away with whoever has something to do in the call to serve this country.

I want to say that the late Brig. Toko’s contribution to peace in Uganda has left a legacy, which legacy has not been on the airwaves. It is our time to sing his name in recognition of that particular contribution when our country was in the high seas - of course in Uganda I would say in the waves of Lake Victoria. We know when there is a storm and what those waves can do to people sailing on that lake. 

We all know that he did participate in the Moshi Conference in 1979. There are many gallant sons and daughters of this country who made a contribution at that time when the Movement spirit was supposed to have been implanted into Ugandans. But something happened somewhere and it was not to be, because whereas man plans, it is God who disposes. 

And this has been the philosophy of Gad Wilson Toko; when it is time for something to happen, it will happen and indeed it did happen to him. We see him lying there. None of us knew that he was going to go so soon and so suddenly.

He did not only stop at the peace talks, he led the Military Council to the Nairobi peace talks in 1985. Further efforts to bring peace within the northern region at his initiative are also to be highly commended. 

Indeed, when we worked together during the campaigns, this was what he was telling people wherever he was going, “we need peace, we are all Ugandans, this is our country; let us work together to build it.”  

If he was here to speak, I am sure that would be the call he would still be sounding to all those who are still fighting peace and choosing conflict, those who are fighting not for the good of our people but for the sake of fighting. 

Toko experienced turmoil outside the country. I know a good number of you have lived in exile.  East, west home is best. He did stay out for a good ten years but accepted the gesture of the NRM Government and returned to Uganda. This is further testimony of his love for his country.

Madam Speaker, I want to say here that while we are doing this and getting these mishaps, it is paramount that we get a system that puts into place ways and means of honouring our leaders, not only political leaders or military leaders, but leaders in every way. In that vein, Cabinet has directed the Minister of Public Service to put before it for consideration a policy to this effect.  

While that is being done, the state, in accordance with the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act 21 of 1998, recognised the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko as a former Vice President and ensured that he enjoyed the privileges due to him. We are here to therefore mourn a man who loved not only his home in West Nile, but had the peace of the nation at heart.  

The country has lost a great man, and we can only emulate his good example of hard work and higher achievement; somebody who targets and knows where he was going and who loves peace. We should all emulate his passion for being meticulous and disciplined, and his passion for humanity and life. Indeed, he died when he was going to attend to a golf tournament. 

May the Almighty God rest his soul in peace! I beg to move. 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, the late Brig. Toko was a candid professional pilot, an effective sportsman and a political leader who participated effectively in the process of political reconciliation.  

Although Brig. Toko was Vice Chairman of the Military Council, I had never interfaced with him closely. However, when the Military Council went out of power, he left Uganda. I discovered him in Sweden when I went to attend a conference on human rights. Indeed, I presented a Paper at the conference on the major causes of violation of human rights in Uganda, a Paper that has been published in a book. 

He was politically alienated when I met him along with other Ugandans. We candidly discussed Uganda’s problems from 5.00p.m. to 3.00a.m. I had discussions in my personal capacity as a Professor from Makerere University.  I discovered that he was a good listener, a discerning judge of issues and a candid person. 

I am pleased to inform you that as a result of my discussions with him, plus the intervention of other people, he voluntarily came back to Uganda and was accorded the benefits befitting a former Vice President. 

The tragic death of Brig Gad Wilson Toko, Mrs Christine Kania and the two drivers has once again highlighted the urgency of all Ugandans to work together and institute measures that can greatly minimise accidents. This is an urgent national appeal. 

It is gratifying to note that under the Movement Government, former political leaders like His Excellency Lukongwa Binaisa, His Excellency the late Tito Okello, His Excellency Adirisi Mustafa, the late Otema Alimadi, the late Brig. Wilson Toko and others have returned to Uganda and have been accorded political recognition and material assistance. Furthermore, their security has been guaranteed by the state. These measures have enhanced political reconciliation, which is a necessary condition or facilitator of national integration and harmony. 

I wish to convey my sympathy to the relatives of the bereaved family. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved families! I beg to support the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice President.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Brig. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, mine is going to be a very brief life history of the late Brig. Toko. 

Brig. Gad Wilson Toko was born on 1 January 1943 at Anyamgba in Terego County, Arua District to Joshua Adelo, the father, and Priscilla Puzro, the mother. Because his father was a catechist whose station of duty often changed, the late Toko studied in many primary schools between 1949 and 1955. He finally completed his primary education in Arua Demonstration School in 1955. 

From 1956 to 1957, the late Brigadier did his junior secondary school in Mvara Junior Secondary School, Arua. 

In 1958, the late Brig. Toko was admitted to Sir Samuel Baker Senior Secondary School where he had his secondary education. The school was in the then Acholi District, now Gulu District. He completed those studies in 1961. 

He then joined Kampala Technical Institute and stayed there for two years, 1962 to 1963. During that same year, 1963, he was recruited by East African Airways to do an apprenticeship with them. 

In 1964, the late Brigadier joined the Army as an air force cadet, and after that he was sent to the Soviet Union where he trained as a pilot for two years. 

Between 1967 and 1970, the late Toko worked with Soviet experts in Uganda Air Force as an aeronautic expert. He was based in both Gulu and Entebbe air bases. 

In 1971, he was appointed Uganda Air Force Commander, and while there he was able to form a formidable air force. 

In 1972, after having got newly married, the late Gad Toko was sent to Egypt, a trip he thought was a honeymoon gift from the Government. While in Cairo, he received a fax message through his host, Hosni Mubarak, then Air Force Commander now President of Egypt, that his services as Air Force Commander had been terminated. After being relieved of his duties, he went and settled in West Nile. 

In 1973, the late Toko was appointed Director General of East African Airways, a post he held until 1976 when the airline collapsed. But before the collapse of the airline, he was sponsored by the Boeing Aircraft Company to go to Fortsworth, Texas in the United States to convert from a military pilot to a civilian pilot. 

Since his removal as Air Force Commander, the late Gad Wilson Toko had a strained relationship with Idi Amin. Some prominent sons and daughters of West Nile, like Capt. Aswa, Capt. Onzima, Lt Avudria, Lt Col Mike Ondoga, Amin’s own wife the late Kay Amin, and close relatives of late Toko had either mysteriously disappeared or been killed. These events naturally scared him stiff. So, in 1977 the late decided to go into exile to the United States. 

While in exile, the late Gad Toko worked as a research associate in the University of Pittsburgh in the State of Pennsylvania. At the same time, he studied for a Masters degree in Business Administration. In 1977, he authored a Paper on Soviet intervention, with Uganda as a case in point. He also taught international relations at that university. 

In 1979, the late joined the Moshi Conference as a deputy to Godfrey Binaisa, who was the chairman of one of the anti-Amin groups in North America. 

From 1979 to 1985, the late served as General Manager of Uganda Airlines. 

In 1985, the Chairman of the Military Council, the late Tito Okello Lutwa, appointed Brig. Toko as his deputy in the Ministry of Defence. He was also promoted to the rank of Brigadier. He also initiated reconciliation meetings between the West Nile and Acholi elders in 1986.

Sadly, in 1986 the late Toko had to leave for exile for the second time. He left through Juba in southern Sudan, where he met me, and continued to Britain where he lived until 1995. 

While in Britain, he studied French language and electronic computing. He did consultancy work in aviation management and business management, and he also worked with African voluntary community organisations. 

The late Toko was the co-founder of West Nile Welfare Association and treasurer of the same association in London. He was heavily involved in community organisations promoting cultural and educational activities that encourage unity among various ethnic organisations. 

May Brig. Toko, Mrs Kania and others’ souls rest in eternal peace! Amen.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Henry Oryem Okello): Madam Speaker, honourable members, fellow countrymen, here lies in state the ultimate officer and a gentleman; here lies a father, husband and young but elderly leader; here lies a friend, a true friend; here in state lies the remains of the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko.

Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, friends, I came to know the late Brig. Wilson Toko when I was about 8 years old. He was a regular visitor to our home, and he was always there at military functions and a guest to our home promptly.

I got to know him better when he served under my late father as Vice Chairman of the Military Commission, and the years that followed while in London. The late Brig. Toko gave me strength and courage by his guidance, advice and support during out times in London.

The late Toko made the brave and bold step to return to Uganda from exile under the very government that had just sent him to exile. This was an example of reconciliation and harmony, the likes of which are not seen in Uganda. Let us salute him! This was the kind of gesture that this country badly needed to bring peace, tranquillity and harmony to this country. This was the kind of gesture only an officer and a gentleman would make.

It was his return from exile that gave confidence to people like me to also follow his example to return to serve our country. It is my wish and prayer that even in death, he will be an example who will be followed by others who are still in exile and for one reason or the other choose not to return. May those who are in exile take Toko’s example to also make their move to return to Uganda and reconcile with the Movement Government!

When I was appointed State Minister in charge of Sports, the late Toko took a lot of interest in my portfolio because of his love for golf in particular, and sports in general. He always suggested ideas and proposed to me the way forward in sports, and I always took his advice seriously.

Like most of us here, I was stunned and shocked when I was informed that Toko had died in a motor accident. My late mother died in a motor accident also. So, I feel for his family, I feel for his children.

I salute the late Brig. Wilson Toko. I salute this officer and gentleman. May his soul rest in eternal peace!  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Madam Speaker, honourable members, let me start off with the expression used by the former speaker, indeed Brig. Gad Wilson Toko was an officer and a gentleman.

I knew him when he was in the Air Force before he became the commander. Thereafter, they brought him as the first pilot CEO of the East African Airways, where most of us were then pilots. That was to our happiness, because for the first time, there was a CEO who was a pilot by profession. 

The establishment had not accepted most of us who had joined this profession, and a lot of the indigenous trained pilots were frustrated.  There are many stories you have heard about the East African Airways, including that of names being European and people thinking that the pilot was a white man. 

When Brig. Toko came, he made sure he created harmony with the people who were then in the airline to accept indigenous pilots. During his period of tenure as a CEO of the East African Airways, a lot of us became airline captains. Until then, it was thought that Africans could not fly aeroplanes.

He worked out a relationship between the indigenous pilots and the then senior pilots who were in the airline. They eventually accepted us, and we registered as young captains on the biggest jet at the time, which was the VC-10. Capt. Roy and Capt. Newman were the first captains of those airlines. And there was the famous story of the then Attorney General thanking Capt. Newman for having landed so well in Nairobi.
  
Having been a jet fighter and a commander of the army, this man had other attributes. He had a sportsmanship spirit. He was a man who lived by his training. Pilots are trained with certain discipline, and he had been to all the colleges that trained senior air force commanders. I am quite sure some of the air force officers whom he worked with will testify to this.

He was friendly and kind. I got to know him even better when he became a family friend. In my home the children knew him as “Uncle Willy”; even the day he died, my kids called me and said, “Uncle Willy has died”.      

The other day when I had a function of my daughter, “Uncle Willy” attended. This was the first time he had come to my homestead, and he graced the occasion. We had a friendship that has lasted for over 30 years; I visited him in the United States and I visited him in Britain. 

He was a very strong family man, he loved children and the children loved him. Those who played golf with him will testify. He was one of those very few people who had discipline, even in games. And when he was your friend, and I think this is true for all the people who come from that area, when they are your friends, they are friends indeed - (Applause)- and Toko was a friend. 

I am very grateful to this Government for having recognised Brig. Toko, not because he is a professional friend, but because of what he has done. He made our profession proud. He was sincere to himself, he loved where he came from and he loved this country. Even when we met abroad, he always talked about home. We will miss him. 

He has been a very good friend and a professional colleague. I would like to thank the Government for having accorded him a State funeral, and I hope this will go all the way even to other deserving people - (Applause). 

I am quite sure his friends who were in the air force in the 1960s, when we had one of the best air forces in this region, will remember him well. I hope we rise again and have such an air force with such gentlemen flying those aeroplanes. 

May I send my sincere condolences to the bereaved family, the relatives and his friends. I am quite sure most of his friends in the air force will miss him greatly. May his soul rest in eternal peace, and may perpetual light shine upon his soul. Thank you.
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall continue to thank Government where it is due. Human life is indeed sacred, and that is why the protection of human life ranks high in the Ten Commandments of God. 
When we talk of human rights at whatever level, the basic right is respect for human life. For this reason, therefore, on behalf of the people of Maracha Constituency where the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko hails from, I want to thank the Government. Under the leadership of His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Government provided genuine security for the Late Brigadier - (Applause). 
If that had not happened, if the Brigadier had died under unclear circumstances, a lot of questions would have been raised locally and internationally. Because he is a person who served under Idi Amin, he is a person who served under the late Gen. Tito Lutwa and he is a person who participated in the failed Nairobi Peace Talks, he is known. 
I want to emphasize once again that I thank Government, sincerely, for having provided security for our late brother. That is why I say that for us in Maracha we give credit where it is due. Where it is not due, we say, “sorry.” This time it is really due and it is genuine.
I also thank Government for not only providing security for the late Brigadier but for making it possible for him to sustain his family after he had come back from exile. That is also very important, because these are some of the experiences we had never seen before. This one also came under the leadership of the same President, His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. We thank him for that. 
I also want to go on record here that when President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was told of the tragedy, despite his tight schedule officially and personally, he had time to call on the mourners at the late’s residence in Bunga. We also thank him for that gesture - (Applause). In fact, in a meeting following the late Toko’s death, the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Premier was in touch with the President who blessed the State funeral.
Having said that, I want to reiterate here that as it has been mentioned, the late was a highly trained professional in both civil and military aviation. That is why it was easy for him to serve in various capacities, both here and outside this country. 

The Second Deputy Premier summarised the curriculum vitae of the late however, in a situation like we are in now, when Government wants to professionalise the Army, I will say we missed a very big opportunity by not employing the vast experience and skills of the late Brig. Toko.  He would have been a very useful person in this exercise of Government wanting to professionalise the army, and it would have been cheaper for this country. 

I believe there are many other Ugandans outside there who have the skills and the experience. So, I will urge Government to look for such Ugandans so that whatever good thing we want to do for Government, we can use the services of these Ugandans. It will cost us less and we will move forward.  That is my advice to Government.

The late Brig. Toko had a huge heart for peace as has been said. I recall very vividly that in the meeting, which was alluded to here, which he convened in Arua with the Arua elders in 1985, I was present. I was a youth then, but the people of Maracha voted me to be among the elders from Maracha County at that time, which was a creation of the late Gen. Tito Okello. 

There was an exercise that was conducted in Arua and he wanted representatives of elders to be elected from the various counties so that in case of anything, he would consult them. So, I was one of them, and I had the opportunity to participate in that meeting.

When we held the meeting, which he chaired, he said, “I have summoned you here” - and there were so many soldiers around who were carrying guns. These were soldiers who were defeated in Kampala and had retreated, and you can imagine how hostile a fugitive soldier can be, especially when he is still carrying his gun. 

The late Toko told us, “You are free to say anything that you think will help our region. Do not fear the soldiers. Your security is guaranteed, speak out your mind without fear or favour.” And he briefed us about the failed Nairobi peace talks, and that we needed a way forward.

We told him that we had suffered enough in West Nile. We went through the Amin Government; when Amin was overthrown, we were forced into exile by circumstances. It was when the late Tito took over power that we had an opportunity of peace, because he summoned all the fighting forces, the rebels, to come and join hands with him in Government. So, we wanted that one to continue. 

So, we told him that “you lay down your arms, get to your homes, settle, we want to see what the new Government is going to come up with.” He listened, and that is why there was no fighting in West Nile. Probably you know some isolated cases here and there, but that is when Museveni took over power here in Kampala. 

Here is a man who commands a lot of respect, the manpower was there, they had the guns, but because we advised him so, he just left the country and his name has never been associated with any rebellion. You have heard of several rebellions in the north, but his name has never featured in any rebellion in the north. So, that is why I strongly believe that the late had a huge heart for peace.

The late Brig. Toko, like many other military and civil officers in the pre-Movement governments, chose to marry outside West Nile; that is very important. In Uganda we have a problem of tribalism and ethnicity. So, when we intermarry, when a Lugbara marries a Munyankole or an Itesot, and a Karimojong marries from Fort Portal, that minimizes tribalism in this country - (Applause). 

If I married a lady who is not a Lugbara, I am not going to talk Lugbara to that lady; we are going to find some other language in order to communicate. And that brushes aside my tendency of being so lugbaralistic or whatever. So, you will be in a position to help the relatives of that lady, either by means of education, putting up structures for them, looking for employment for them and so on and so forth, which to me is very important. 

We need it in Uganda here, but it is rather disappointing that now people tend to go for inbreeding. It is not the same practice that used to be in pre-NRM governments; it is a different story. We are going back to square one. So, we should fight that one.

Finally, if past leaders, who mainly came from the north, were backward, barbaric, murderers, primitive or swines the late Brig. Toko was not one of those. He was not one of those because as a swine he would not have survived in the advanced world.  As a murderer, he would not have survived in the advanced world.  

Indeed, from West Nile we have many other leaders - not West Nile alone but even in the north - who had this clean record, like the late Barnabas Kili, who was the then Minister of Education. You will recall, after the fall of Idi Amin, he was pushed to Luzira but it was Makerere University students who fought hard that Government should set him free because he had a clean record. 

As of now, we have the retired Maj. Gen. Emilio Mondo; he is with us here. Nobody runs after him because he has a very clean record. We have the retired Lt. Col. Obitre Gama, who also hails from Maracha, a man of integrity and a very clean record. We have many more others. So, we should not lump all past leaders as swines and murderers just because they come from the north.  

May the soul of the late Brig. Toko rest in peace, and may the Almighty God sustain his family! Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After the well articulated presentations by Her Excellency the Vice President, Dr Specioza Naigaga, and the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister of Uganda, I will have very little to say.  

The late Brig. Toko was a personal friend and a great supporter of my environmental crusades. He loved nature, he loved wildlife and he loved a clean environment. It is on the strength of this that I come here to pay tribute to that great man.  

As an individual, the Brigadier was soft-spoken, but he was a politician of character. He was a nationalist of great values and dimensions. I remember a scene in London when the late Sekweyama Anthony and I visited London during our political democratisation crusades. At a certain point, much as many Ugandans living in various parts of Britain wanted to listen to us, we had run short of money - (Laughter). 

Here is a man who was living as a refugee in a different country, but he made a sacrifice and said, “No, people in Birmingham would like to listen to you, I am going to raise some money so that you visit them and articulate your democratic crusade”. I stand here to appreciate that good spirit - (Applause).  

It is a rare spirit; the world today has changed and people are taken up so much by money, especially when you are living in exile. When you see Ugandans coming to London, they are the people who should be giving you money but not you giving them money. Because of the love he had towards democracy and humanity, he gave us money to spread a democratic, peaceful crusade. So, I would like to pay tribute to him in regard to that.

I am impressed by the tribute paid by the Second Deputy Prime Minister of Uganda, Brig. Moses Ali. After the presentation of Brig. Moses Ali, I was greatly moved when I heard that in 1995 the late Brig. Toko led a team of reconciliators to talks in Nairobi with President Museveni. When President Museveni and the Government of Uganda chose to put in place a state funeral for a man with whom they were fighting and exchanging words, I praise the Government - (Applause)  

In the same vein, as a student of comparative politics, I would like to relate that candid character of reconciliation, which was prevalent in Toko, with President Museveni. President Museveni has also attempted to cause dialogue where dialogue sometimes is difficult. I would like to praise the initiative of talking to Kony and the Lord’s Resistance Army. When you are talking to people, you do not talk to angels alone; you talk to satanic characters as well.  

In regard to loving reconciliation and dialogue, the character of Brig. Toko is a big challenge to the present Government, including our Parliament here. We should never hate one another! We should emulate the character of the former President of the Unites States of America, J.F. Kennedy, when at one time he said, “we should never talk out of fear but let us never fear to negotiate”. That is a big challenge! 

Uganda should follow that statement of John F. Kennedy. When you talk or you participate in talks, it does not mean you give in at every point. You can retain your character of gravity while you call a spade a spade, and that is a step in the right direction.  

I would like to end by urging the Uganda Government to emulate Brig. Toko. The best way of emulating Toko is by encouraging the on-going initiative of dialogue with the rebels. There is nothing to fear, invite them to table and let them talk nonsense. We will all come on your side and support you to beat them up until we win, and the time is now.

As I pay my tribute to Brig. Toko the man, the values that I will never forget are that he was a man of love and he had a determined character.  He was a nationalist at heart and a politician of character. A nationalist and a politician of character mean a great deal, but above all, he was a man who loved Uganda. 

Many people go outside, they find greener pastures and choose to stay there. Toko never did so, and he chose to come back to build Uganda. He was silent because he knew there were problems, and that is why he kept a low profile and he never endeavoured to talk. We are talking for him now, because we knew what he was. God bless him.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti):  Madam Speaker, personally I am very sorry for the people of Maracha and West Nile in general, especially Terego, for the twist in the fate which culminated into the death of Brig. Toko and Judge Christine Kania. 

I do not know and I did not have opportunity to interact with the late Toko, but I heard a lot about him during my time as a student and as a child as I lived in Entebbe, which I still do.  

Madam Speaker, can you also allow me to interject here that the other person who died in the twist of fate, which resulted into the death of Brig. Toko, is Judge Christine Kania. I met her while I briefly stayed in Jinja. She was a very humble lady but strict and with high integrity.  Unfortunately, she was crippled in an accident and has again died in an accident, leaving behind a family of children and a husband, who is also a Judge, in total confusion I imagine.  

While we mourn Brig. Toko and also Judge Christine Kania, the rate of accidents in this country is turning into something that should be of concern to us as people who care for those who have elected us to this House.  

Not too long ago, a delegation of leaders from Karamoja, which had gone to Kyankwanzi, met their death on Kumi road. All of them were crushed and they all died there. 

Not too long ago, there was also a collision between a bus and a lorry carrying fuel in the west and all the passengers died. There have been so many other deaths, to the extent that one is beginning to wonder whether we do not have a role as leaders to ensure that these deaths can be minimised. Even as recent as last night, there was another accident on Jinja road where two people died, and I imagine several others who were injured could be in a critical condition or some have already died.  

The death of Brig. Toko and Judge Kania Christine should be an eye opener to all of us that death comes to us all and accidents can happen any time to anybody. 

I therefore, appeal to Government, although in this case the circumstances could be different, but it is a high time they sat down and reconsidered how our roads are used and how our people drive on them. Otherwise, we are going to have a lot of problems; a lot of burials and many people are going to lose their dear ones on road carnage.  

On behalf of the people of Kaberamaido County, I send sincere condolences to the people of Terego and people of Maracha through their members present and absent here, for the loss of their gallant children who are indeed also children of Uganda in this circumstance. May the soul of the deceased rest in peace!

MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi District):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to support the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice President, giving our tribute to my late brother, Brig. Gad Wilson Toko.  

The arms of fate can be very vicious. On Sunday, the 11th of this month, at an inter-regional golf ceremony in the Republic of Uganda, officiated by the First Deputy Premier, hon. Eriya Kategaya, my late brother Gad Wilson Toko, president of the Uganda Golf Union, had a prophecy. He told that congregation that that was the last time he was talking to them as president of the Uganda Golf Union. 

Madam Speaker, that was prophetic. Little did we know that the arm of fate would claim Gad Wilson Toko from Maracha and Commissioner Christine from Maracha at the same time in the same place!  

When you distinguish yourself, it should be very difficult to extinguish you. While we get vehicles to assist us to move faster, and as hon. Babu has said, as a pilot you move faster, there are things that can stop you from being extinguished that fast. A mere airbag in a vehicle of a distinguished person would possibly stop that fast extinction.  

We have many sons and daughters of Uganda who had distinguished themselves and they were just left to the hands of fate. It is not easy, as we have heard today, to make people of the type of Christine and Toko; even God who made him, made him such a handsome man, so eloquent and clear headed. But here in just a second, he is no more. And we have many of these even in this House, ministers and Prime Ministers moving with vehicles that are not protected.  

If Christ said that he accomplished his work at 33 years of age, he did not mean that we must also go at that age. He has given us opportunities to use all that we have on this earth, to ensure that heaven starts from earth. And the likes of Wilson still had, in the human thinking, enough time to live on this earth.  

As a golfer, Wilson distinguished himself to a very great extent. The game of golf is a very distinguishable sport. It is a game that moulds the character of a person; and you should have seen Wilson starting from learning, to distinguish himself to a single handicap and excel to become the president of the golf union. 

He would hit that ball like a pilot, using a projectile system, and the balls never went to the bush. That is why, as hon. Onzima was saying, Wilson never went to the bush. He came back and remained at home to bring reconciliation to the people of Uganda and harmony amongst the people of West Nile.  

In the fraternity of golf, we have lost a great leader with such excellent humour that Uganda Golf Union will live to regret. He had original humour and it was never repeated. It was always original and new, and that is the talent that he used to bring together the people of West Nile to denounce rebellion and go for peace.  

Even if you called him something unpalatable, Gad would always be on his guard, and he would let you be what you are, but he would say one thing that would take you to where you belong.  

As I mourn my brother, I would like the people of Uganda to know that with the life that we live on this earth, if we do not have an opportunity to reconcile, you will always regret it because we do not know when we shall be called. 

Even these mere black ants, they are so tiny but well organized and friendly to each other. A black ant meeting another black ant will never pass the other without greeting, so why can’t we emulate that from our brother, Gad Wilson Toko. 

Those tiny insects, when they get anything, they will always take it to the headquarters; they will never eat it outside, and that is what Gad was. If we can emulate the example of those black ants, things like corruption in this country will not be there. They take whatever they get first to the headquarters and then they divide it.  

My brother Gad Wilson Toko, as he came from exile tried not only to live on what Government was giving him but invested in income-generating activities. As he leaves this country, he has left a lot of wisdom, a lot of vision and a lot of missions that he had not fulfilled. I believe that the people of West Nile will take on from there and take those visions of his to total solution.  

I would like to thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda for remembering to bury our brother and giving him a state burial. We invite each and every one of you to come to Arua on Saturday at Emmanuel Cathedral for the burial of our late brother.  

May his soul rest in eternal peace! I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me opportunity to also express my deep condolences to the family of the late Gad Wilson Toko as a son of Uganda who distinguished himself in very many ways. 

I stand, speaking on behalf of many of my colleagues who associate themselves with Brig. Gad Wilson Toko by virtue of the fact that we studied in Sir Samuel Baker School in Gulu. This tragedy that befell the family of Gad Wilson Toko and the family of Justice Kania also befell the family that is constituted by Sir Samuel Baker.  

I did not know that Justice Kania was also a student of Sir Samuel Baker. The death of his wife and the death of Brig. Toko is a reminder to all Ugandans that all the education systems that allowed talents to emerge from the remotest parts of the country, shared equally by all, is fading. 

It is high time that this country paid more attention to promoting educational infrastructure that will promote the kind of integrated development that the country witnessed in the 1960s.  

It should not be that because I am Latigo, able to take my children to Green Hill and Budo, there I would meet another person from another part of Uganda. In Sir Samuel Baker, it did not matter where you came from; it did not matter where you wanted to go to study. You would go there and meet everybody from the country, share experiences and build alliances. The country should remember this.  

When we were young in the 1970s, and there were a lot of upheavals, we used to recognize names, and one of the biggest names that we recognized was that of Toko. Sir Samuel Baker was near Gulu Air Force base and the planes would fly out of the airbase and circulate over Sir Samuel Baker. The fact that that name was so loud and clear, it was an inspiration to many. 

But more importantly, as an Acholi, our community had problems Everybody knows that during Amin’s time we lost many of Toko’s colleagues in the Air Force, and we lost many in the army but out there, we had always heard and we were told that amongst those who were strong moderating factors during Amin’s governance was Brig. Wilson Toko. No doubt, as my honourable elder said, he actually ran foul of the regime, not because he did anything bad but because he wanted that Government to treat Ugandans fairly. He had to run to exile in spite of coming from West Nile, which might seem very strange to many people. 

I also know that in 1985 when the country went through the next cycle of political upheaval, Brig. Toko and many clear-headed people from West Nile came up and said, “let us sit down; in spite of everything that happened under Amin, we must live together, otherwise this country will perish.” 

The initial mass reconciliation that was subsequently promoted by President Museveni actually started with that understanding between Brig. Toko and the leadership of West Nile, the late father of my colleague, hon. Henry Oryem, and the people from Acholi. To this day, the people from West Nile can go into Acholi and we can go into West Nile and nobody will point a finger at you for what happened. 

So, with the death of Brig. Toko, let me make an appeal. It is possible for us to forgive everything that has happened to this country, and it is very cheap to forgive. The benefits are enormous. With these challenges like tragic deaths, let us renew our commitment to find ways of reconciling ourselves in this country because we have to live together regardless.  

Finally, if you look at what happened on that fateful day and you try to apply the law of probability, your conclusion would be that it would not happen, because these are two people on different missions but coming from the same place and they crush head on in that particular spot. 

Since the probability is zero, the only conclusion we would draw is that the good Lord had already decided. And if that be the case, I would like to ask the good Lord to forgive our brother and sister and the two drivers who perished, for any mistakes that they would have made on earth, and to give them peace in eternal life. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion that was moved by Her Excellency the Vice President, in paying tribute to the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko. 

On behalf of the people I represent in Yumbe, I would like to send our condolences. Indeed his death has been a shock, not to only the people of Yumbe, not only to the people of Arua, but also to the entire country.  

I first learnt of his death from hon. Mike Mukula, who told me that he was doing everything possible to see to it that at least somebody survives. And he did all he could to co-ordinate from Jinja and Mulago, talking to doctors to be on stand-by but alas! God had decided the fate of most of the people involved in the accident. 

His wife, Madam Reste, is still in Mulago. I would like hon. Mukula not to give up but to continue monitoring her condition, urging the doctors to keep vigilance so that she gets fully recovered. 

For a person of his calibre, it would be a little bit difficult to know much about his past, but anybody will tell you that Brig. Toko, regardless of the fact that he was an air force commander, a political leader, a pilot, a former Vice President, he was a very simple man. Jolly with everyone and diplomatic; he had a high sense of humour, he had respect for all and he was easily likeable. If you hated Toko, then you had a problem yourself. 

He was time-conscious, a father and somebody who always offered guidance. He cherished peace, and I am not surprised that today peace-loving sons like Col. Hussein Ader and Ezaruku have accompanied him with his colleagues. These are members of the Aringa-Obongi Peace initiative that is on-going in Yumbe District and has pacified the entire West Nile region -(Applause). Despite the fact that he was not physically involved in the peace process in Aringa, because the people of Aringa wanted to do it themselves, he has always offered guidance and advice. So, I thank them for that. I urge all other Ugandans to emulate the peace processes going on in different parts of Uganda so that we have an entire peaceful country that is good for every Ugandan. 

I also want to be on record to have recognised Brig. Toko as a person who had respect for women. As you know, reports indicate that northern Uganda rates highest in polygamy. I am not an expert on the advantages and disadvantages of polygamy, but the fact is that he was a role model. He loved his wife so much that so many people would admire him. He has been attending so many weddings, Kuhingiras and so forth, but never make a mistake of inviting Toko without his wife. Reste always accompanied him. 

When hon. Mukula told me that Brig. Toko had been involved in an accident, the first thing I asked him was, “You mean his wife was not there? You better find out.” He said, “No, his wife was not there.” I said, “Please, find out, otherwise, she must be also involved in the accident because they moved side by side for every occasion.” I pray that God gives her the heart to accept to live without him for the sake of the children.  

Brig. Toko loved unity and togetherness; he did not segregate. He loved unity so much. In a district like Arua, there are so many ethnic clashes - between the Aringa versus Terego, Terego versus Maracha, and Maracha versus Ayivu - I think Onzima will tell you. Dick Nyai is also right up there, and I am happy to see honourable “No Change”, Butele, up there. 

This is an area with such ethnic clashes, but if you wanted an independent mediator, somebody who would never segregate, somebody who would blame an Aringa for the wrong he has done and say, maybe the Teregian is the right person without any segregation, it was the late Gad Wilson Toko, and we will miss him. That is why, when people from Arua heard about his death almost all families were in shock. If there were somebody the people would have wanted to survive the accident, it would have been him. But since we are not above what the Lord decides, may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

He led by example as an air force commander; he was a fighter pilot. As Director General of East African Airways and General Manager Uganda Airlines, many of the people I have interacted with have told me he was extremely transparent and not corrupt. You can list the amount of wealth that Brig. Gad Wilson Toko has accumulated despite the vast experience and positions he has served in. He was not corrupt at all, and I hope other Ugandans can emulate that.  

I would like to add my voice to that of the Members of Parliament who have thanked the President for his efforts in trying to repatriate past leaders. Indeed, when the offer came, Toko took it with one heart. He came back and lived a humble life. 

I am sure he must have had some problems, because like you know, most past leaders have been complaining about Public Service and how to handle emoluments in time and so forth, but he never publicly complained. He did not sue anybody. I think it is because of his high sense of integrity, discipline, and diplomacy that he took on that stand.

Basing on that fact, I would like the Prime Minister, as head of Government, to take time and consider finding out whether the family was catered for as expected; and maybe other past leaders’ problems could be solved before they can come out in the Press. 

As a lover of education, on his return he was one of the people who had been spearheading the need for a university in West Nile. I hope other members will continue yearning for what he wanted in place, even if it will take many more years.

Brig. Gad Wilson Toko, having realised that Arua district was lagging behind in information technology, and knowing that he could not realise his dream of having a university in the area within a short period, opened a school of computer technology in Arua town. He even organised a fundraising for it about two months ago. 

At this fundraising, the President pledged to give the school at least two computers. Now that the Vice President is here, I hope that pledge can be taken with seriousness and be fulfilled. I also hope that, that school does not collapse because of his death. He initiated it, but please continue supporting the school.

I would like to conclude by thanking the President for pledging to continue supporting his family, and in particular the welfare and education of his children. Many people will miss him. Like I said, he is a model. May the Lord rest his soul! Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had quite a long day. In particular, the family and friends of the deceased have been here since 10.00 O’clock. We ought to have concluded this session at 4.00 p.m but for the reasons I told you about, we started late. So, I want two brief contributions and then we wind up.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (CAPT. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker, it is a very sad day for Uganda, because last Sunday the prophet of doom prevailed over the gallant sons and daughter of this country.

It was ironical, as it has already been stated, that two people all coming from the same area perished in a very tragic accident on Kampala-Jinja road. In probability, they call it the PGF - Probability Generating Function. If you looked at it fully, it would all calculate to zero. This accident was so tragic. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the doctors and medical staff of Jinja Regional Hospital for the effort they put in in assisting those who were injured when this tragic accident occurred, and those who worked on the bodies. The doctors worked round the clock. And I particularly thank Dr Wanume, the Medical Superintendent of Jinja Hospital, for the effort he put in throughout the time these bodies were in the refrigerator. 

The refrigeration mortuary has just been installed in Jinja and is working very well. I would like to say that these are the efforts of Government in making sure that the health services in this country are improved. Otherwise, it would have been difficult to preserve the bodies.

I would also like to put on record that the late Gad Toko died while he was moving to Jinja for a function as a golfer and as the president of the Uganda Golf Union. He was moving with his wife side by side; this shows that the late Toko loved his family and loved his wife. 

I would also like to put on record my gratitude to Government for making it possible for his children to be brought from United Kingdom. I thank Government for paying their airfare to bring them here to attend the funeral of their father.  

As we continue to pray for the soul of the late, our prayers also go to the wife who is still in Mulago. I assure the House that she is in a stable state and recovering under the care of our medical team in Mulago Hospital. I do not know whether any information has been passed, but she has not been informed of what has happened to her husband. You can imagine the pain and shock she will suffer when she is told about her husband’s death.

I thank the Uganda Golf Union members who have been able to come in and put together an organisational framework. Brigadier Toko is a person who has worked so closely with golfers. He loved golf with his heart and played all the 18 holes and even the 19th hole. He was very good at all the holes. 

A lot has already been said, and I am not going to repeat it because time is of essence, but you will recall that in 1976, the then President of Uganda, Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada, VC, DSO, MC, Ssalongo, Life President and Conqueror of the British Empire, appointed the late Toko to be the Chief Executive Officer of the East African Airways. 

During the Entebbe raid in 1976, the Intelligence informed Idi Amin that because the Israelis had passed through Nairobi, they believed that the late Toko had connived with them and given them the whole layout of the airport. Amin recalled Toko from his position as the Chief Executive of the East African Airways back to Kampala. 

The late Toko refused to come back because he had already heard that a number of people had been killed. His friends who were here told him that if he came back, he would face the same thing. The kind of impunity that prevailed from there drove Toko to exile.  

The late Toko was a very professional pilot, and as a friend and a pilot, Capt. Babu has already spoken about that. The professionalism exhibited in the discipline of flying is what late Toko exhibited throughout his career. This profession is all about discipline, time and management of people. 

I remember one time there was a commander of the First Division. One of the officers and pilots told me that during the war of Tanzania and Uganda, when Amin attacked the Kagera salient, there was a man called Col. Ozo, who could not spell his name very well. If they asked him to spell it, he would say, “my name is ‘O’ double ‘zo’, Ozoo.” 

He wanted to go to the frontline and see what it looked like. So, one of the pilots who was flying a MIG-21 took him. He was quite a hefty person and when they got airborne, this pilot took him straight into a spiral roll, climbing towards the Kagera salient, and when they got over there, he put him through the robotics. 

Flying aircrafts is not something that you take lightly. When you see the MIG-21 that we have now, that is the kind of equipment that we have, although this one is a much more improved version. But by the time Ozo landed on the ground, the oxygen mask was full of what he had eaten during lunch. So, you can imagine the kind of problems that this man went through and he abused the pilot and so on and so forth.  

But the late Toko enjoyed being a pilot, and throughout his thrust towards attaining his professionalism, he went to the ACME School of Aeronautics, one of the best academies in Fortsworth, which the Second Deputy Prime Minister has already talked about. I went to the same academy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this calls for all us, both the Government and the private sector, to see that we have lost so many lives in the road accidents. I sincerely appeal to our people to drive very carefully so that we can preserve life on our roads.  

Finally, I would like to thank His Excellency, the President for having accorded Toko a state funeral and full military honour -(Applause). 

I would also like to thank the Vice President, the Prime Minister, the Speaker and the organising team led by Brig. Gen. Moses Ali, the Second Deputy Prime Minister, who, together with a number of other people, have made this function important and colourful. 

I also thank the members of the family and the Bishop who have come all the way to stay side by side and give encouragement to the family. I am informed that the Bishop of West Nile has already informed the late Gad Toko’s wife of the demise of her husband. This is a position we have just received. I would like to take the opportunity to say, “Brig. Toko, go in peace”. God be with you - (Applause).

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think whatever could be said about Gad Wilson Toko has already been said. 

I knew him when I was a Director, Management and Training Advisory Centre, and at that time we did a lot of training for Uganda Airlines. I would imagine that Uganda Airlines was at its best during the time of the then General Manager, the late Toko. 

It is amazing that after such a long time ago, he had never forgotten me. Whenever we met, he would call me by my first name. And a month ago from today, on the 21st, which was a Friday, I went to meet a guest at MOSA Courts. I found him there talking to a number of golfers and he rose and came and shook my hand. I said, “Sir, why should a Brigadier rise to shake my hand? I do not even have any grade in the Army.” So, we laughed and joked a little and left.  

I agree with all the comments that have been made by various honourable members about the quality of the person of Brig. Toko. I do not want to repeat myself, but I wish to seek your indulgence to speak a little about Christine Kania. 

When the accident occurred and we learnt that both Brig. Toko and Christine Kania had died, we thought that probably they were travelling together, only to learn later that they were travelling from different directions. What fate! 

Christine Kania got her disability in a road accident, and indeed it is a traffic accident that has taken her life. Christine Kania was a disability activist. She was the first and only woman who has headed the National Union of Disabled People of Uganda (NUDIPU). 

During her time, NUDIPU expanded its programmes to different parts of Uganda. Despite the fact that she was so severely disabled by that accident with a spinal injury and she was in a wheel chair all the time, she travelled to different parts of Uganda, mobilising the disabled people. We will miss her greatly.

When hon. Joash Mayanja was putting together the Constitutional Review Commission, he came to me and said, “James, can you propose some disabled person to sit on the Commission?” I mentioned a number of names, but he said, “No, give me one name, do not give me all these names; I do not know all these people you are mentioning but I will rely on your judgement, so give me one name.” 

I mentioned the name of Christine Kania, and I was happy that she was subsequently appointed to serve on that commission to look after the interests of Ugandans, but particularly the interests of Ugandans with disabilities. We shall miss her.  

I know everybody is tired, so I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the families of those who perished in these accidents. May the Lord Almighty rest their souls in eternal peace! Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me now put the question. The question is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament as moved by Her Excellency the Vice President be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind you that the funeral service for Brig. Gad Wilson Toko will be held tomorrow at the All Saints Cathedral, starting at 10.00 a.m. and it will end at 1.00 p.m. 

This will enable you to return here so that we can continue with the budget process that we have been handling until this occurred. So, I encourage you to go and attend the funeral service, and those who will be able to go to Arua to do so and give him a warm send-off.

National Anthem
 Exit of the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we come to the end of this special sitting to pay tribute to the late Brig. Gad Wilson Toko. We adjourn to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(Parliament rose at 5.56p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 August 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


