Wednesday, 24 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I would like us to acknowledge the presence of hon. Dr Jerome Brey, Member of Parliament from the House of Commons.  Hon. Dr Brey is here together with his wife who has accompanied him.  You are most welcome.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Abubaker Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: ‘The Laws Revised Edition Bill, 1993’ be read the First Time.

MR BYAKATONDA (Bukanga County, Luwero): Mr Chairman, Question No.25/94. 

MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Chebrot): Mr Chairman, this Question was raised by hon. Byakatonda from Bukanga County and the Question runs as follows: ‘During the Rwandese Refugees have left Nyakibale area in Bukanga County the fact that there is population pressure that requires the Bakanga to acquire some more land. Could the Government give part of this land to the people of the area to use as farmland and animal husbandry production, other than leaving it idle as it is now.’  

The second question goes; ‘Could the Minister state when and how to implement this Bill? Land in this country held entrust by the Ministry of Local Government.  However, refugees came to return to their countries of origin when conditions were put that led to their flight. The permanent and most desirable solution to the refugees is, therefore, voluntary reparation. There are, however, other options, which include integration and resettlement in the third country.  It should be made clear, however, that because of the comparative peace enjoyed by Uganda, within the East and Central African Region, this country has become the haven for refugees.  

In this respect, therefore, whereas we can jubilate over the spontaneous return of the old case-load of the Rwandese, the country was still with a big population of refugees continuing to arrive in the country from the Sudan, Zaire, Somalia and Rwanda.  They are now over 250,000 Sudanese Refugees, 15,000 Zaire Refugees, and 10,000 Rwandese Refugees in this country.  The Ministry is, therefore, still under pressure to resettle refugees in a situation where a free land for the resettlement of the refugees is becoming impossible.  

Secondly, when Government has an obligation to integrate refugees who may not be of voluntary reparation as well as resettlement in the country.  There are disagreements and convention of refugees to which Uganda is a party is to provide for this obligation.  The only point that could be made in this regard on behalf of Government is that the Government itself does not have enough land where it can undertake large-scale agricultural projects. Consequently, the government looks at these areas as the only alternative for their future large scale land development. 

The last point on this question is that, where possible, Government can opt to release some settlement land for the settlement of landowners so as to make them rely on.  It should be noted that all these options are subject to discussion by Cabinet.  The answer of question number two is, therefore, that what will happen to those settlements that have been completely vacated by refugees will come from the Cabinet.  Please, also note that the Rwandese Refugees have been returning spontaneously.  And a Census is to be carried out to determine the population of Rwandese Refugees that have left.  

In this respect, I would like to inform the hon. Members that Uganda is under the International law to provide settlement to those brothers in the neighbouring countries to settle in this country.  

As we do recall, not more than ten years ago, we heard about a half a million Ugandans who were living outside this country.  Most of them were living in Southern Sudan and they were given the opportunity to stay in that country and they were given land. Therefore, in considering removing this land from the Ministry of Local Government, we should consider the possibility of getting no refugees in this country.  As I have stated we have 250,000 Sudanese Refugees who are staying in the private camps and the private camp would mean that they were to be provided for by non-governmental organisations, and this is just a temporary arrangement.  So, they will need land where they can be able to stay and resettle so that they can become self-reliant. Therefore, the Government still needs some of this land so that if we get other refugees from any of the neighbouring countries, they can easily be re-allocated.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Given the fact that, Chaka has too big refugee settlements - Chaka is in Kabarole District, that is Kazinga or Chaka 1, Chaka 2, which add up to over 270 square miles, which is a quarter or about a quarter of the land area covered by all refugee settlements, disorganized over 700 families, 32 of which were supposed to have been settled in the new restructured ranches as passed by this House when discussing the Ranches Restructuring Bill in August 1990, but were completely ignored by the Ranching Restructuring Board inspite of the several contacts and correspondences, and are now being thrown out in the Katonga Game Reserve where they took refugees, and given the fact that most of the refugees of Rwandese origin who occupied these two refugee-settlements have left for their homes.  

Would it not be in order for the nationals who were seriously affected by the creation of these settlements to repossess part of the land by merging the two settlements and reducing them to one, and reducing the one remaining if it happens to be Chaka 2, which is over 220 square miles, to 100 square miles which would still remain the biggest single refugee-settlement in the country?

Is the Minister aware that the Refugees of Zairwa origin who were recently brought to Chaka 2 are a security risk to the people of Chaka and neighbouring counties?  Because one, they will remove randomly without control.  They steal people’s food; wash themselves and their clothes in people’s wells and threaten - you know they go around threatening people with witchcraft and have no respect for the local leadership.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Chebrot): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member has raised very many questions. Government is aware of the need for more land for Ugandans not only in those areas, surrounding Chaka 1 and Chaka 2.  But there are more areas in Uganda like Kabale and other areas of Uganda. My Ministry is in consultation with various local authorities who still have low chances of land where those people who are facing problems in their areas. That is not to say that this Chapter regarding Refugee-settlement is closed.  I did indicate that Cabinet is considering and if it finds it could not then it will allocate land to those areas in Chaka 1 and Chaka 2.  But the thing must be done in orderly manner.  We cannot allow citizens just to move into those settlements, which are gazetted and have the property of the Government of Uganda. 

Secondly, on the question of Zaire Refugees, when refugees enter the country they must abide by the laws of that country.  I am aware that the refugees from Zaire have been indiscipline and most of these refugees come from Eastern Zaire where there is almost no Government. So, I think when they come into Uganda they think that they will live the way they are living in Eastern Zaire.  I would like to ask the local authorities together with my Ministry to ensure that the refugees abide the laws of this country wherever they may be. I thank you.

MRONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I would like to put the supplementary request to the hon. Minister that since we, as a state would like to leave our door open to accommodate refugees when they come.  Would he consider fencing those areas so that these people do not - even if it is 200 square miles because we would not like the situation where a refugee is a refugee for ten days, and the next day he a national.  

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to inform the House of how Ugandan Refugees, the Rwandese Refugees are now returning to their mother land.  We also have got service with the refugees still remaining in other countries.  There are some Ugandan Refugees in Zaire who have listed themselves and would like to return to their home later.  I think this was communicated to the Ministry of Local Government.  I would like to know from the Ministry what arrangements he is making to return the refugees from Zaire particularly those Kagwas who have listed their names.  

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Chebrot): Mr Chairman, once again I would like to thank the hon. member for raising that question.  I would like to inform him that it is a policy of the National Resistance Movement Government not to keep any Ugandan outside his brothers.  Every Ugandan for whatever reason who ran out is encouraged to come back to this country. We continue saying that wherever we go. However, we are aware that there are close to 20,000 Ugandans who are still in Zaire.  We have made contacts with these groups.  

A few years ago we signed an agreement between the Government of Zaire and Uganda to allow the repatriation of Ugandans from Zaire.  This Agreement has been sealed and it is due for implementation.  Next week or a week after I will be traveling to Arua and to some parts of Eastern Zaire to talk to these brothers who are still in Zaire.  The only thing, which could delay them from there is that, they would not like to leave without harvesting their crops. So, once they finish harvesting, we should most of these Ugandans getting back.  But I would like to assure the nation that the doors are not closed for anybody to come back to Uganda.  All Ugandans who left for whatever reason they are free to come back home. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Can the Minister inform the House as to how many refugees are now in Uganda, and what their nationalities are.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT:  (Mr Chebrot): Mr Chairman, if the hon. Member was listening, during my opening remarks I did indicate that currently we have 250,000 Sudanese Refugees.  Most of these refugees are in the West Nile Area - that is in Arua and Moyo, and some are in Kiryandongo. We have 15,000 Zairean Refugees and 10,000 Rwandese -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR CHEBROT: Mr Chairman, let me finish.  In my last statement this afternoon, I said, please, note that the Rwandese refugees have been returning continuously, and the census is yet to be carried out to determine the population of those Rwandese refugees who are still in the country, and those who left the camps.  It is not possible for me to give you a figure right now of the exact number of Rwandese refugees who are in the country, but I am giving you the number of those Rwandese refugees who recently came from Rwanda.  But the exact number of Rwandese refugees as of now who are not in the camp are 10,000.  Thank you.

MR BYAKATONDA:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I want to thank the Minister for having answered my question, but when you look at the Order Paper, the people of Bukanga are not called Bakanga, I think that is an error, they are partly Bakooki, they are partly Bakiga, Banyankore, so it is just a punch.  

First, I wish to express my concern at the rate Uganda is receiving refugees; it is a very alarming rate. We have made provisions for these refugees in 10 settlements throughout the country, and these refugees do not choose to be so, but we should not do so, settle them at the expense of Ugandans; that is what the people of Bukanga said.  We could not resettle these people at the expense of the Ugandans.  

When these people are dumped in settlements by the UNHCR, the UNHCR tends to ignore them, I do not know what Minister intends to do with the UNHCR. For example, the Sudanese were - the Kenyans were dumped in Nakivaale settlement and they were abandoned, and these fellows started coming into people’s homes.  And even coming to the extent of sharing food with the people. So you can see the extent of this issue -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your Question, please.

MR BYAKATONDA: My Question is, what does the Minister intends to do with the UNHCR to make sure that these refugees do not disturb the peace of the citizens.

MR CHEBROT: I think the hon. Member is opening a new debate on this subject. Anyhow, to answer his question specifically, I wish to inform the hon. Members that my Ministry works very closely with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR). It meant that the government or UNHCR abandoned the refugees.  

First of all, I think this is not true. Right now we have 26,000 Sudanese Refugees in transit camps. It means that they have to be provided for by UNHCR; they have to be given food, they have to be medicine, and they have to given clothes, and this is going on.  We have heard many complaints from that part of the country. 

However, what I want to inform the hon. Members is this, when the Kenyans went to Nakivaale, they were expecting to live in conditions which they were living in before they left their country, Certainly, no government can manage to provide that neither can the NGOs.  They were expected to be getting a portion of land to live in.  Some of the refugees of course, sell their food and they expect no rations from UNHCR; this was not done.  But the Kenyan refugees were not let to starve in Nakivaale as stated by the hon. Member.  In fact, they were given assistance when they were there.  I thank you.

Question: Item 3 (ii)

MR MBURA MUHINDO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Question No.30/94.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, much as hon. Mbura Muhindo is raising the pertinent question regarding the contentious issue on land dispute in Kasese, I think the question was misdirected.  The Cabinet Committee is not any of the committees of this House and, therefore, there is no way the Cabinet Committee, of which I was a Chairman, to investigate these issues, would have resorted to this House.  

However, the Committee has in mind was the committee chaired, which was a sub-committee of the Cabinet to investigate into the manners in which the people were evicted - the encroachers were evicted from Kibaale Forest Reserve.  That Committee reported to the authorities to take on action on that committee to do such a job.  

In the course of doing that, it had to brief high authorities in this country about its findings.  Then I was asked with that Committee to do some job on land dispute intersected. And when we completed and reported, since this was then not a Cabinet directive, we had to report to the authorities, which had directed us.  

However, we cleared because the implementation of the matters had to be put to the Cabinet. We cleared it with His Excellency, the President, and we reported it to the Cabinet, which took decisions on the report.  Therefore, it is not true to say that the Committee has never reported.  

However, for the good of this country, because the issue is very contentious, even if before the Cabinet took some decisions the committee met leadership from Kasese District including hon. Muhindo as a Member of the NRC. It also met different authorities in Kasese District to make a consultation so that they can come up with recommendations which are acceptable and which could be amicably recommended. 

In that respect the Cabinet has approved that the prisons fund should feed an approximated area of 7,550 acres, which is equivalent to about 3,528.03 hectares, which is already encroached on so that the farm specialising in animal husbandry and livestock farming, that land is going to be left for the wanainchi in Kasese District. 

Secondly, the Cabinet has also approved that Yibuga Refugee Resettlement Scheme should be degazetted for public further consultations.  The few refugees there transferred to any other refugee settlement camp.  This would release about 2,190 acres in the area. There is also the youth cotton project, which has covered about 750 acres equivalent to about 350 hectares, which should not be exclusively used for growing cotton and turns into permanent futures that should be used for mixed farming.   

So, in light of those, there are other recommendations which have been made which for different departments, the department of agriculture, has to take some responsibility to ensure infrastructure regarding cattle rearing in the area, like cattle deeps, and like cooling plants. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible with the responsible prisons, and has been directed to take that into account.  

The Ministry of Natural Resources has been directed to look into those areas where the people have been encroached upon, especially, the interiors of forest reserves. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has also been directed to link into those areas which have been encroached on at the National Park, and the Ministry of Local Government has been directed to look for alternative ways of alleviating the problem in Kasese. The Ministry for Defence, has also been directed, to public further consultations. There is the NRM - production farm which also is considered, but which is left for further consideration. But also the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has been directed to rationalize the land in Kasese District and the land occupied by different projects in Kasese District.  

For those who are familiar with Kasese District, as you travel from Bunyaruguru all the way to Fort Portal, the eastern side is occupied by institutional projects, National Parks, Game Reserves, Mubuku irrigation scheme, Mubuku Prisons Farm, Yibuga Refugee Settlement Scheme, Yibuga Prisons Farm, NRM production unit, Hima Cement Factory and what have you - so, even the western side; the minister has been directed to look into this.  This we hope will ease the land problems in the area but not to answer the problems - the Committee recommended; it is not the only solution. 

The Committee recommended that the administration in Kasese District take out considerate building in all those parties concerned. Because beside the issue being due to land shortage, it also - there is ethnical connotations.  

Finally, the Prime Minister has to form a Task Force composed of some prominent member from Kasese District and headed by the distinguished Ugandans, the Ugandans to over see how these rationalizations and implementation of the recommendations can be implemented.  Thank you.

SUPPLEMENTARY

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I am wondering whether the Minister is aware that the main reason why his committee was set up was to investigate the inhuman manner in which the people of Mpocha were treated, and in the process of which a lot of property was destroyed, and the people left helpless, and can he tell this House whether Government has got in plan any intentions to compensate these people for what they lost, and to resettle those people who even today, even today are refugees in their own country, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is putting a wrong question.  I explained at the beginning that the committee which hon. Mbura Muhindo had in mind, was the one which was set to investigate in the manner in which the encroachers in Kibaale forest had been evicted.  That was surpassed subject and we finished it but the question on the Floor is about the Kasese land dispute, and I would wish that the hon. Member but questions to matters pertaining to Kasese land dispute.  Kasese land dispute has nothing to do with the manner in which the people in Kibale Forest Reserve were evicted.  

MR MBURA MUHINDO:  Supplementary Question.  Mr Chairman, these recommendations which the Minister has told us were made about so many years ago.  Because their Committee was in 1992, and the hon. Minister assured this House that these recommendations will be implemented expeditiously.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the duty of my Committee was to investigate land disputes in Kasese and come up with recommendations, viable recommendations that could be implemented say, the land dispute in Kasese.  It has done its job, the Cabinet has made recommendations and it has even - the Prime Minister is going to form a task force and the Prime Minister is the coordinator of government businesses.  I think the office of the Prime Minister co-ordinating all different departments, which are responsible for implementing these recommendations, I am quite sure that they will be implemented.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I beg to move that the Law-Revived Edition Bill, 1993 be read the Second Time. This is a technical and enabling Bill it seeks to make provisions for the preparation and publication of the sixth revived edition of the laws of Uganda, in order to make written laws of Uganda more easily accessible. The Bill provides for the appointment of Commissioners of law division, sets out their functions, and provides for giving legal effect to the revived edition and prepared by them. 

Hon. Members are aware that there is an urgent need to revise and reform our laws.  These tasks are most important, especially, at the current stage of our democratization process.  Revived edition of the laws of Uganda have been prepared five times.  In 1910, in 1923, in 1935, and the last edition in 1964, which was carried out shortly after our Independence by Mr Gordon Thread.  Since then, the laws of Uganda have only been published separately as supplements to the Uganda gazette.  The passage of 30 years without the publication of any revived edition, of the laws of Uganda, had resulted in a state of general inexcusability of the existing law.  

In 1982, in an effort to call the preparations of a revived edition of laws of Uganda, the government enacted the laws revived edition act of that year.  The act whose objective, as to make provisions for the preparation and publication of a revived editions of the laws of Uganda, also provides for the appointment of a Commissioner for all revisions and stores out his powers.  

The Act, as amended by Statute no. (7) of 1987 also provides that the revived edition shall contain the laws of Uganda in force on the 31 days of December 1987, as well as those laws, which were enacted but not yet brought into operation on that day. That Act is silent as to the place of constitutional instruments and laws of federal state, and administration in relation to the revived edition.  Due to financial constraints, and also other constraints the purposes of the laws with that edition act 1982 have not been implemented. Serious attempts are to securing a revived edition of the laws of Uganda during the NRM administration, during the period 1986/89, was frustrated by inadequate funding.  The programme was put to a halt.  

Hon. Members are further aware that along side the laws revived edition acts there exists the Uganda law reform commission statute of 1990. The Law Reform Statute came into force on the 16th of November 1990.  The main objective of the Commission as stipulated in section 10 of that statute, of ‘To study and up keep to study and keep under constant reviewed statute and other laws comply with the laws of Uganda with the view to make the recommendation for their systematic improvement, modernisation and reform.  Again due mainly to financial constraints in the immediate past, the Law Reform Commission is only now in the process of being established. 

I am glad to report that the Secretary for Law Reform and the chairman and two commissioners have been appointed and the Commission will soon be inaugurated.  The Secretarial staff has also been appointed for over a year as the hon. Members have noted from their budget studies.  The implementation of the policy behind the Law Reform Commission Statute is only beginning to be executed.  While both the Law Revision and the Law Reform re important and urgent tasks, it is realised that before any meaningful law reform can be undertaken, law reformers need to be in a position to ascertain the existing Statutory Laws.  

The Law Revision is urgently needed, therefore, to equip reports, the government, law enforcement agencies, public bodies, legal practitioners, with up to date law books but it is also needed to facilitate the separate process of law reforms Law Revision is thus a vital pre-requisite to meaningful law reform. The Bill which hon. Members have before them re-enacts the provisions of the Laws Revised Edition Act of 1982, extend the cut off dates for the Revised Edition to the 31st day of December 1995 and include certain aspects not covered in that Act.  

As I said, the main constraint for not going ahead with the task of Law Revision and also Law Reforms has been financial constraints. 

I am glad to report that the Government has carried out negotiations with the Government of the United States of America and of the United Kingdom through their aid agencies that is to say USAID and IDA and has received firm promises that those governments will finance the actual exercise of revising the laws and printing them. The USAID will provide all the required funds for the revision exercise. This relates to sorting out all the laws that are in force since 1964 and dropping out those laws which are either directly or indirectly repealed or have ceased to have effect for a variety of reasons and then take them out in convenient volumes by subjects and size ready for printing and publication of the said volumes. Here the assistance will cover the purchase of all the equipments required for the exercise such as computers, hard and soft were etc., payment of emoluments and travel expenses for required expertise, which will have to be paid for and other related personnel expenses like travel both in and outside the country. That will be undertaken by the United States Government. The IDA and the British will fund the cost of actual printing and production of the volumes of the Laws of Uganda as updated by the revisers.  

In a related matter, in terms of assistance to Uganda in the course of this exercise, IDA will provide the necessary machinery in the Uganda Printing and Publication Corporation Printing house at Entebbe to enable that Corporation to actually print, produce and publish the Laws of Uganda in the volumes that will have been determined by the revisers.  This exercise, therefore, has very little cost to the Treasury and is only being delayed by the passage of this enabling legislation.

In conclusion, I would like to say that as a practitioner the present practice really the law is in a state of chaos.  It is scattered all over the place and, especially in up-country areas it may not be possible for magistrates, in fact I believe it is not possible for magistrates to be in a position of any copies or most of the relevant laws of Uganda. 

Therefore, I appeal to the House to pass this technical enabling Bill.  It has no policy implications.  It has little or no financial implications so that we can go ahead with the help and assistance promised to us by our friends so that we can get the laws in an easily accessible place for practitioners and also in order to enable the Law Reform Commissioners to undertake their work of reviving their laws. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.  (Applause)

MR KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I support the Bill and I wish to remark that the fact that this Bill has taken this long to come is a comment on the concept of the rule of law in this country. It is because nobody seriously takes the rule of law in this - that nobody ever considers this kind of Bills important.  

The kind of comment the hon. the Attorney General has made that in upcountry courts it is not possible for magistrates to have access to the actual law is serious. It means these magistrates are forced to enforce a law, which they do not have or do not even understand.  The amount of injustice that comes from this kind of situation cannot be measured.  It forces magistrates, policemen and other law enforcement agencies to use their own whims to decide what is legal and what is not legal and this has been the disaster of this country.  There are so many laws which have been amended so many times that it is not possible for any body to know what the actual law is at the moment. One of them is the law on Income Tax.  Virtually every year some amendment is made.  So, it means that those who enforce it find difficulty in knowing exactly what is the actual position at present. But that is not all, there are so many laws which are on the statute book which were meant to be enforced but which have never been enforced at all up to now and yet they continue to be on our statute book.  Some of them with very serious implications. One of them is the Land Reform Decree of 1975. It had tremendous - Decree became part of our law and it is still part of our law and it has tremendous implications to the development and the economy of this country but nobody knows exactly which part are enforced or enforceable even under the circumstances and they have to be looked at.  But what even worse are the penal sections of the Penal Laws of this country, especially the ones which refer to fines.  Some of the fines were determined in the 1960s and they have never been reviewed because nobody looks at them.  

So, you find that very serious offenses have very minimal penal clauses.  Somebody causes a serious traffic offence he is fined just Shs2, 000.  Perhaps in the 60s that had a meaning but at the moment it has absolutely no meaning.  Of course, the most ridiculous of them all is the Elopement Law.  If somebody elopes with somebody’s wife the maximum punishment is the 600 up to now.  So, people who have been angered and injured under the Elopement Law -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House as well as a lawyer that under the Penal Code, Section 150(a) of the Penal Code, we in 1963 UPC and K.Y. decided that and made into law in this House under Chapter 36 of the Laws of Uganda 1964 because adultery at that time was payable at Shs600 because a cow at that time at Nalukolongo or Mukono was Shs 300 so anybody who could get Kabotongo could get Shs 300 to get injection at Mulago. (Laughter) 

MR KAWANGA: So really, Mr Chairman, anybody who is aggrieved under the Elopement Law and goes to court often comes out even much more aggrieved than before he went there.  So it is necessary to make a general outlook at this law, but there are some other laws which are extremely serious but which are wrongly enforced and one of them is the Detention Law of this country called The Public Order and Security Act.  It is a law of tremendous implications to human rights.  A law, which has been abused since its enactment up to the time when it stopped being used.  People have been detained under that law without following the proper procedure but everybody has forgotten about its implications. (Interruption) 

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the hon. Member for Masaka for giving way.  I would like to inform him that ever since the establishment of the NRM Government the Public Safety and Security Act whatever it is so called, the Detention Act as we know it, has only been used once and even on that time the person who was detained very temporarily was released.  It is not being in use at all today. (Interruption)

MRS WAFAANA MASAABA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the speaker and the whole House through you, that the law, which is also abused totally is the law of inheritance whereby widows are chased away without any property of the deceased.  The Decree gives them 15 per cent but you find that widows, especially those ones who have no children are chased away.  The daughters of the deceased, if there are no sons, the girls also are chased away and the property, especially, land is taken away from them. So there is a serious abuse of some of these laws.  

When you come to the law of divorce the same case appears.  You find that the people who investigate these laws do not pay attention to the women’s rights, women’s problems, you find that women are harassed.  (Interruption) So, I wish to inform the House that actually there is abuse of some these laws. Thank you.

MR KAWANGA:  That actually emphasis the fact that our law is there but it is not being enforced.  As regards the Detention Act, I know it has not been used but it can be used and, I think it is high time actually the law should be abolished.  And, finally, now that we are in the process of making a new constitution, a lot of laws may be redundant by the fact that the new constitution comes into force.  I am pleased to note that the Government intends to make December 1995 the operative law of this Act hoping that by then the constitution shall have come into force and all the laws made under that Constitution.  I support the Bill.  

MR MUDIRIKAT MUKASA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I stand to support the Bill. In fact, this has been overdue.  As the hon. Minister has said that many practitioners find it difficult to trace these laws, it is also true that even non-lawyers in fact they find it more difficult to trace these laws.  It is also more difficult for our legal draftsmen to trace these laws.  Some laws are actually forgotten. For instance, I have been trying to trace the regulation for the Trade Union Decree.  

In fact, I took time. I went to the High Court Library, it is not there. I went to Makerere Library, it is not there. So our draftsmen have even forgotten that we do not have regulations for the Trade Union Decree. You would find that most of these laws are actually bad laws.  Now, we condemned Amin and he was chased away from Uganda but we are still operating all his laws.  For instance, we have Employment Decree 1975, it is very much still in force.  We still have the Trade Union Decree and many other decrees as hon. Kawanga has just stated.  

In order to compile a proper law volume, I think, it requires repealing most of these laws.  I looked at the list which has just been circulated in this House, I wanted to at least to trace that area of my interest, that is the labour, I did not see any legislation intended to be revived or repealed by this House at least in the near future. There are twelve in number but none concerning labour while labour still have laws originating from 1964. We have the Compensation Act 1964; we have the Trade Dispute Arbitration Act 1964. Of course, there have been some revised amendments here and there and that is what makes people difficult to trace their own pieces.  I am a Muslim.  It is stated that the Koran was first made on some pieces of stones.  Now, it appears the situation of Uganda laws is that  -(Interruption)

MR, NYAKATURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor who is representing the trade union, the workers, that a private Member has an opportunity to move a Private Members Bill and now that the workers are represented here and if the workers representatives find it difficult for the government to move and bring amendments, these Members can bring the amendments.  Thank you.

MR M. MUKASA: I do appreciate the information from the hon. Member but I think the hon. Member should know that while a private Member of this House can move a Private Motion, he cannot amend the law.  He cannot institute and this is the role of the government.  A private member cannot amend a statute. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR M. MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, these statutes I mentioned, these are the Laws of Uganda, I do not know that it is appropriate for me to come and bring an amendment or a repeal.  In fact, these laws require repealing. I cannot repeal a law, it is the work of the government. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in most countries where you have Parliamentary Procedures, any Member can bring a law, cause an amendment to the law or even repeal for that matter.  Therefore, belabouring the point for a bit longer is not the right thing but if he wants to be more knowledgeable about it he can ask the lawyers.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MUDIRIKAT MUKASA:  I thank the hon. Member for that information. But the point I was developing Mr Chairman, before I was interrupted by these information was that the state of Uganda’s laws is similar to that of the - you find pieces of laws here and there and they actually - even our legal draftsmen get lost they do not know which is which, they do not know what repeal, which to review and whatever it is. 

Now, what I am proposing is that when considering the law revised edition it should be convenient petition whereby the statutes made frequently by this House can be just injected; our neighbouring country has a similar edition, it is easy to handle and even none lawyers can follow.  But our present edition of 1966 is difficult to be followed by a none lawyer. I think the intention of legislation should make laws simply for everybody to follow to read it.  I normally find these laws, in every big office; these the Law of Uganda volume, but I doubt whether these people can follow these laws easily.  

So, in the process of revising this edition, it should be made very simple for everybody to follow; you know, somebody can read a Bible, he can read any book, why is that it is difficult to read our laws and we would require a lawyer to interpret even to find that piece of law where it is!  I beg to support the Motion. 

MR ADRANI ADRADRIGA (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to decry - shortage of low volumes, especially in our high institutions of learning such as Makerere University, Law Development Centre and other related institutions like Uganda Management Institute as well as offices which traditionally have had low volumes such as the Magistrate Courts, the offices now the district representative secretaries and the like. Shortage is responsible for visible - which now exists in our Judicial system and, I think partly, it is the office of the Mover of the Bill to bring because in the Government which is revolutionary like NRM now, I do not see why it has taken 8 years in order to bring such an important law.   

However, I want us to make a start and I hope that we shall be able to revise also these laws and be able to keep prices with changing conditions in this country.  My experiences are that these law volumes are extremely important, before, I came to this House I was an administrator and I am aware of the fact that even before we become District Commissioners or Assistant Commissioners we were required to do a course in law as simple a course but it was very vital and it enabled us to interpret laws.  This is no longer the case today. In fact today, we are producing half baked administrators and maybe, even the possibility of half baked - could be there.  

It is important that we do everything possible so that even some laws which are still absolute can be operational, I have an example of some of these laws such as the ‘enguli’s license in Acts. You see the enguli license in Acts is at the mercy of the officers. If the Police officer’s wife is involved in producing enguli or the man himself is off duty or even on duty but it is mixed out to taste something then the law becomes non-operational. But as long as he is not involved as the officer has no direct interest the law becomes operational, but normally the people come to appeal and in the end there is no enforceability.  

What I am saying is that, is it important that laws which are absolute also become operational they are absolute okay but before we revise then we should always try to make them operational instead of blaming maybe, the situation blaming the Government, blaming the district officers.  

Finally, even we, as politicians and other persons in Government, are finding it extremely difficult to really accurately interpret laws. Even in offices you find sometimes it is difficult to make accurate reference and instead most Government officers depend on what I would call a political climate, which is extremely unfortunate sometimes. It affects our capability of negotiations with outside countries and in implementing conventions - International conventions.  Thank you.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujjenje County, Masindi): Mr Chairman, I rise to support this Bill, which is really long overdue, as my colleagues have said.  The people in rural areas whom I represent are finding it difficult to go with the law.  Recently, I think in 1993, the hon. Attorney General brought a law here, which was unopposed, to empower the RCs so that they would hear these minor cases, and the House somehow because the law was badly drafted somehow had some reservation to go ahead debating it.  We thought that the hon. Minister would go back, make an analysis come back to the House and bring back this good law which were empowering the RCs so that these minor cases can be heard by the RCs because most of our people are denied justice.  

I know to some lawyers, Mr Chairman, as with due respect you are a lawyer, it was painful exercise to the lawyers because they were trying to encroach on their areas but this is slightly important that the RCs should have more powers to hear the minor cases so that instead of the poor people in the rural areas, the peasants to be subjected to long trial which they do not seem to follow, the RCs who know their problems should -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I am taking note but I would like to inform the hon. Member, hon. Kabuubi that I did indeed take the views of the House. I have heard the RCs Bill giving criminal jurisdiction to RCs revived and printed.  But I have got about twelve or 15 Bills from my own Ministry which I have not yet had an opportunity to present to the House for debate and why we move this is the one which concerns the hon. Kawanga gives now meaningless fine were a fine of 2,000 shillings has been affected by the current reform 2,000 you cross off two zeros and you are left with 20 shillings. So, I have got so many other bills, which I would like to bring, and I shall be bringing them as and when time permits.

MR BUTIME:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from hon. Kabuubi if the RCs are given powers to try minor cases.  Then, I wanted to know if those minor cases are they purely - or they can also go to being minor but also criminal.

MR KASAUJA KABUUBI: Thank you hon. Minister.  I am happy that, Mr Chairman, the hon. Attorney General has realised the problem of the RCs and I would request that he brings up this Bill here for discussion and implementation immediately because I represent the rural people and they are finding it difficult, they are being denied justice by the corrupt magistrates, I am repeating this by corrupt magistrates because the people bring up small cases and they begin capitalising on them saying that this one you need the State Attorney.  Then when the people go to the State Attorney they are not given services, so there so many problems in which our people are facing regarding courts.  So, I suggest that the sooner the RCs are given more powers to try the minor cases which I am trying also to inform the hon. Minister for State for Internal Affairs. (Interruption)

MISS KADAGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my colleague from Bujjenje that minor case are not cases which involve the State Attorney. Any case that involves the State Attorney must be the case which is very serious, and I would like to caution Members to this House and the Public against thinking that the entire solution lies in giving more judicial powers to the RCs; this is not a solution, I think, should more conscious how about to go about this thing.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, what I was trying to say is that, the RCs if they hand any issue which pertains to that area of jurisdiction they do it quickly, but if you take a case in court even if it is a small one from our experience which you all know hon. Members it takes not less than one year or two to reach a decision.  But the RCs can do it expeditiously within two or three months and the matter is solved. (Interruption)

MR M.MUKASA: Mr Chairman, I am rising on a point of order that is the hon. Member in order to insinuate in his contribution that we have a corrupt judicial system in such he said that corrupt -(Interjection) 

I am making a point of order that corrupt magistrates these people are not here in this House to defend themselves and it is a general statement -(Interjection)- can I have protection.  It is to general a statement that to indicate are to imply that all our magistrates are corrupt without substantiation is he in order. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Hon. Kabuubi you are not in order to decide that I think you have dwelt on that point so long and the Attorney was promising to bring a Bill to the House to that effect.  So, please proceed to another point.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  But second point, Mr Chairman, having left the RCs since the Minister has positively accepted to bring it here but the sooner the better. I wanted to talk about the Commission of Inquiry.  Recently, the hon. Minister formed a Commission of Inquiry to look into the mismanagement of the criminal offenses -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  I was of the view, Mr Chairman, that the Minister stopped short he should even have given further reference to this commission to look also into the mismanagement of civil cases. It is not only the mismanagement of criminal cases but even the civil cases are being mismanaged and much as you have ruled me out of order I do not want to go back and retreat what the hon. Member was talking but to substantiate about corruption, about the magistrates so I am not going to talk about it let me go ahead with another point.

Now, this Bill is indeed, this was an opportune Bill because really when you look at the Land Reform Decree of 1975, you find that some lawyers whom I have consulted they say that this law is just on paper but it is not operational.  So, there is a need immediately to ensure that if it is absolute let it be scrapped why do you keep a law, which you cannot put into operation.  And more so the law is so vicious.  

So, another point, which I want to talk about with regarding to educate our people about the law. Most of our people do not know what is happening I also conquer with my previous colleagues who have talked about this point that the law should be made in simple editions so that people can understand because people should not be taken for a raid to this rule that ignorance of the law is no excuse.  This is how most of our people are being manipulated, and they lose a lot of money over a simple thing -(Applause)- with due respect, Mr Chairman, since you are a lawyer - you take something so small which you can easily understand but you want to go and get a lawyer to interpret it for you.  So, I feel that this law should be supported by all of us. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR SIBO (Nominated Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, to allow me to say something about law. My simple concept is that justice is one of the basic needs of man.  Indeed if you are denied food it means you are already sentenced to death, similarly if you do not know justice or if you are denied justice or if you do not understand justice you are also died. Therefore, I commend the Minister for having brought this Bill to us.  

In contemporary Uganda as the hon. Member has just said, majorities if not 80 per cent of the population is ignorant about the composition of the laws of Uganda.  Right now people are confused when they say the constitution has been written and they are now saying, if the constitution is being written now, I commit an offence and I am supposed to be taken to court - you see they are getting confused what really is law. 

So, I call upon the hon. Members to assist the Minister to come with clear terms as to what are the laws of Uganda and it must be, I will suggest, in simple terms so that the ordinary man understands and these oppression and implications are also known.  Because in many occasions the simple thing is put in a complicated term in the end you do not understand  - hon. Kabuubi has said, when you - because of ignorance you do something and then you are committed to law.  

I also want to say something about the RC case which the House entrusted to our representatives down there, I have noted with concern that it stands to be a - business to some RCs they have left at the developing issues pertaining to their localities instead they go to look for cases at the expense of over development and to the best of my knowledge there was a certain fee with was supposed to be charged according to the category of cases but it seems either because they have not been regulated or they are keeping with the economic burden to our people and in most cases, most RCs now chase cases other than involving themselves in development issues.  

I also want to say something about appealing.  In many occasions our ordinary man, we wish to appeal to higher courts but the expense of this appealing is so high that the ordinary cannot afford it.  You may find a very poor man has a general case but at the lower level he is defeated.  But it is legal for him to appeal. But because the procedures are so expensive you find that he is unable to proceed. He, therefore, abandons the case and he now succumbs himself.  So, I will wish that such a trend is also reversed.  

I also want to say something a little about the interpretation of the law in various cultures in Uganda. I do not know what was taken into consideration to make law for a society like Uganda, which has got a heterogeneous culture. It may be a constitutional issue, but I do not know, I am not a lawyer.  But on many occasions, you find the cultures in Uganda may have certain effect in the law.  And therefore, it has implications on one’s life.  Therefore, I will suggest this Commission, which the Minister is trying to bring up in amending our laws, try to take the culture of the country.

Lastly, I want to know something about the management of criminal and civil laws.  Because in local authorities, I get concerned they say a case is criminal, it is left to the chief to deal with it.

I have come across cases whereby the chief now takes this criminal case on his hands and whatever he does, the offenders definitely know it.  So, I will look at revising that area where they are saying, criminal law should be in the hands of the judges and so on.  This has been as a loophole for some local chiefs now who in many occasions are giving headache to the RCs, when somebody comes to complain, she says, this is a criminal law, let us go in my office and we shall see what to do. And then when it is civil, it is taken by the RCs. 

So, I will suggest that, that kind of phenomena should be ironed out, and to me, a chief is not a judge.  So, they have taken up the law in their hands to enrich themselves. Because their understanding is in terms of ram, cows and this is what is in simple terms corruption. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information.  I wanted to inform the hon. member that it is not enough to complain about the RCs taking the law into their hands, the chiefs taking the law into their hands, part of the work of the Member of NRC, is to mobilise the people, to explain in the area, to politicise, so that each organ, RCs chiefs know what to do other than coming here to lament and accuse them of taking the law into their hands.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand up in support of the Bill.  I have only a few remarks to make.  In the first place, I have always asked myself the law is for who?  I have a belief that the law is supposed to be for all citizens of this country, of any country for that matter. Therefore, I always get disturbed when I read law books and are in such complicated language as my friend pointed out.  In fact, at one time, I was so concerned, asked a colleague of mine in this House who happens to be a lawyer why legal books are always written in a very complicated language. Then his answer was, if they were to put it in very simple language, how could the lawyers eat?  Now, which means, it is not a law that the law books should be written in such complicated language. 

Since the law is meant for all citizens, I want to make a request to government through the Attorney General, that this time when these law books are printed, when the revision is carried out, if possible, let us go beyond putting it into simple language which people can understand.  Let us try to translate much of this law into local languages, so that our people down in the villages can read and understand the law.  Otherwise, if we remain ignorant to this law, then we shall keep on breaking the laws, just because we are ignorant.  Mr Chairman, I also want to make an appeal that these law volumes, be made as cheap as possible.  Because there are some of us who are interested in reading this law, but then the cost is very prohibitive.  

Indeed, with these new attempts of moving the law down to the RC III, I also wanted to propose that in future when these laws have been revised, and have been translated into the local languages, let copies be made available to these RC III councils, so that they can read them very well, and then be able to administer the laws that we want them to administer at their level.

Lastly, I want to assure the Minister that once he makes the laws as clear as possible all of us Ugandans will cooperate, and I am sure his job will be made very easy.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I support.

MISS KADAGA ALITWALA (Women Representative, Kamuli): Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I would like to express my personal pleasure that, the Attorney General has brought this amendment to this House.  In my maiden speech of Wednesday, 26 April 1989, this was the subject I tackled, and I urged government to do something about reviving and reforming the law.  Before I make my contribution, I would like to make a small observation on the comments of hon. Kalule Ssengo who says that, the law should be simplified, translated and so on.  

When we study law, we take a lot of time studying, because it is not simple.  We are specialists. (Laughter) So, there is no way, law is one of the three oldest professions.  There is no way the law can be diluted, to facilitate ordinary people to be able to practice law.  In the same way that we cannot simplify medicine. (Interruption)

MR SSENGO KALULE: Point of information. Mr Chairman, when I raised a question as to whom the law belonged to, the whole House assured me that, the law was for all of us.  Now, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, they are trying to say that, they are professionals and, therefore, they must try their best to make the language of the law very complicated, is actually very wrong.  If the law is made for us; it should be in simple terms so that, we can read it and understand it. (Applause) 

And that is why I did point out that, one of my colleagues in this House, who happened to be lawyers told me that, they make the language deliberately complicated, so that they can very easily eat the break, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much.

REV. ATWAI ONGOR:  Point of information.  If the law has such an amendment as I see - hon. Kadaga it is not meant for the lay people to follow; then why did they employ the services of court assessors who are not lawyers?

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have always had the problems with lawyers.  But this time, I would like to advice that, quite often, when you simplify you change the meaning and it is dangerous to change the meaning, just in case you get into trouble. Therefore, the law must be written in as exact a language and ideas so that it is very difficult for people to manipulate.  I thank you. (Applause)

MISS KADAGA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Dr Kagonyera for that very good contribution.  Now, with respect to what Rev. Ongora Atwai has said, assessors do not give opinion from the law, only on facts.  So, please, they are not civil lawyers.  Do not make that mistake. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MISS KADAGA: Protect me, Mr Chairman. As I was saying that, I support this Bill, because it has been very, very long overdue, now for us private practitioners, we have a problem in that, the Attorney General, every year vigorously administers our certificates and inquires us to have the volumes of the law of Uganda in every chamber.

There is a very severe shortage of the Laws of Uganda in this country, and a number of lawyers spend time, hand around in the High Court Library in the Ministry of Justice and in the chambers of senior lawyers in this country, to be able to have access to the law.  So, this is very timely.  In fact, it is long overdue.  

The other thing is that, we have a lot of absolute laws.  The countries from which we borrowed our laws have amended their laws so many times, that it is drastically different from what we adopted.  In fact here, we still have laws that, distinguish between a white person or a black one, which court you can go to and so on; men and women of course.  So these are from our statute books.

I am glad the Attorney General said that, a lot of laws have got to be repealed.  I would urge that, when this commission is sitting, let us try and sit down and compare for instance, our East African countries are doing on certain laws.  Can we have amount of infirmity, because we are moving towards greater cooperation.  Can we look into areas where we can cooperate even within our law, which laws we can adopt, you know compare form our neighbouring countries to facilitate movement, trade and so on, among our people.  Because, the fact that, each of us - each state has got its own individual law, has been a great hindrance to greater regional cooperation and as long as we continue, we just pay lip service to regional cooperation, without removing the legal obstacles, we are not going very far, we should become a song and remain a song.

So, in conclusion, I would urge Members of this House, to pass this Bill very, very quickly; because it is more than 30 years as you have been informed, and as you know times of the incidence, we want to stop running around, jumping around to check where is this law, where is that statute and so on.  So, with those few words, Mr Chairman, I beg to support.

MR RUTAROH (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have a few comments in support of the Bill.  One; I had very good reasons that the Mover of the Motion presented, and as have been presented by my colleagues. One thing that has been difficult for me to understand is that, since 1987, Law Reform has been talked about, and in fact some officers who were appointed for that purpose including the late, Justice Nyamuchocho; but it has taken so long up today, to get that law reform moving.  In fact in 1988, there was no provision, I remember the Budget Provision for the officers that had been appointed at the time.  So much so that, there was no stationery to enable those who are appointed to do the preliminary work.  

So, this Bill really is very, very timely. I wish to support the Bill because a number of laws are totally absolute like the level of fines that are levied on conviction of certain criminals or in cases of compensation.  I also know that, some fines that are being levied today are illegal, because certain laws have never been revised upwards. Say, on statute books you will find a case where somebody is supposed to be fined say Shs 200 but today in Traffic Court, or in some other court, they will charge him Shs 2,000 or Shs 20,000. So, there is a necessity to revise the law.  I wish to talk about the 1975, Land Reform Decree as one of those laws that were extremely progressive as far as I am concerned. But for some reason, it has not been effective.  And the results of its not being effective are being felt today.  

I will give an example of Muyenga.  Today Muyenga is a rich man’s slum.  A number of people will tell you - will not be able to describe to you geographically where they stay. Most people will not tell you where they stay, those who stay in Muyenga.  Because of the mailo land system. Certain areas cannot be developed, because City Council cannot step their to do the planning, because the owners of the land have a title and all the rights and the City Council cannot easily interfere.  So, certainly, there is need to get these laws fairly uniform.  There is the Enguli Act, which today is very, very difficult to enforce.  Because most people partake of that least drink. So, any place, even at this hour as I talk, most people are consuming that drink in the crude form.  

As a chemist, I will tell you it is very, very dangerous to consume. But for some reason, because of the economic implications, of taking alternatives people have resorted to taking the illicit drink.  As a result, the law does not make any sense because it cannot be enforced.  The law enforcement officers themselves, starting from the hon. Minister’s chambers consume the same.  The policemen consume the same. I have been reliably told that Members of this house also consume. (Laughter) So, that law -(Interruption)

MR SSENGO KALULE:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to request as part of my information; that since this crude waragi is being consumed in almost all places in Uganda, would it not be wise to at least, half legalise it, so that, we solve the problem.  Otherwise, fighting against it would be wasting our time, because it is even within the barracks themselves where they have the law enforcement officers.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, when we were debating the Police Bill here, I did inform the hon. Members that, we had completely banned discouraged, and we are prepared to arrest punish any police officer or arrest any person we find selling enguli, waragi, Kangogo in the barracks -(Laughter) and therefore, hon. Kalule Ssengo should know that, and should he find any of these people selling waragi, including himself consuming it there, we shall also deal with him.

MR RUTAROH:  Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Members for their information.  But one piece of information that I would like to advise Members on as a chemist, crude waragi contains ethyl alcohol mainly – water, and there is ethyl alcohol which is an active poison, you will have noticed -(Interjection). Let me take the information after explaining this. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You take it now or you do not hon. Member.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform the Member on the Floor that, if it is now waragi it is not legal.  It is enguli, which is legal.  So, we should differentiate the terminology. Enguli is offensive, but waragi is accepted.  Thank you very much. (Laughter and Applause)

MR RUTARO:  I must thank the hon. Member for that information.  When I was introducing the point I talked about the Enguli Act, so I know the difference between the waragi and enguli. (Interruption)

AN HON.MEMBER:  Point of information.  On the terminology which my hon. Member has just given, enguli is a raw material of waragi, so both are acceptable.  (Laughter)

MR RUTAROH: Mr Chairman, let me explain what hon. Kalule Ssengo was praying for. Enguli contains substances that are poisonous.  You will have seen a number of people, those who consume quite a bit of it. You will see their lips red.  Most of them have very, very poor sight, and this is an effect from ethyl alcohol that tends to poison these people.  Excessive consumption leads to direct death.  So, no government would be advised to administer or to allow people to poison themselves. The next point to do with the nature of crimes being committed with respect to the present Bill.  

I have one or two examples to give.  Because of the laws, that are scattered and are not easily reached by everybody, judges give different punishments for same offenses. You have a man who is taken to court for embezzling - he has not been proved yet, for embezzling Shs 20 million, and he is realised on Shs 50,000 court bond.  Somebody else is taken to court, for the same offence and for a similar amount, and he is only realised from court after paying one million shillings cash, and you find difficulty to interpret what these two mean. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Abu Mayanja): Point of information.  Sorry to interrupt the hon. Member that, I think, it is good that some of these things should be given as we go along.  Mr Chairman, it is the fact that, the law is not certain or that one judge does not read the same law.  But the law - first of all, with regard to punishments, law lays down the maximum punishments then it is left to the discretion of the judge to award an actual punishment not exceeding the maximum, but taking into account the circumstances of the case including the character of the accused, including the problems of reputation, including whether he is a first offender, including if you have got a wife, who will suffer if he is put in custodial thing and all that. Again with regard to bail conditions, - conditions for bail, judges and magistrates are given a very wide discretion.  

In fact bail is not a punishment.  Bail are just conditions to ensure that, the accused person will come and stand his trail.  For instance, if I am accused of any offence and the court knows that I am not going to run away, they can even release me on my own bond.  But if they do not know me, or if I have no fixed address or you know, something like that, that is where they say, maybe, you can run away; but in order to ensure that, you do not run away, let somebody else come and sign also for you, or bring cash bail, so that if you run away you will forfeit to the state. So, the thing is, these bail conditions and the different punishments hinder the conditions in which different courts, different judges arrive at different conclusions.  

MR RUTAROH: Mr Chairman, I am grateful for the information from the Attorney General, but I would like to disagree with him in one particular point, that bail can be punitive and therefore, a punishment.  If you are given bond of Shs 50, 000, not cash, you will walk away with easy, but if you are asked to pay a million and you cannot raise it, you will stay in the cooler down there, do you not get punished, is that not a punishment?

Two, if in the long run, you do not win the case, the bail is forfeited.  Because it is not refunded.  It is only for those who win the case that the bail is refunded.  So, I think it is a punishment. (Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information. No, no, bail is a condition for you to appear and stand your trail, and irrespective of the conclusion of the trail, whether you win the case, or you loose it, the bail money is refunded to you at the conclusion of the trail.  And secondly, may I also inform him - if people are doing differently, they are doing so illegally.  Secondly, may I also inform hon. Rutaroh that excessive bail is unconstitutional. (Laughter)

MR RUTAROH:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Attorney General has made two big points.  And these two big points are that, his department is not observing the laws that we have in our statute books.  Bail is not being refunded.  In certain cases, excessive bail is being levied in both cases. So, I am grateful for the information and we would like to request him to go and rectify directly. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, that there are two aspects to the law, that in practice, do not worry about the profession aspect of technical.  Once you are arrested because you have broken into the law, you are given by a law enforcement authority, not anybody to be taken to the process of law or the courts of law.  In that process, there are laid down procedures, which the law courts with the Police interpret in light of the available working laws.  

Therefore, if politicians say that the law enforcement authorities are not in the letter of the law, it is for them to come here and reform or change the law.  We politicians should not say that the law is bad.  Then you come here, look at the law and bring appropriate change so that the law can be smoothly run for justice and for the good of Uganda.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that part of the problem is ignorance of the public about their rights and about the law.  Unfortunately, much as the law is clear and the procedures are laid down, those who are meant to fulfill those procedures do not educate the public but instead they take advantage of their ignorance and the citizens suffer as a result.

MR RUTAROH:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the hon. Members the information they have given.  In conclusion, a year or two ago, we made a law that restored traditional rulers.  Alongside that, we also gave what is still popularly called ebyaffe. In making that law, we seem to have overlooked certain laws that existed.  The giving back ebyaffe emphasized mile land to the traditional rulers and the 1975 Land Reform Decree had sort of given the uniform law.  And I think this is in support of the present Bill.  We need to revise all those because even Members of Parliament have had to make a law forgetting a law that we already existing without repealing it.  Thank you very much.

MR MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  By a strange coincidence, I never received the Bill we are debating and I have inquired from my colleagues around me, it appears none has got a copy.  So, it is, Mr Chairman.  You may easily count how many have a copy in their hands.  Not having a copy in my hands has caused me to wonder whether we are debating only the reprint of the laws or the revision of the laws. (Interjections) Okay, now, thank you very much.  The Attorney General is saying a reprint not a revision.  So we have been going sort of -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, there are two really separate matters.  One is the law revision which means that you bring all the various laws which had already been made together, you cross out all those parts which have expired but you reprint them as they are A reviser has no power to make law or to change it.  A reviser only brings all the amendments, which have been made, and you can find that the Penal Code has been amended ten times since 1964 or even 20 times.  So, what the reviser does is to bring all these amendments and then write them together and give you one Penal Code. 

The second process is Law Reform. The law reformers have power to recommend to this House that certain laws can be changed in certain ways.  They study them, they say as hon. Kadaga was saying that they are really absolute, they have been amended where we borrowed them or they do not comfort with our traditions of life and they do not reflect our own version to certain criminal behaviour.  What they consider there in Britain hyenas, we may not consider it so.  What those people do, the revisers, they do not write the law themselves.  They do not change, and they have no powers. They recommend to Parliament and then this Parliament enacts the process of reforming.  The revision is to write together, to make it readily accessible to practitioners.  I hope I have made it clear.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I thank the Attorney General for the information.  Let me leave aside the revision, the reformation and all others and just look at the reprint.  When the hon. Minister of State stood up on a point of information, he said it is up to you hon. Members to get back to the villages and interpret to those people you represent some of these laws.  Mr Chairman, I like that.  It is important that before you interpret any type of law to anyone, you must be clear about it yourself.  At least if possible, you should even be having a copy somewhere in order to be certain.  

I have been in this House since 1989 and during these last five years, we have debated here a bill known as the Finance Bill.  I do not know whether you have been observant enough to realise that very few people debate the Finance Bill. The reason mainly is, they do not know what it is talking about. It says, such and such being amended to such and such and listing figures and figures and what is being amended is unknowns generally.  So, it has come to the point where an hon. Member of this House goes back and he is asked, is it that taxes on salt went up? You know when these things take place; they go so fast that it is difficult to know what the government it thinking. The fact is, what is being revised is not known.  

It is here that I would like to make a kind of an appeal to the Attorney General.  We are being given a kind of a grant to facilitate the reprint - remember, I am talking about reprint only - the reprint of these laws and since we have now this kind of good Samaritan, would it be unreasonable for the Attorney General to consider making a copy of these sets of laws available to the Law Makers?  (Applause) Even though, this may come - it is even possible to have a kind of paperback - (Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I will make a complete set of the laws of Uganda or when two available in the hon. Members’ library.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate the gesture of generosity from the Attorney General.  I do not know when he last visited the library. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. May I inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House who has raised a very important point to the effect that an attempt of the living law in our Statute law particularly to the hon. Members of the House because we are continuously in the process of making laws and thinking about legal matters to serve the nation.  He should occur to Attorney General that every Member of Parliament ought to have a set of laws of Uganda so that it is intelligent because law making is a science.  It is intelligent to follow the trend from the background of legislation.  

For example, when I took, this Ministry of Law in July 1964, the immediate thing I took as an administrator, I was interested in the legal aspect as an administrator.  So, we must have as legislators, a set of laws so that we understand what is happening.  For example, yesterday, we passed a law concerning the police.  Many of us were ignorant I quoted in this House that Chapter 312 concerning the police and also Chapter 294 concerning the police and prisons and even the Minister was just there when I said.  He was blank.  (Laughter) 

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate the information from hon. Obwangor.  I appreciate particularly the point, which I was driving at; that efforts are made to make a copy available to every person who comes to this House.  Now, when I say that, I notice the hon. Minister chuckling.  I believe his chuckle means where will the money come from.  It is possible to arrange. If a whole can be made available to a Member of this House and he pays for it slowly by slowly, how much easier is it to get a set of these laws and arrangement be made through the Clerk’s Office to see how he pays for it.  Because, being in this House as a lawmaker without a set of law books is like a carpenter who has no set of tools.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. in the afternoon.

(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.) 






