Tuesday, 27 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.13p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Well, where is the Minister of Finance, because this is his motion really? Suppose we finish it, who is going to tell us to resume the House?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I am ashamed that the minister is not here. I want to apologise and suggest that we go ahead. I should try to take his role, if you so accept.

THE SPEAKER: No. If they are not used to keeping time, I am going to suspend the proceedings for ten minutes.

(Proceedings suspended at 2.15p.m. and resumed at 2.29p.m.)

MR KAYONGO: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs yesterday announced the sacking of the CAO of Mukono and his deputy. She said that all their functions will be handled by the Chairman LC V. The LC V Chairman lost his seat in court. I would like the Attorney General to clarify to me whether being elected under the Local Governments law is the same as for Members of Parliament. 

When a Member of Parliament loses an election petition but appeals, he remains a Member of Parliament. Does the local governments’ law provide for that? The LC V Chairman in Mukono lost and he is still occupying the office. He is now going to take over the functions of the CAO and his deputy. Is that not a law being flouted? And it is the same district where we have all these malpractices. 

For example, in Njeru Town Council, the chairman who won the elections, because he does not agree with the councillors, elected his Executive outside the council. Can I be helped on that?

THE SPEAKER: I think there are two questions. One; can the Chairman of the District Council play the role of a CAO? The other question is; if a chairperson or a member of a local council - be it LC V or LC III - has been disqualified by the court, can he continue to perform his functions, if he has appealed, like a Member of Parliament? 

MR RUZINDANA: Can a minister sack a CAO and deputy CAO? I thought the question was that a minister sacked the CAO and deputy CAO.

THE SPEAKER: No, the question was, “did the Minister of Justice sack the CAO or any other person?”

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My clarification is on another serious issue.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we dispose of this first, then we deal with the other matter, instead of mixing them?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with the easiest, the one on whether the minister can sack a CAO. A CAO is appointed by the District Service Commission. He is a civil servant of the Local Government of the district and, therefore, I cannot imagine a situation where a minister, and of Justice and Constitutional Affairs at that, would come and sack the CAO.

The second one had to do with whether a chairperson, who has lost a petition and is therefore disqualified by a court order, can continue to act or perform the functions of a chairperson. With regard to the situation where parliamentarians who have lost a petition but have appealed continue to sit in the House, I think this one is provided for. I am, however, not so clear in my mind whether the election law for chairpersons of local councils has a similar provision. If it is not there, then it is probably unfair, for why is it that Parliamentarians have such an express provision and not Local Government Councils? 

On the question of whether in the absence of a CAO a chairman can perform the functions of the CAO, Mr Speaker, there is no such provision to the best of my knowledge.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Speaker, the two laws are different.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, he has said that as far as Parliament is concerned, there is an express provision for them. Actually, this express provision came as a result of the amendment of the relevant law under which Members of Parliament are elected. The other ones are elected under the Local Councils Act. There has never been an amendment to give them the same status as is given to Members of Parliament. It may be unfair, but the law does not provide for it. If it is required, you have to amend the law to make the same provision apply to people falling under the Local Councils Act. Satisfactorily answered?

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the State Minister in charge of Security, Mr Mukasa Muruli. We have read in the newspapers that while addressing Moslems in Mukono, he said that rebels are being recruited in Mosques. As the Parliamentary Imam, I am very much touched that the Minister in charge of Security could say that rebels are being recruited in Mosques without being specific. 

This generalisation has made this country lag behind. Because the moment you are specific and perhaps say that Moslems in Mukono or in such an area are recruiting rebels, then that is different. But to say that rebels are being recruited in Mosques, it also means that even in the Parliamentary Mosque downstairs we are recruiting rebels! 

So, we would like the Minister of State in charge of Security to be specific. He should apologise to the entire Moslem community for having said that Mosques are being used for recruiting rebels.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I think what was reported in the press is an overstatement. It is true I addressed a group of Moslems over the weekend. They are my friends and as usual, we talked about the general security situation. I did not say that rebels are being recruited in Mosques.

What I said was that there are some people, a few Imams in a few Mosques, who are using their Mosques for subversive meetings. After prayers on particular days, they send away some people and remain behind with the ones they want. They carry on these meetings, sometimes until the wee hours of the morning. So I brought that up. I was just trying to caution others not to follow the example of such people and make these places of worship centres of such meetings. That can cause a general security breach in the country. I did not, however, say that actually rebels are being recruited in Mosques.

I also said that earlier on when we had this problem in 1996, 1997 and 1998, a few Mosques were used in that capacity. People would go in, have these meetings and it turned out that some of these youth were lured into rebel activities. And, of course, as a country, we ended up with a lot of problems 

With that precedent in the background, I felt it fitting that we should alert the country. If such things begin to be noticed again, then the responsible people should come up and put a full stop to them. So, what appeared in the press was actually an overstatement. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I am far from being satisfied. The minister has again stated that in some Mosques, rebels are being recruited. I think the minister is doing a disservice to his country. He is in charge of security and he knows the Mosques that are doing that. 

The President is in Gulu fighting rebels and he is here telling us that some Mosques are recruiting rebels! Why don’t you get those people and take them to court? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean this is connected to the question of hon. Ssebaggala?

MR SABIITI: No, I have another one.

THE SPEAKER: If it is not, then do not raise it now, because he has raised a question and the minister should come in and answer it.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I thought I had really made a simple, plain and clear statement. I do not think it would be appropriate for us here in Parliament to begin disclosing whatever we know about some of these activities. However, what I said should be used to serve as a warning to those people who were doing it. Let them not go ahead. I did not say they are recruiting; I said they are holding these meetings, just like they did in 1995, 1996 and 1997. And the result of these meetings was that people went into the bush and caused a lot of problems, especially in Western Uganda. So I request that we leave it at that.

I nevertheless invite the honourable Imam of Parliament to come and see me so that we can have an in-depth discussion about this matter. We can do it in my office or anywhere else, and see how to go about this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem. My constituents have requested me to get information from the Minister in charge of Security. One person, by the name of John Bagashasha, was taken by security operatives about a month and a half ago. We have tried to trace him but up to now we do not know where he is. We were however told, when his wife contacted the security men, that, “Yes, the man is being held by security operatives.” So the relatives and the constituents are concerned about the disappearance of this young man. May I know from the hon. Minister whether John Bagashasha is in your custody, where he is and when is going to be taken to court? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS SANTA OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give information to you and the House on the issue, which was in the papers some three weeks ago. It was also over radios, concerning the displaced children from Pader district and Kitgum to Kotido.  

Last week on Wednesday, I visited Kotido District with an officer from the Ministry of Gender and an MP from Kotido presenting Jie County, and these are the things we found there. Mr Speaker, it was true that so many children have been displaced by war from Pader and Kitgum, but the majority came from Pader district. To me, they are from disaster to another disaster. We found a total of 650 children. 

When we had a meeting with Kotido district leaders and the NGO, they showed us where these children were. Most of them are of schooling age, and they were distributed to different schools, some of which are Kotido Girls, Kotido Mixed, Lomukula primary school, and Kotido Army School. The majority of these children are in Kotido Army School. When we asked why so many went there - about 160 - the Headmaster told us that the children told him that they are used to being guarded by the soldiers so they feared going to the other schools. 

I said they are from disaster to disaster because there is a lot of famine in Kotido district. These children were distributed to the schools but they are not given enough food. Although World Food Programme gives food to the different schools in Kotido district, the food taken to these different schools was on the ratio of the number of children who were there before. So, these children who were displaced were supposed to share that food.  

Mr Speaker, our worry and that of the district leaders is that the schools will close down this weekend. Where will these children stay? Secondly, where will they get food? We suggest that if two or three schools could be spotted and these children are kept there, maybe World Food Programme could come in and feed them from those schools until the schools open, when they can go back to their ratio of food in the different schools. 

I am therefore appealing on behalf of these children to the government, ministries and NGOs, which handle the issues concerning children, to come and assist. The Ministry of Education should come in immediately to announce some two or three schools where we can put these children for their shelter. This is the report I wanted to give to the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is a clear report.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Contrary to what was said yesterday that the Department of Disaster should be scrapped - and I was being incited but I kept quiet - I want to make it clear, in the absence of the Second Deputy Premier and the Minister of State in charge of those matters, that these issues have been fully discussed, and we have requested the Ministry of Finance to provide us with money. So far they have given us some money. I think when I last talked to hon. Aporu, at least Shs0.4 million had been given. We had, of course, asked for far more money, but WFP had also – I am now referring specifically to the afflicted areas, WFP also provides assistance but 30 per cent is met by the state. I want to make it clear that these matters are being addressed. 

There is also a proposal by His Excellency the President, which we are studying concerning traumatised children who have been released - former abductees. I do not think it will be proper for me to announce that proposal but it is going to be discussed by Cabinet. They are also concerned that when traumatised children stay in an area where they still think they are vulnerable, they may not study properly. So, those things are at hand and I want to make it clear that Uganda is disaster prone but our resources are scarce. But when the state gives money and it liases with NGOs and other civil institutions, we shall manage.

I do not think we can afford to scrap the Ministry in charge of Disaster. In fact, many people tend to kick us in the teeth here but they come and beg us for assistance and they thank us quietly – (Laughter) – only to come here and kick us in the teeth. I shall not allow that to take place any more. If they kick me in the teeth I shall kick them in the teeth also. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been talking about children and in the Gallery we have our children from Mengo Primary School in Lubaga Division. You are welcome! 

PROF. KAGONYERA: I think Members might have heard the Prime Minister say that the Minister of Finance has given us Shs0.4 million. That is not correct, the correct figure should be Shs0.4 billion or 400 million Uganda shillings. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
  
MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to seek your indulgence to clarify what I had stated earlier regarding the fate of the CAO for Mukono district. I have now received information from my colleague of the circumstances under which the CAO may have been suspended. According to the information now available, that particular CAO was implicated in the report of the IGG. What the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs did was to write generally to the RDCS to ensure that the recommendations of the IGG are implemented. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Did the IGG recommend that the CAO be sacked and the Deputy CAO should now be replaced by the Chairman LCV? 

Secondly, since it is apparent that once a chairman or a local council member has lost his seat - at least there is no law that says you should keep his seat - who ensures that the councillor or chairman who has lost a petition actually vacates his seat and another one is elected or somebody acts until such a time as the appeal has been disposed of? It appears that because there is no enforcement of this lacuna in the law, the chairman LC V continues to enjoy his position without anybody raising a finger. Who is supposed to take action?  Thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I am getting a bit perturbed about the explanation.  Much as I know that the IGG can give strong recommendations, I am not yet sure if he does the sacking. If the IGG did the recommendation, the recommendation must have gone to somebody who has the powers to sack. From your explanation, I do not see the mention of somebody who has got the powers to sack in order for the CAO and his deputy to vacate their seats.  I would like that explanation. If the IGG makes a recommendation, does it get implemented here and there before the person concerned sacks that person?  

MR AYUME: First of all, I wish to say that my latter clarification was in respect to the circumstances under which the CAO may have been suspended or sacked. I think I had also answered the issue of whether, in the absence of the CAO, the chairperson can take the responsibilities or perform the responsibilities of the CAO. 

Now, coming back to this other point, the minister wrote to the Resident District Commissioner in her capacity as the overseer of the electoral process, and as you know, the CAOs are the returning officers in their respective districts where they are posted. Therefore, it is in the light of IGG’s recommendation that some of the CAOs or other electoral officers misconducted themselves to the extent of fidgeting with government funds, and it is on the basis of that that the minister made the recommendation to the RDCs. 

Hon. Mwandha appears to have raised a new issue, which again was related to a situation where if the chairperson has lost an electoral petition and is therefore disqualified from continuing to perform those duties, who performs those duties? I am not so sure about this particular issue because there may not be a provision in the law. But one thing is clear; where there is a problem within the council, the CAO himself should take an interest and, if need be, advise on who should, in the absence of the chairperson, exercise his functions.  Thank you.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But this thing is developing into substantial questions when it actually came for clarification of two issues. Now, we are expanding it really! The issue was whether a person who has lost a petition under the local government system can continue simply because there is an appeal. We have said there is no law. Although there is a law to protect a Member of Parliament, as far as local governments are concerned, there is no such a law. If Parliament thinks that that law should be there, we are free to make an amendment to enable that one. Then he has told you that a chairman who is a politician cannot really play the role of a public servant like a minister cannot be a Permanent Secretary. I think this is the equation.  So, why don’t we end there?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I wish, on my own behalf and on behalf of the entire Ministry of Finance, to tender our unreserved apologies for the delay and, indeed, the embarrassment that we have caused this afternoon when the House started and there was nobody from the ministry. But this was not without cause. The reason was that while my colleagues in the ministry knew that I was in Parliament, I was still appearing before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which did not adjourn until well after 2.00 p.m. And by the time I left the Committee Room, Mr Speaker, you had suspended the proceedings. I wish to apologise to you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, and, indeed, to the Leader of Government Business. I make an undertaking that this will not happen again. I thank you very much (Laughter).  

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 001 – OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs33,409,705,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 101 – OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs4,833,412,000 under Head 101 - Office of the President be provided for as development expenditure.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002 – STATE HOUSE

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs22,580,010,000 under Vote 002 - State House be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed.)

Head 012 - STATE HOUSE 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs25,209,021,000 under Head 012 - State House be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 – OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,223,657,000 under vote 004, Office of the Prime Minister be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs56,209,499,000 under Head 014 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 – MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs3,973,000,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 106 – MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs12,269,570,000 under Head 106 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTES OA1 to OC9 – MISSIONS ABROAD

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs16,309,998,000 under Votes OA1 to 0C9 - Missions Abroad be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEADS 1A2 TO 1B4 – MISSIONS ABROAD

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs500,000,000 under Heads 1A2 to 1B4 - Missions Abroad be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 034 – MASS MOBILIZATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs5,826,999,000 under vote 034 - Mass Mobilisation be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 134 – MASS MOBILIZATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs783,000,000 under Head 134 Mass Mobilisation be provided for as development expenditure.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, you made a reading of recurrent expenditure for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the figure was around 3 billion and the other figures around it.  But what we have on our paper is that the recurrent expenditure for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is Shs10,270,000,000. Can I really get clarified whether I got the reading badly.

THE CHAIRMAN: From me or from the Minister of Finance?

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, from you since you made a reading.

THE CHAIRMAN: What I read is what I have on the document. I now put the question to the motion by the Minister for the House to resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SABIITI: I raised a question about my constituent and the honourable Minister did not respond.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, sorry. Hon. Minister, there was a question from his constituents.

MR MUKASA MURULI: Mr Speaker, I have had some quiet interaction with the honourable Member. I asked him to give me a few more particulars about that constituent of his, which he has kindly supplied. I am going to look around and see. I cannot say for now exactly where he is, who arrested him, and so on, because security is really a broad thing. I will need just a few days. After I have established the circumstances regarding that constituent, then I can come back and clarify to the honourable Member. Thank you.  

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, before I make the report of the Committee of Supply, I wish to make this correction.  The figure we submitted for Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ recurrent expenditure was Shs10,270,000,000 and I am informed by the Clerk that there was a typographical mistake and it will be handled at an appropriate time.  I beg to move.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following votes and heads for the financial year 2002/03 and passed them without amendments. These are: Vote 001 and Head 101 for the Office of the President –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Surely, is this the way we should move? There are contradictions in a budget and we continue to assume as if everything is in order! I request that the Minister of Finance properly clarifies and we go back and recommit.  

THE SPEAKER: Personally, I think so.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to apply for recomittal for the consideration of the total sum under this Head and Vote.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Which vote?

MR RUKUTANA: Recomittal of Vote 006 in respect of Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

RECOMMITTAL OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE 006 - MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs10,270,000,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the following votes and heads for the financial year 2002/03 and passed them without amendments.  These are:

• Vote 001 and Head 101 - Office of the President,

• Vote 002 and Head 102 - State House,

• Vote 004 and Head 104 - Office of the Prime Minister,

• Vote 006 and Head 106 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs,

• Vote 034, Head 134 - Mass Mobilisation, and

• Vote 0A1-OC9 and Head 1A2-1B4 - Missions abroad.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.  

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i)THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/02

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the budgetary estimates for the financial year 2002/03. Mr Speaker, I will not read the report verbatim because it is bulky. I will attempt to make a summary of the report. I therefore beg your indulgence and the indulgence of the Members to allow me present a summary of the report. 

The committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the budgetary estimates for the following departments:

1. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
2. The Judicial Service Commission
3. The Uganda Law Reform Commission
4. The Judiciary
5. The Uganda Human Rights Commission
6. The Electoral Commission
7. The Inspectorate of Government 
8. The Parliamentary Commission.

Mr Speaker, discussions were held with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the heads of the relevant autonomous institutions. The committee’s report on the 2001/2002 budget estimates was also reviewed.  

Under the Ministry of Justice, a number of activities were carried out. For example, the Promotion of Justice (the case backlog) Project, the Commercial Justice Reform Programme (CJRP), the Justice, Law and Order Sector/SWAP Development Fund. 

The Ministry’s major problems include a shortfall in financial out-turn and field approved costs, delayed restructuring of certain departments and lack of computerisation of vital records, especially in the Department of the Registrar General. 

Mr Speaker, the Constitutional Review Commission is scheduled to finalise its work by June 2003. A sum of Shs2.5 billion approved for the Commission in our opinion should be adequate for completion of its work. However, if the Commission is subjected to the quarterly ceiling, as was the case in the last financial year in the release of the funds appropriated to it, it may not be able to meet its deadline.  

The Constitutional Review Commission has a lot of political and constitutional implications. We therefore urge government to provide funds to the Commission so that it completes its work on time, so that the political future of the country is predictable.   

Under the Ministry of Justice, we have the Law Development Centre. The centre has had financial problems, which will hopefully be settled with the intervention of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The funds for Government sponsored students for the past financial year, which was approved as Shs120 million was not released at all. The Shs160 million that is meant for this financial year had been reallocated to the Constitutional Review Commission. We recommend that this money be provided for so that the government-sponsored students at the Law Development Centre, like other students in government-aided institutions, are catered for.

The Judicial Service Commission has not had a chairperson for a long time. As you know, the chairperson of the commission under the Constitution is the only full-time commissioner and for over 1 year and half, the commission has not had a chairperson. Therefore, the activities of the commission are to some extent paralysed. This has affected a number of commission activities and it is our recommendation that this post should be filled as soon as possible so that the Commission can be fully constituted in order to exercise its mandate. 

The Law Reform Commission, which is charged to review the laws of Uganda, is doing a very commendable job. However, its work is affected by the failure of the Ministry of Finance to release all the funds approved by Parliament on time. 

On the Electoral Commission, we were informed by the Minister that the chairperson and five other commissioners were relieved of their duties following the report of the Inspector General of Government on the investigations into allegations of massive misappropriation of funds and other forms of corruption at the Electoral Commission. I think this was a good step and we look forward to other actions to be taken against those remaining.  

A number of activities cannot be carried out in the commission because it is not fully constituted. It has only one commissioner who can not, of course, form the quorum to take decisions. It is therefore our recommendation that the post of commissioners on the Electoral Commission be filled as a matter of urgency.

On the Judiciary, the priority areas that need funding include the provision of vehicles for chief magistrates and Grade I magistrates. These people have no transport facilities at all, but if you look at their counterparts in the districts such as Assistant COAS, COAS, RDCs and Deputy RDCs, they are well facilitated. Chief magistrates and Grade I magistrates represent the Judiciary, which is an arm of the state and, therefore, they should be equally facilitated like other arms of the state in the districts. 

The Ministry of Finance had earlier on indicated that out of the 50 cars required to cater for magistrates, they would be provided five cars every financial year, starting from the last financial year. The committee had agreed with this position but even with this little, nothing has so far been provided to them. 

Members will appreciate the nature of the job of magistrates: these are people who adjudicate over serious matters in the districts and to let them travel by public means exposes them to a lot of risks because they are handling a lot of sensitive matters. It is our recommendation that they should be facilitated to enable them perform their duties.  

The Judiciary has got a plot of land near the current High Court, where it needs some funding to construct a building to house the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. It needs Shs6 billion to undertake this project.  

The Judiciary’s work is also affected by ad-hoc commissions of inquiry, which diverts judges from their professional work in the courts of law. We are going to recommend later that instead of diverting judges from the judiciary to do work that should be done by CID and the IGG, the institutions that are mandated to perform those duties should be funded and strengthened so that we avoid ad-hocking in the judiciary.  

On the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Commission’s budget is inadequate, especially given the increase in its activities.  The committee is satisfied with the good job the commission is doing, and it has gone ahead to open regional offices in a number of areas in this country. These additional offices require additional staff and logistics.  It is unfortunate that it is among the institutions of government that the Ministry of Finance has continued to under fund.  

Mr Speaker, I must, in a special way, on behalf of the committee, commend the job of the Inspector General of Government for the good job done in carrying out thorough investigations, especially with regard to the Electoral Commission. We must also commend the government and the IGG for the enactment of the Leadership Code and the Inspector General of Government Act, which will go a long way in assisting to curb corruption in this country. Mr Speaker, the Inspectorate’s activities will however, like other departments I have talked about, be affected by budgetary problems  

The implementation of the Leadership Code is likely not to take off because the budgetary provisions are not commensurate with the additional demands that were enacted by this House. In any case, when this House was considering the Leadership Code Bill, the Minister of Finance undertook to provide the implementation of the Leadership Code, and its undertaking is in writing.

Mr Speaker, the increased activities of the Inspectorate also requires the filling of the post of the Second Deputy Inspector General of Government, which was created as a result of the enactment of the recent Inspector General of Government Act.

Lastly, the committee considered the Parliamentary Commission and observed that the Commission has a funding gap in its development and recurrent budget. In its recurrent budget, money provided this financial year is less than what was provided in the last financial year, and yet members will note that the activities of the Commission have increased because we have had more Committees and more Members of Parliament, and so on.  Three new Standing Committees, as I have mentioned, have been formed and these require increased resources. The committee therefore proposes, in addition to what I have talked, the fate of Members of Parliament when they leave Parliament - when the former Minister in the Office of the Vice President died, Members observed that the lack of a pension scheme for honourable members of Parliament is really causing a lot of suffering to those who have left this House.  

We are therefore recommending that this House adopt, in principle, the consideration of a pension scheme for Members of Parliament and also the remuneration for backbench commissioners who are doing a good job in addition to their roles as Members of Parliament. And also, Mr Speaker, to consider chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of committees who are always doing a lot of work in addition to their usual activities as Members of Parliament. We recommend that this House adopts those schemes in principle, and the Parliamentary Commission can be mandated to work out the details.  

In general, it was noted that a number of donors make contributions to some of the institutions where they have particular interest.  Their money cannot be re-allocated to fund other programmes where the institutions may have shortages. We recommended that they should take into consideration realistic activities of different institutions.  

It was noted that activities of various institutions are increasing but budgetary provisions are based on previous allocations. The existing investigative institutions should be strengthened to minimise ad hoc commissions of inquiry, which impact on the judiciary’s work.  

The committee therefore recommends the approval of the budget for the financial year 2002/2003 as follows:

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs- Development Expenditure Shs17,810,994,000 and Recurrent Expenditure  - No, I am sorry; I have just got updates from the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Justice.  So, I beg the indulgence of Members. This is not my fault. I have been getting new figures until I started reading this Report. So I beg your indulgence, I will be making corrections as and when need arises.  

Recurrent expenditure is Shs13,732,719,000 instead of the Shs10 billion. You can make the correction. There is also an additional Vote, that is, Total Statutory, which is divided into current quota awards Shs2,200,000,000 and quota awards arrears of Shs7,182,000,000. The Total Statutory is Shs9,382,000.000.   

The Directorate of Public Prosecutions 

Development Expenditure – Shs350,000,000 and Recurrent Expenditure - Shs3,427,000,000.

Judiciary

Development Expenditure - Shs2,530,000,000 and Recurrent Expenditure - Shs14,740,000,000.

Judicial Service Commission

Development Expenditure - Shs46,000,000 and Recurrent Expenditure - Shs760,000,000.

Electoral Commission 

Development Expenditure - Shs2,437,242,000 and Recurrent Expenditure Shs16,941,000,000.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission 

Development Expenditure - Shs60,000,000 and Recurrent Expenditure - Shs2,630,000,000.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission

The Uganda Law Reform Commission has been omitted from the text you have but I wish to recommend that the following budget be approved for the Uganda Law Reform Commission - Development Expenditure Shs120,000,000 and Recurrent Expenditure Shs1,250,000,000.

The Inspectorate of Government 

Development Expenditure - Shs237,843,000 and Recurrent Expenditure Shs6,760,568,000.

Parliamentary Commission 

I think there should be a correction. Development is Shs2,745,157,000 and Recurrent is Shs32,394,290,228.

Mr Speaker on that note, I beg to request the House to approve the report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the presentation.  

MR AGGERY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First and foremost, I would like to congratulate the Chairman, his deputy and the rest of the members of the committee on a good report. But, Mr Speaker, I am raising certain concerns in this report.  Actually, my concerns are directed to the Minister of Justice.

Mr Speaker on re-allocation of the money for the Law Development Centre to go to the Constitutional Review Commission, I think it is a very serious matter. We are here to approve money for certain needy areas. We have more than 200 students who are enrolled at the centre, who need to be supported by the state like any other institution or tertiary institution. Instead their money was hijacked to go to a Constitutional Review Commission.  Was this Commission accidental or an afterthought? Why didn’t we provide for it initially? Why didn’t we go into supplementary instead of taking money that was meant for students at the Law Development Centre?  

I am also raising concern regarding education of our lawyers. At the moment, only three Universities can send their students to the Law Development Centre and no other. I do not know why this matter has not been cleared to include additional indigenous tertiary institutions that are now training our lawyers. I am specifically referring to Mukono University, which is training lawyers. 

When these people graduate in October, they will have a problem - Mr Speaker, I am being detracted by the hon. Minister of General Duties in Prime Minister’s office; his smile is cynical -(Laughter). You are smiling cynically as if I have an interest in Mukono University. I am only raising a matter of concern that these students in two months’ time are graduating and their fate has not been established. I wish the Advocates Act could be immediately amended in order to include local tertiary institutions that are training students in law, so that they can be accommodated and trained at LDC.

Last but most important is the matter of the Parliamentary Commission. Mr Speaker, without the Parliamentary Commission, the functions of this august House could be hampered. And I note with great concern in this report that there is nearly a Shs0.7 billion shortfall!  It has been hinted in the press that maybe we have to curtail our sittings here in order to stay within the budgetary parameters.  

Mr Speaker, it would be unconstitutional for us to curtail our activities here because the Ministry of Finance has refused for whatever reason to release the money to the Parliamentary Commission. We are supposed to pass this budget in the next few days, and if we are going to be curtailed in our sittings here for financial reasons, that would mean a breach of the constitutional provisions. I request that this House put pressure on the Ministry of Finance to release the money to the constitutional bodies.  

The Ministry of Finance is beginning to treat Parliament as if it was a ministry within the executive branch. We are an independent organ of the state, and we should not be handled like a ministry that can be tossed around.  Once our matter -(Interjection)- yes, we are being tossed around financially by the Ministry of Finance! Why should we go begging?  If we were to put our foot down and refuse to pass your budget, where would you work?  Where would you go?  I think you better take us very seriously! I request the Ministry of Finance to take our request very seriously. We are an independent organ of the state and not a ministry within the executive branch of the state, so our request must be admitted.

Secondly, having evicted certain tenants from this building, especially the Ministry of Justice, we have got additional accommodation in the eastern wing, which we have not been able to renovate to accommodate all Members of Parliament. Members of Parliament are entitled to office accommodation furnished properly and carpeted –(Laughter)- wall to wall for that matter, and the Ministry of Finance has refused to do that! Instead our tenants of the executive branch, that is the President’s office, who are our tenants at will, have got fully furnished office accommodation with wall to wall carpeting!  

If the Ministry of Finance cannot provide us with the necessary resources to furnish our accommodation, then I request that the Prime Minister find accommodation for the President’s office elsewhere outside the Parliament buildings.  We cannot afford to suffer when they are enjoying very comfortable air-conditioned facilities on our facility.  Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter that must be considered in its right context.

I am glad the honourable chairman of the Committee raised the matter of the commissioners. Mr Speaker, these are people who are taking on extra duties beyond the call of a backbencher. For us to honour them a little, give them airtime. Can’t you afford that really? These are the people who do work for us.

Last but not least, again pertaining to the Parliamentary Commission, members of Parliament are supposed to travel internationally to compare notes with our colleagues elsewhere. As I speak now there is no money for our travel at all, and yet there is only one minister in the Ministry of Finance now; the rest are globe trotting. They are in New York, IMF, globe trotting, and so forth.  Why are we also not allowed to globetrot with our parliamentary colleagues elsewhere within the Commonwealth?  

Mr Speaker, you recently chaired a meeting of CPA, Africa Region. You know what you went through financially.  It was tough going. Now, why aren’t we also allowed to compare notes with our colleagues elsewhere? We are a parliamentary democracy; we survive on exchange of information among other things. I am really disturbed when I see that when we come to that particular point of travel, we are not allowed.  

As a Member of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, at least once a year we are supposed to send one or two of our colleagues to the UN to attend the General Assembly.  Foreign Affairs normally invites us but they normally say, “as long as you can foot your bill.” It is important for us who are determining policies here to know how some of these international organisations function. This will help to strengthen our people who are representing us here. Instead, the Ministry of Finance always says, ‘no, we do not have the money’!  

I was perturbed again the other day when they restrained even the President’s Office a boda boda for His Excellency the President, the Gulf Stream IV.  That aircraft is supposed to take 12 to 16 people.  Instead they have restrained him to take only eight people.  Which means whenever the President travels we cannot as Members of Parliament even send somebody to accompany and advise him on matters pertaining to parliamentary gymnastics.  Mr Speaker, - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe here I have to inform you that recently the President has been contacting me to select some people to travel with him on a number of trips he has been making. I think currently, he is going to South Africa.  We have nominated some of you to accompany him. I think some people went with him to New York and others went with him to Cairo.  So, there is a policy now in the President’s office to encourage some of us to be with him.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that important information. As a former diplomat, I am very conscious of protocol.  When you travel with the President, you travel with him, not in advance. When you go in advance you are like his advance bodyguards. But when I am going with him, I have to be on the same aircraft and red carpet and whatever comes with it -(Laughter).  

So, I really appreciate the last time when he invited us to travel with him. My chairman went with him and two other colleagues. In South Africa, I know that the ministers have gone in advance but in our committee, I do not know who has gone. I do not wish to go because there are too many delegates, but indeed, it would be proper that somebody goes with him from the committee, especially the chairman and another person of the other gender.

Before I sit down, the matter of the Electoral Commission affects my being in this House. Without the refereeing of the Electoral Commission, my being here now would not be legitimate.  I demand that an organ, which is going to clear me to get here, must be equally clean and transparent.  We do not want an organ that has been found to be fraudulent to determine our coming into this august House. That is why I call upon the Ministry of Finance especially, the Government and much more so the President, to fill these vacancies as quickly as possible. 

I know one of his key ministers has been kicked out of this House using that Electoral Commission. So I hope that will not cause an appeal.  However, I would request the Electoral Commission to clear that particular minister but unfortunately the courts of law found him wanting in terms of collection of votes. Which means it was a reflection also on the Electoral Commission. So, I call upon the presidency to nominate people with integrity and transparency to sit on this commission, not people who will be found wanting in certain aspects of political qualifications.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of persons with disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to start by making an observation with regard to the budgets of independent organs.  I think the Minister of Finance being a seasoned lawyer is aware of the procedure required in Article 155 of the Constitution, and particularly clause 3.  In order to refresh his mind, I will read it: 

“The estimates prepared under Clause (2) - that is estimates of those independent organs - of this article shall be laid before Parliament by the President – of course the Minister on behalf of the President- under clause (1) of this article without revision, but with any recommendations that government may have on them”.  

The Minister of Finance, in concurrence with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, consistently year after year, as if this Constitution does not exist, comes here and tells us about these revisions. You know he was revising figures without even giving us the comments that are required under that clause. I want some clarification.  

Mr Speaker, having made those comments, I want to talk about the Parliamentary Commission. First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr Speaker and your Committee, and this Parliament for hosting a very successful CPA meeting of the Africa Region. You know that Uganda has not enjoyed the privilege of participating under this forum for a long time. Indeed, when I was a member of the delegation to Cape Town, when people were wondering which other African country was going to host the conference, people were eyeing Uganda, and your predecessor, Sir, hon. Ayume stood up and said we would host the conference. I am glad the conference was successfully hosted -(Applause).

I want also to commend you for the various works of progress that have been made in this Parliament. I want to mention in particular the renovations of Parliament, which have more or less made this Parliament look like a modern building. I commend you for that, Sir.  I believe that once the lifts have been fixed, many of my constituents who are wheelchair users will be able to move around this building with a minimum of hindrance. There is only one small place, which I will be discussing with the administration, which could be improved in order to make Parliament completely accessible. But we would like to commend you and the commission for the work that has been done on improving this building.

I would also like to recommend that the Commonwealth Hall in the basement, which used to be the Parliamentary Library, should actually be put in use. Many of these parliamentary seminars, which are held in hotels at a great cost, could actually be held in the Commonwealth Hall. We would save money, we would also use the facilities here like feeding.  

So, I would like to call upon the commission to ensure that that Commonwealth Hall is actually used for some of the seminars which require Members of Parliament, rather than go to hotels which are expensive and some of which are inaccessible. Hotel Equatoria is still inaccessible, Grand Imperial is very inaccessible and even the International Conference Centre. 

I was so embarrassed recently when the Human Rights Commission organised a meeting in the International Conference Centre. A colleague of mine from the Human Rights Commission of South Africa is a wheelchair user, and this lady suffered the indignity of having to be lifted to the committee rooms because she could not access them with a wheelchair. It is unfortunate that that building was built with no consideration of the fact that one day disabled people will use it. But as far as Parliament is concerned, we do appreciate this.

I want also to appreciate the fact that you have permitted a number of questions to be raised in the House without notice. I pleaded with the Committee on Rules to provide a certain amount of time, as indeed is done in many Commonwealth parliaments, to provide for questions without notice; questions that are current like colleagues have raised this afternoon.  

In the House of Commons they spend the first hour on questions without notice so that current issues are dealt with there and then. The committee did not take my advice, but I am glad, Sir, that you have permitted, on several occasions, for members who have current issues to raise them in the House. I think this is good for Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, I am extremely worried. In spite of the commitment by the Leader of Government Business that ministers will answer our questions, this commitment has not been fulfilled. We have many questions which are lying with the Clerk to Parliament, and the ministers and even the Prime Minister comes here, he does not remember that he made a commitment to this House, and these questions remain unanswered. This is – (Interruption) 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I have said it before and I repeat it. We are ready to answer your questions any time you bring them. The problem is that you have not put them on the agenda. Who is at fault?  I repeat; we are ready to answer your questions until 2.00a.m, if necessary. You have not put them on the agenda, so who is at fault? I repeat; we are ready, we are ready, we are ready!  -(Laughter) I thank you.

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, I wish to recall your own intervention in this august House that because we had started the exercise of the consideration of the Budget, you would find time to allow all these questions which have accumulated to be answered. I think that is what you said here, loud and clear.  

THE SPEAKER: Do I have to reply now? What I can say is that these questions, which were not answered in the last session, were saved and have to be answered immediately we complete. In fact, this week we are completing the budget process and, therefore, we will have plenty of time to have some of these questions answered may be starting next week.  

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is also a little outstanding issue of hon. Epetait, who was assaulted by a senior military officer. We were promised that a statement from Government would come to the Floor of this House to tell us exactly what happened and what action is being taken against this man who assaulted an honourable member of Parliament in public, to his embarrassment. Mr Speaker, you made that plea to the Executive – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I did, and for your information, I contacted those I thought were concerned to ensure that this report is made, and it will be made maybe this week.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you again, Mr Speaker. I commend the recommendation of the committee that we should look into the possibility of setting up a pension scheme for Members of Parliament. And I would like to add also staff, because Parliament is now an independent entity, therefore, such a scheme should also include members of staff. All parliaments in the civilised world have schemes for their members, and I am glad that this recommendation has been made. I hope that the House will give total support to that recommendation.

On the question of the Constitutional Review Commission, I am rather surprised that the committee has not said more than what it has said. There is a big question as to whether this commission was set up under the correct law. The committee should have made a comment on this.

Secondly, we were told that this commission was going to look into issues, which were controversial during the Constituent Assembly. But when you look at the terms of reference, issues that were settled have now been smuggled in and they are going to be opened again in this review. One such issue is the pillar of Parliament. 

Apparently, one of the terms of reference is to consider whether the President should have the powers to dissolve Parliament. I never knew that this matter was controversial. There are many honourable members of this House who attended the CA; I think the idea is to make this Parliament a rubber stamp. And honourable members, this Parliament is an endangered species. 

What is happening now is that the RDCs, DISOs and GISOs are mobilising people to say that if Parliament is obstructive, the President should have powers to dissolve it. They are also proposing that if the President is doing well, this business of two terms should not apply. How do you change a winning team? 

So, Mr Speaker, I am so worried about the work of the Constitutional Commission that I would like our committee to look a little bit more into the activities of this commission and report to this House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JACK SABITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the chairperson and his committee for the good job. The report was so explicit that I felt that they were really well organised. I really thank them very much.  I have two comments to make; one on the Electoral Commission and the other on the Ministry of Justice. 

The problems of insecurity, the problems of armed struggles in the Third World do hinge partly on the mis-management of elections. And unless Uganda in particular is guided properly, we are likely to continue in the circle of violence and internal armed struggles.  

The way the Executive handles commissions, particularly the Electoral Commission needs to be revised. I may have to suggest later that the appointment, for example, of the chairman of the Electoral Commission in this country should not be in the hands of one arm of government. We should involve other interested parties instead of leaving it to the Executive, which has an interest. 

The interference of the Executive, the appointment of raw people as commissioners and staff of the Electoral Commission, makes the commission not perform its duties very well. I therefore request and advise the Executive that much as I agree with the way the President handled the removal of the Electoral Commission, when the period of appointment comes, the Executive should be extremely careful. They should look at all the variables that have caused conflict in this country, and not impose certain persons on that commission to do the work of the Executive –(Interruption)

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Thank you hon. Jack Sabiiti for giving way and I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

I do not follow clearly what hon. Sabiiti is saying, because Parliament approves the chairperson of the Electoral Commission and other members. Parliament also approves the budget of the Electoral Commission as we are doing today. If Parliament is not satisfied, it can at any time, through the relevant committee, summon the chairperson of the Electoral Commission or the entire commission. We can also withhold the approval of the budget when we are not satisfied.  

Now, what I do not understand is the complaint of hon. Jack Sabiiti to say that this matter is left in the hands of the Executive exclusively.  What I am trying to inform the honourable member is that it is our duty, if we are not satisfied with the members that are proposed by the Executive, to say “no”. If we do not do that, I do not think it is fair to turn around and blame the other arm of government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SABIITI: Thank you for your information. I am quite aware that Parliament has a hand in it, but I am surprised to see hon. Kazoora - it appears when a backbencher sits in front -(Laughter)- But Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Kazoora for his advice. I am quite aware that Parliament gets involved - (Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, as is the tradition of this House, I sat on the frontbench very uncomfortably, purposely to help the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, specifically on matters of the Parliamentary Commission, which deals directly with the honourable members.  Hon. Sabiiti knows my attitude towards the frontbench right from the Sixth Parliament to date. Is he in order, Mr Speaker, to impute bad motive on me that I, John Kazoora, coming to defend the budget of the Parliamentary Commission, could therefore be influenced otherwise?

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Sabiiti is out of order in that. There was an oversight because he does not know your role as a commissioner, which you are playing now -(Laughter)  

MR SABIITI: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. The reason I dwelt too much on the Executive is because of the acrobatics that take place in the House, and particularly in the Appointments Committee when names are forwarded to the committee. I am aware that the Executive has tended to influence decisions; that is why I am requesting that we want to have a commission that is independent as provided in the Constitution. We want a commission, which is competent, a commission whose membership reflects the type of skills that are needed.

There is a tendency to have people in that commission who are not independent-minded, who are not neutral, and this makes the commission’s work extremely difficult. 

I request that much as we cannot get out of political patronage, there are institutions where we must have the right people to do the technical job.  So, I request the Executive that when it is time for the appointment of these people, please look for the right people to do the right job.  

Secondly, I would like to talk about the Ministry of Justice very briefly. The chairman of the committee has very ably articulated the problems of the ministry. One of the major problems is posts which exist but which have not been filled for a long time. Year after year, we are told that the following year the posts will be filled.  I request the Prime Minister to liase with his ministry and the Ministry of Public Service to come to the rescue of this ministry.  Many departments in that ministry have never been restructured. A lot of money was spent on restructuring, but some departments were left unrestructured, and as a result they cannot recruit.  So, I would request the hon. Prime Minister to help this ministry to make sure that the posts, which are vacant, are filled.  With this, Mr Speaker, I thank you.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the debate. First of all, I seek clarification from hon. Jack Sabiiti. I am a bit confused when he tries to say there is a lot of political patronage and somersaulting in Parliament when these appointments are being made. Is he trying to suggest that the Appointments Committee of Parliament does not have the wisdom to sieve through some of these things in order to make the correct decisions and, therefore, approve some of these presidential appointments?  

I think we should not send wrong signals. Rather, if we really want to make our Parliament independent and make correct decisions, we probably have to come up with standards or recommendations to the Executive on how these appointments or nominations should be made. Therefore, when they make their own nominations, they must conform to the recommendations of Parliament.  

Having said that, I thank members of the committee and their chairperson for the good work done, but with respect to the Electoral Commission, a request is being made for the approval of their budget in order to complete, for example, the electronic voter register. Before we approve this budget, may we know how much money has really sunk into the photographic voters’ register? And when this project was being undertaken, may we know whether it was well conceived, or was it being done on an ad hoc basis?  

We read from the press that the secretaries who were employed in the Electoral Commission for the voters’ registers have gone away with the pin-code numbers and, therefore, the information about the voters can no longer be accessed. Is this information true? Because you may be aware that a lot of money has been sunk into this project, but day by day what we get are not very encouraging results.  

There are so many flaws at the Electoral Commission resulting into the termination of the services of some of the commissioners. Right now, as rightly reported by the chairman of the committee, there are only one or two commissioners, and they cannot constitute a quorum. Therefore, there is an urgent need to fill up those positions. Can we be educated very clearly how these commissioners are appointed? Because the electoral process in a country determines the kind of stability it will have. 

A country like Uganda has undergone a lot of trauma arising from political instability caused because people begin to challenge electoral results. We must take this matter as a very important aspect because it is a fountain of problems as much as it is a foundation for our stability.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to tell me about this Electoral Commission as per now, in view of what has happened. Is it ready to tell this country how much money has been lost, so that we actually know the mess, which has been there?  I thank you.  

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues in commending the good job done by the chairperson and his committee. I have got three points to raise, one is with Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and this has a connection to the Ministry of Finance.  

If you look at page 3 of the report and at the committee’s observations, I am interested to see what was approved during the financial year 2001/2002 for this ministry and the shortfall in billions.  If you look at the shortfall and the work the ministry is supposed to do, and what they have approved for this financial year, I do not know if the Ministry of Finance considered them before they came up with their ceiling to the committee concerned. 

Mr Speaker, we come here and pass budgets but at the end of the day you find that the ministry has done nothing simply because the Ministry of Finance releases funds in bits. I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance to participate fully in supporting these ministries.

Page 16 is about the Judiciary, and the committee came up with a good statement. They are saying the mission of the Judiciary is to provide timely administration and delivery of justice to all the people of Uganda. That is covering all the corners of Uganda. If you look at the recommendation of the committee about transportation, they are saying it can be done in a phased manner, if the 50 vehicles cannot be availed at once. I wonder what sort of formula they are going to apply in deciding which particular district should be favoured first and which to give in another financial year. I wonder about such a recommendation. I am sure what is bringing all this is lack of a policy as far as purchasing vehicles is concerned. 

You do not get surprised to find that while other ministers and Permanent Secretaries are driving 4000 cc model 2000 Nissan or whatever it is, their counterparts in another ministry are just driving Coronas. And this is because of lack of a consistent policy. If we had -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Public Service is responsible for the provision of vehicles to ministers and entitled officers. It is also the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Service in liaison with other ministries to work towards standardisation of motor vehicles for use in government.  

As I speak now, the ministry has come up with the standardisation of vehicles to be used by entitled officers and ministers.  So, what is happening now is to work on the total requirement of vehicles for government ministries and departments. Already last week we were able to provide 10 vehicles which have been allocated to ministers and entitled officers and we hope that during this financial year, we shall work closely with the Ministry of Finance to bridge the gap. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, when the Minister of State for Disability was appointed, she was given a ramshackle double cabin pick-Up which at one time broke down in Mabira forest when she was going on official duties in Jinja. That is about four years ago. Because at that time there was a project of Community Based Rehabilitation, it was considered necessary to give that minister, on temporary basis, one of the vehicles of the project. Since then the Ministry of Public Service has not found it fitting that the Minister of State for Disability should have a vehicle like any other minister. Even ministers who have been appointed later have been given beautiful sleek Intercooler Pajeros and our only Minister of Disability continues to suffer in an old project vehicle without any consideration whatsoever that she should, like any other Minister, as a matter of right, have a vehicle for her use. As if that was not bad enough, even the other vehicle in the project had been given to one of the ministers. But I understand it has now been returned to the project. We feel very bitter!  Let the minister know that this is happening. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, on the same differentiation of providing facilities, I always observe with sadness the Minister of State for Education and Sports using, I think, one of the oldest and rare quality of a Land Rover now in the Ministry department. It must be the only one of its type still available to ministers. I do not know whether it was her special choice! I thank you -(Laughter).

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the concerns of my colleagues in ensuring that the Members of the frontbench and entitled officers get appropriate vehicles for use. I would like to give the following clarifications. 

Hon. Mwandha is right to state that the Minister of State for Disability does not have a vehicle. It is true we are working towards providing a vehicle to each minister and minister of state. The Ministry of Gender has so far received three brand new vehicles. These are Prado Intercooler ministerial vehicles. The last one was just delivered this week to the Minister of State responsible for Children Affairs. The Minister responsible for Disability is on the list. She will be getting her vehicle possibly before the end of November. 

With regard to the issue raised by hon. Okulo Epak, I would like to inform the House that hon. Akech Betty received a brand new vehicle this week on Monday. It is a Prado Intercooler and I am sure she is happy about that. And we look forward to ensuring that all ministers and entitled officers do receive what they are entitled to.   I thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: I thank you, honourable minister for that good information however, I am still not yet convinced. I still believe that there is some inconsistency and greed, mostly in the Ministry of Finance. We have been in this Parliament for a long time and we have seen that whenever there is a change in the Cabinet, the new Ministers of State always take the ramshackle vehicles from the old Cabinet Ministers. So, unless you come with a clear policy, this issue will continue to come on the Floor.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the Uganda Human Rights Commission.  Honourable members, all of us know the importance of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. If you look at page 18, there is an observation by the Committee that the commission has formed a countrywide civic education framework and a steering committee to help in co-ordinating activities of NGOs involved in human rights activities, which is very much commendable. 
However, if you go to the third-last paragraph, you will see that only Shs40 million has been provided to this important commission. That is why I am saying that the Ministry of Finance in most cases is not serious about what it is providing before it comes to the committees.  

I urge this House that if we are to continue with this important commission, something important must be done. If the Executive is not interested in this commission, let it scrap it off rather than just putting it on the payroll and providing it with a mere Shs40 million, which cannot even buy the Prado the Minister of Public Service has been telling us about. If the Minister of Public Service is serious about the policy he is talking about, then where is this commission going to get the vehicles of Shs40 million? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their good report, and I have a few comments to make. Under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, when we were looking at the budgetary provisions, the chairperson of the committee introduced what he called statutory awards. That is the court awards and the arrears. I am a Member of the Committee on the Budget and we were informed that the government is in arrears of about Shs59 billion to pay court awards. 

Mr Speaker, you might be aware that almost everybody who sues government wins a case in court. I am not sure whether there is less competence on justice to defend government. As we continue losing cases, this bill will continue accumulating. We have provided for Shs9 billion to cater for the court awards and the arrears. That means by the end of the financial year there could be more cases lost by government in billions of shillings; add on the arrears, we shall jump to beyond Shs70 billion.

I represent Bugangaizi County and I have represented this county since 1996, and I have some of my constituents who sued government after being evicted from a game reserve. They are demanding about Shs20 billion and so far only Shs1.5 billion has been paid to them. At this rate, some of them will die before they receive their compensation. I am not sure whether it will not be like the East African workers who have died and their money has never been paid to date. What is the Ministry of Finance doing so that some people who sued government and defeated it are paid their money? This money continues to accumulate a lot of interest. 

So, I wish that the Ministry of Justice becomes more patriotic to defend government and win cases so that we progressively reduce this figure, otherwise, it will keep increasing. Maybe we shall get a loan from World Bank to pay court award arrears. 

I want a clarification from Ministry of Finance on what strategy they have in place to make sure that the people in my constituency are paid their money before they die. I am under a lot of pressure; they think we are not providing enough money to pay them and yet Finance has not given – I think today Finance should give me an answer that I will tell the people of Bugangaizi. I thank you.

LT COL PHINEHAS KATIRIMA  (Army Representative): Thanks very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a very good report, and for the time they took to interact with all these departments. I am also happy with their recommendations and I hope, at the end of the day, to convince Members to adopt them. But before we reach that stage, I want to point out a contradiction. 

I do not know whether it was inadvertent or whether the chairperson of the committee changed his mind at the last minute. Therefore, I want to know whether it is in keeping with the recommendations of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which we may need to adopt at a later stage. This is on page 22, the last-but-one paragraph. It says: 

“The budget of the Parliamentary Commission should be approved as presented by the Commission.” 

I would like to stop there, Mr Speaker, and then look at the figure, which he has read for approval for the Parliamentary Commission. 

I thought the first figure which was there was the correct one, but he has now cancelled it. I do not know whether it is inadvertent. The right figure, in my opinion, was Shs36,526,079,200 but he cancelled it and put the wrong figure of Shs32,394,290,228 in spite of the good case he articulated and the very good and convincing presentations you heard from hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Mwandha and many other members, and which I think many members of this House dearly share. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from Ministry of Finance concerning the shortfall indicated on page 3 of the report. It appears to me there is such a big gap. 

I am wondering, based on a communication - which I will probably lay on the Table at a later stage - that was given to Ministry of Justice by the Justice Law and Order Sector Donor Group Chairperson. They were concerned that the medium term budget framework did not reflect most of the donor contributions. They went into detail to tell us how much they were willing to give to this sector. 

I am wondering whether the indication made by the donor group is reflected as part of this budget or we are suffering a shortfall because of the usual tendency of the Ministry of Finance to say, ‘this will cause inflation.’ The figure here is US$15,150, which I think could cater for the shortfall we have in this report. I would appreciate a clarification from the Minister of Finance. I thank you.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for a very good report. My concern is on page 11, about the Constitutional Review Commission. 

You will realise that Ugandans appreciate the intentions of this commission. On very many occasions, whenever something of a constitutional nature appears, the population has always been told to wait for the outcome of the review commission. So, the goodwill should be enhanced and the confidence of this commission should be improved.  

I also appreciate the position of Finance, but when you read that the work of this commission has disrupted activities of other institutions, then you get a problem in terms of commitment to this commission. Like the committee has rightly pointed out, that the work of this commission may not be through by June 2003 if certain arrangements are not put in place. So my plea goes to government and even the Minister of Finance to give this review commission special consideration. 

I look at it as a project of significance to this nation, whose outcome is needed by the entire population. I think due consideration should be given to enable this commission deliver results to the population in time. Otherwise, it will be a mockery of the very reason that it was put in place. I call upon the government and the Ministry of Finance to give it the co-operation it deserves so that we get timely intervention from this committee. And whatever has been of a problem in terms of constitutional nature should be handled once and for all. My plea is for proper funding of this commission so that it concludes its work very well.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good work done. However, I have a few points to raise and I will start with the Parliamentary Commission. I have been in Parliament for the last one year and two months and we have passed a budget for travel for Members of Parliament to represent us outside the country. Since then these members travel but I have never seen a report telling us what these guys went to do for  us. 

You hear so and so is out of the country; we are hearing of traffic jam in the air; people are dying, but nobody informs us of who is travelling. Why don’t we have a bulletin per week to tell us which Member of Parliament is where and what he is doing? If he is a tourist, I do not mind, but so long as he is representing Parliament, we need to know.

Mr Speaker, I have heard that Parliament will close by December 2002 due to lack of funds. I am getting worried! I thought people sent us here to make laws, which laws are good for all Ugandans. If Parliament closes, who is going to make the laws? Is it the executive or the judiciary? I am getting worried. This could be a deliberate move by the Ministry of Finance to make sure there are no funds for us. 

You can see that a lot of money has been wasted in the Electoral Commission on non-important issues, where we know money has got lost. The IGG is also telling us these people cannot be prosecuted when we know these guys have robbed us! Why don’t we get that money to do a good job in Parliament?

On medical allowance, believe me or not, we all fall sick and our families also do fall sick. Again, unless it is a deliberate move to make sure that by the end of this financial year all Members of Parliament are dead, then I would need to be told. We need this medical allowance so that we are able to treat our families and ourselves.  Good minds, good laws, good everything! Unless you want us to be here every now and then saying he or she used to be a good person in Parliament.

I was always telling my colleagues and my people at home that me I am a group employee, because a group employee is paid wages for the job done on that day and after that he/she does not share anything including the profits which accrue to the entity. Therefore, this pension scheme was overdue and I think it should be emphasised. Government should look for resources to start the pension scheme as quickly as possible so that Members are sure that at the end of their contract, they are able to get something to go by as a handshake for maybe the bad or good job done.

On the Electoral Commission, I am still getting worried. Evidence came up which showed that these people have been operating a foreign account, which was not authorised by the Auditor General.

THE SPEAKER: But do you have facts on that? That issue has come up from newspapers! Apparently, I think you are picking this from newspapers. These people earned their salary plus monthly gratuity, they decided to invest it in South Africa, in America; what is wrong with that honestly?

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If it is their money, I have no problem, but if they are using our money to invest so that they can earn the interest and whatever, it is wrong.  But if it is theirs, I have no question to ask.

The Ministry of Justice wants to recruit more staff and the DPP has a problem of backlog of cases. We know very well if justice delayed or something like that, it is more-or-less like a war or death. We ask government to expedite the funding of DPP’s office so that they have enough resources to follow these cases, and the victims are not terrorised as they wait for the day of judgement.

Lastly, the Constitutional Review Commission: I know it is doing a good job in some sectors, but in others, it is not doing well. I do not know if it is their own move.  Last week-but-one, when I was in Sironko, I was told that some people were going round telling residents that, ‘When they ask such a question, you must give this specific answer or else your life is in danger.’ So, when the commission went and asked questions, they were giving those answers. Is this really a review commission or it is a ‘coerce’ commission? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like, first of all, to thank my colleagues, particularly those who have expressed concern about the state of staffing, inadequacy of staffing and funding to enable the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs discharge its mandate. Specifically, I would like to say something about the concern expressed by the hon. Aggrey Awori. 

Part of the report says that Shs120 million meant for the students of the Law Development Centre sponsored by government was last financial year diverted to other things. The correct position is that the Ministry of Finance did not allocate such money. 

Prior to last financial year, funds for the Law Development Centre were channelled through the Ministry of Education. As a result of change in policy, these monies were supposed to be channelled through the Ministry of Justice. It, however, so happened that because of uncoordinated movement of troops and lack of proper flow of information, this aspect was not taken care of until it was too late. The Ministry of Finance had no alternative but to say that they did not have the money for that financial year. 

What is happening now is that a series of meetings have been held between my ministry and the Ministry of Finance. It has so far been agreed that the Shs120 million, which ought to have been remitted to the Law Development Centre, will be taken care of as domestic arrears. Our figures for domestic arrears have been appropriately adjusted. This money will be made available, together with the Shs160 million for the current financial year - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But how will the beneficiaries of last financial year gain from this? The parents and students themselves already suffered. Are they going to be given something?  

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with your sentiment, but I think this is a matter that we will take up with the Ministry of Finance. 

Hon. Awori complained about the limitation of entry to the Law Development Centre of the university law graduates. It is true that of the local universities, only three can currently access the Law Development Centre. This matter has been addressed. When the Advocates’ Amendment Bill is brought here, this matter will be adequately taken care of. I am certainly not comfortable with the fact that we are doing it so belatedly given that it has already made some people suffer, but it is going to be taken care of.

Hon. Mwandha, hon. Awori and hon. Jack Sabiiti expressed concern about the constitutional review exercise. They urged that there is need to appoint people of integrity and people who are transparent in the manner they execute their duties. I could not agree with them more. We have had problems with the outgoing Electoral Commission, which I do not wish to go into, as it is now public knowledge. The report on it is out and as a result of the recommendations of the IGG, certain actions are being taken and others have already been taken.
 
Hon. Mwandha was particularly worried about the fact that he is not sure about the law under which the Constitutional Review Commission was set up. I would like to allay his fears that the Constitutional Review Commission was set up under the Commissions of Inquiry Act and that it was legally appointed. 

He also maintains that the commission should not delve into issues that, in his opinion, were already deliberated and decided upon by the Constituent Assembly. I would like to advise that a Constitution, like any other law, is dynamic. We have experimented on the operation of the current Constitution for this long. Many of you have complained about some of its provisions. Even their Lordships, the Judges of the High Court, Supreme Court and Court of Appeal have expressed their views about certain provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, I think there is nothing wrong with the current Constitutional Review Commission addressing some of those issues, or even those issues that members of the public, including honourable members of Parliament, may wish to raise with the Constitutional Review Commission.

An issue was raised about the need to appoint a new Electoral Commission. Currently, we do not have an Electoral Commission, and the process of identifying persons who are suitable for appointment has started. I wish to inform honourable members that it is not an easy exercise. A lot of consultations are going on. I have no doubt that we also need to learn from our past experience. All of us who were involved in the selection and final appointment of such persons, including the Executive and the Legislature, will obviously take into account the problems we have had before.

Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki –(Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you Attorney General for giving way. I did not intend to rise but the hon. Attorney General has commented that we had problems with the sacked Electoral Commission. 

I understand that the laying-off of these commissioners was as a result of his legal advice. May I know from the hon. Attorney General, and maybe the committee concerned, whether there was justice because the committee never had a chance to invite the laid-off commissioners and the chairman, yet they interfaced with the IGG and his staff on the allegations as they were given in the report? They had originally invited the chairman and his commissioners to give their account, but later cancelled that invitation. 

I do not know whether the chairman and his committee at large really think that there was justice served to these people. And the Attorney General, as he continues to refer to this case, does he also think there was justice? Did he himself have the chance to interface with the chairman and the commissioners that were laid-off? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AYUME: First of all, I wish to confirm that the Electoral Commission Chairman and its members were removed as a result of the investigations and recommendations of the IGG. The IGG recommended and the procedure for removing them was followed. I do not wish to go into that. If I did, we would have to get a copy of the Leadership Code, go through it, talk about to whom the IGG submits his report and after how long the authorised officer to whom the report is submitted acts; how he/she acts, and all that. Suffice it to say, however, that as Attorney General, I was satisfied that the procedure was properly followed.

Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki raised the matter of the court awards. I think what he has in mind is that the court awards are excessive. If I did hear him right, he implied that this was attributable to the incompetence of the government lawyers in the Ministry of Justice. If that is what is on his mind, I would like to assure him that that is not the case.  

Court awards normally take time to satisfy. Why? Because of problems, which in the case of the Ministry of Justice are beyond its control. We receive monies for discharging our obligations from the Ministry of Finance and if the monies are not forthcoming, then we are incapacitated. This is so much that some of the awards, which carry interest, have resulted into accumulation of arrears. These are reflected in the figures that some of you read of in the newspapers. 

I cannot say why the money is not made available on time in order for us to satisfy our indebtedness. That is a matter for the Ministry of Finance to explain. I, however, think that all of us know that it may have to do with what they always refer to as the “limited resource envelope”.

Mr Speaker, those are the points I was able to capture, and which I thought I should respond to. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Minister of Finance, do you have something to say?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the honourable members for their observations and concerns regarding the topics before us. I will be very brief because all the members who contributed were really concerned about the ministry’s inadequacies. Apart from hon. Mwandha whose concern I did not quite appreciate, the rest was basically about failure to provide what is approved and failure to meet expectations.

On failure to meet our obligations and failure to provide what Parliament has approved, the answer is simple. Honourable members, all of us know that we are operating a highly constrained economy. We do not have enough revenue to satisfy our demands as yet. We can only provide what we collect. It is true there are shortfalls every year; it is true that Parliament approves certain items and we are not able to provide the money as approved but what should we do? 

At this point in time, the beauty of the budgeting process is that it is transparent by virtue of the Budget Act. All committees have had the opportunity to look at the resource envelope. They were able to see what we have in the purse, and members of this House have had occasion to attend committee meetings. 

All vote holders have had occasion to sit with the Budget Committee of this House and to agree on how to allocate, re-allocate, adjust and re-adjust whatever we have. So while it is true that we do not meet the expectations of this House, it is not our fault. Until such a time that we can be able to raise enough revenue to cover all that we are supposed to cover, I am afraid we shall continue to face these problems 

We do our best but of course we cannot provide the money we do not have. We in the Ministry of Finance do not hold money; we are just a conduit, just like pipes. A water pipe allows water to pass through but it does not produce the water itself. So, if we do not get the money, then definitely we cannot fulfil all that we are supposed to. I do not want to go into the specifics –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. Honourable members are very much aware of the situation because we do not live in a foreign country. We live in Uganda. We know that we collect little, not enough to satisfy our problems Our concern, however, is that use the little you collect properly. I gave an example of the vehicles bought by government. If you know you are still very poor, why do you go for a Benz, model 2002? Go for an appropriate model until time comes when you can afford a better one! 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the choice of vehicles bought is not entirely the decision of the Ministry of Finance. Perhaps we have to address the concern to all organs of state. In any event, I am not aware of any extravagant vehicles or means of transport that the Ministry of Finance or of Public Service has bought. We have only provided what is reasonably required of any minister or government official to fulfil his obligations. I do not think honourable members will be happy if ministers and other officials of government failed to fulfil obligations because of inadequacies in their transporting system.  

To come to hon. Mwandha’s question, he referred me to Article 155 of the Constitution and said something to the effect that we have consistently ignored it. To the best of my knowledge, we have every year, including this one, presented before the House estimates of revenue. They have been discussed with the relevant committees, with the Budget Committee, and every authority that ought to discuss them. So, unless I did not quite appreciate it, I think his observation was not very accurate.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member referred you to the Article in question. It provides that approving of the budget is done here, and we are in the process of doing so. The Ministry of Finance does not approve the budget. He is only presenting his case and it is up to you to decide what you want to do with your budget.

MR MWANDHA: I thank you. The concern was that of the manner and procedure of presentation of the budget as laid down in the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: I remember when the budget was read, the minister brought the books for self-accounting bodies. It is these comments, which the committees have taken, considered, accepted or rejected. That is the procedure we are following. Can we get any clarification on that?

MR MWESIGE: Yes, Mr Speaker. The budgets of statutory bodies are supposed to be brought to Parliament with comments from the Ministry of Finance, but without revision. But we are of course mindful of the resource envelope of government. It is limited and that is why we sit with the Ministry of Finance to come out with something that is affordable. It is one thing to pass money here and another for that money to be available.

Therefore when the Minister of Finance appears before the committee, we discuss with him. We look at areas where he can concede and change, and in some cases he has, as I have explained in my report. But where he cannot, there is nothing we can do. We cannot get milk out of a stone.
  
MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am satisfied with that explanation.

MR RUKUTANA: In conclusion, honourable members, as I stated, what are being presented today are figures, facts and observations, which have been considered at length by your own committees. It is true that we have had ample time to consider everything that is being presented today. 

We note with concern all your observations, the shortcomings and shortfalls, and we definitely have the duty and obligation to see that we work towards eliminating them. All I can say, honourable members, is that we shall do our best to fulfil our mandate. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I still would like to get clarification from the honourable Minister for Finance concerning the indications by the donor groups in as far as Ministry of Justice is concerned. 

I did present some information to the Ministry of Justice concerning what would be available from the donor group. I am wondering whether that was reflected. Earlier on, we were told that some of this money was causing inflation, and we had a big concern over the shortfall. I will appreciate it if the issue is put in perspective. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, contrary to what has been said over and over, the Ministry of Finance never rejects donations. What we say is that all money, whether it is a donation, a grant or a loan must be budgeted for. I do not know of a case where a donor brought money and we said, “No, we cannot accept it.” The only thing is that when a donation comes in we say, “yes, let us make a provision in our budget on how to utilise the fund,” and that is that. 

So to answer your question, honourable member, we have never rejected any donation. But donations must be accepted in a proper and orderly manner if we are to keep the economy of this country in good condition.

MR MWANHDA: Is that true even with regard to the health sector? Isn’t it true that there has been a public expression to the effect that money coming in will actually be stored to exchange at a given rate and therefore money in the sector will not be accepted? 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, it is not true that we have rejected money for the health sector. I know there was an allegation made by some officials of the Ministry of Health that there are donations that we rejected. We wrote to them asking them to provide details so that we could accommodate that particular money in this budget and no details came. So it cannot be true that we rejected money for the health sector.

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to answer questions, which were specifically addressed to me. That is the question by hon. Katirima on page 22 of the report, about the figures of the commission. 

I would like to inform him and the House that originally the Parliamentary Commission had presented a budget of Shs37 billion for recurrent expenditure and Shs5 billion for development expenditure. The Ministry of Finance made its comments and recommended that they could afford Shs31 billion for recurrent and Shs1.9 billion for development. 

We called both the Ministry of Finance and the Members of the Commission on a round table and together they concurred to take a midway position. So, it is Shs32.3 billion for recurrent and Shs2.7 billion for development. Therefore, the change in figures is not my own unilateral decision but the concurrence of both the commission and the Ministry of Finance.

On the Electoral Commission, an issue was raised as to why the committee did not meet the commissioners. Mr Speaker, when we received a copy of the report of the IGG, we called the Minister of Justice, who in our practice normally appears on behalf of the Electoral Commission. We presented the queries raised by the IGG, and she undertook before the committee that government was going to take action. Naturally, we had to give her time to take action, and we were pleased to learn after one week that the President had actually dismissed the commissioners who were implicated in the report.  

Our committee is not a court of law; it is not an appellate court where the commissioners should have appeared even after having been dismissed. Once they ceased to be commissioners of the Electoral Commission, they lost the locus standi to appear before our committee.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report. I now put the question - (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: I am sorry to interrupt, but on a procedural question, I would like to be clarified whether the cramming of suspects in Police stations is a result of what the Minister of Finance has said. That we don’t have enough manpower to handle expeditiously cases of people who are crammed in several Police Stations, particularly on account of things like defilement. I am told of the same situation in Luzira. 

I would like to be clarified whether it is the law. The DPP has told me that they have tried to revisit the law to help the expeditious handling of these cases. But it is a situation, which I would like to know, whether it is procedurally right to have asked the chairman of this committee or it will go to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, because I think there is a lot of suffering.  Mr Speaker there is suffering and I expected the chairman of this committee to pay attention since it also concerns the Ministry of Justice. 

We have all read the law and the DPP said he has tried very much to convince the Minister of Justice and hon. Matembe to see that this law is revisited, but they have refused. It seems there is a lacuna. But, meanwhile, people are suffering and procedurally I would be interested to be clarified where this problem is, because right from the villages, money is being extorted from people on account of sexual offences.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I thought that the reason why hon. Kazoora sat on the Frontbench was actually to answer -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: He has nothing to answer. I am the chairman of the commission and I acknowledge everything. He was working with the chairperson of the committee.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not clear in my mind as to what law hon. Wambuzi is referring to, which in his opinion needs to be changed in order to expedite the process of handling cases in the law courts, but if he is talking about what I know, which is a project under the Justice, Law and Order sector, namely, the Back-log Case Project, then as far as I know, the Ministry of Finance had made provision, though not adequately, but some money is coming.  

The Director of Public Prosecution is being empowered. He has already appointed new State Prosecutors and new State Attorneys are also being appointed. The Judiciary has already been facilitated under this Backlog Case Project.  It is a package, and I am surprised that according to the honourable member, this has not made an impact. But I would like him to be specific as to what he is talking about so that we can take up the matter. Otherwise, there is a programme of backlog cases, which is intended to reduce cases, which are pending for the congested prisons and so on and so forth. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kazoora, did you detect any question posed for you to answer?

MAJ KAZOORA: Yes, Mr Speaker. Just to reassure hon. Mwandha that I have been consulting with the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee to ensure that the position of the commission is taken care of. If he heard the figures properly, we had Shs1 billion added on development, and we had another Shs600-plus million, which had been cut. So, we reassure members that the committees will now sit and we shall be on schedule of Parliament, so there will be no problem. 

Also, about the medical money, when we approve this budget the query of the Auditor General will be no more and we will be paid. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I waited for you to put the question because my concern has nothing to do with the committee’s report or the money that has just been approved.  

At the beginning of the debate today, I heard hon. Aggrey Awori expressing concern about the President travelling or not travelling with Members of Parliament. You went further, Mr Speaker, to outline to us the number of trips on which the President has had to adopt members of Parliament to go with him. This thing has been disturbing me. 

There is no law that compels the President to go on his trips with Members of Parliament, much as there is no law, which stops him from doing that.  But, Mr Speaker, this insistence of Parliament to go on the President’s delegation, to me, has got two sides to it. One side might be that Members of Parliament want to go and see what the President is doing when he goes outside there, but the other one, which is bothering me very much, is when you look at the separation of powers between the three arms of government, when you look at the independence of Parliament and the oversight role of Parliament, I want to know, what is it that members are going to do on the President’s delegation?  

Mr Speaker, the President has got a 61-member Cabinet in all the sectors –(Interruption)
            
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the new policy is not that the Parliament pressed the President to include Members of Parliament on his delegations. It was the initiative of the President. I think there is nothing wrong for him to decide who is going to travel with him.  So, it is not a question of Parliament pressing the President. I have been getting communication from His Excellency the President to the effect that he would prefer to travel with one or two people on his delegation; what is wrong with that?  So, it is not because we have insisted that it is being done, it is the President’s decision that it should be done.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker my question is, given the three arms of government and the independence of Parliament as an institution, does this strengthen us in anyway? 

I remember very well when the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs met with His Excellency, the chairman - I am sorry he is not here - Hon. Nsaba Buturo put it very clearly to His Excellency that they would like some Members of Parliament to be travelling with the President on his delegations.  So, I would like to be guided; I don’t know what my colleagues think about this, but I think it undermines the independence of this institution of Parliament vis-à-vis that of the Executive.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think, let us not really open a debate on this. You mean when you go to the President you cannot stand on your feet and say what you want to say?  Does it mean that when you travel with him it is bribery? Does it cause you to lose your principles? Is it that when you are on his delegation you will not be able to say what you want to say? Are we underrating the Members of Parliament that they cannot be independent when they are in the proximity of the Presidency?  

I think we shall examine this another time, because it just came up. Somebody was saying we should not, and I said the President has actually done so. I think let me remind you; he said he wanted to travel with two people and I have been nominating people with various interests and from different parts of the country. And I do not think that when the members came back they had been compromised. I have full trust in the ability of members to decide on what is good for the country and what is not. (_Hon. Sabiiti rose_) Hon. Sabiiti, is it because of your question, which was not answered?

MR SABIITI: No, Mr Speaker. The issue being raised by hon. Kiraso; I think we should not just brush it off –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Nobody is brushing it off.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, when I was presenting my case here before hon. Kazoora interrupted me, these were the areas I was looking at, where the Executive tries to influence Parliament through various ways. Before such a policy is adopted by this Parliament, I think it should be properly discussed, because I can see it affecting Parliament in many ways. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I really don’t think this is – because if it is a substantial subject, I think we shall find time to deal with it here with proper information. Otherwise, I think concluding that because somebody has travelled with the President, he or she is therefore influenced, is an insult to a member.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from the honourable member is that- I think you are being dragged into something different. When we talk about the Executive, I hope we are also including the ministers on the frontbench, is it not so?

MR SABIITI: Yes.

MR BAKKABULINDI: If that is the case, we are always interacting with the ministers and nobody is complaining. I do not see anything awkward about it.

THE SPEAKER: I think the subject is closed. Now, honourable members, we should be moving to the committee of supply, but we had a problem with the figures. I think I should give the Minister of Finance the opportunity to crosscheck the figures so that we do not repeat the mistake. Unless I am informed that there is no problem, then we can proceed. Is there any problem or we proceed.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, in collaboration with the chairperson, because they can bring figures when they are different from what the committee looked at, and they just come for approval, I think the Minister of Finance should liaise with the chairman of the committee so that the figures brought here are true figures.

THE SPEAKER: So, we pronounce ourselves on the figures tomorrow?

MR RUKUTANA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I understand you have an address from the Director of ISO. So I think maybe this is the convenient time to adjourn so that you get the address.  With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to 2.15p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.36p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 August 2002 at 2.15 p.m.)


