Thursday, 21 August 2008

Parliament met at 10.47 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. We have decided to start a bit earlier so that we can handle much more business. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Mr Anthony Yiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that we have one Member of the Front Bench present. Otherwise, I was getting very concerned when I didn’t see the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Local Government and that of Public Service, but maybe they are on their way to Parliament.

This is the report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Governments on the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the Fiscal Year 2008/2009.

Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution and under the provisions of rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure mandate the committee to among others:

1.	Examine and comment on the policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction; and 
2.	Discuss and review the government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them.

In line with this mandate I now have the honour and pleasure to present, for your consideration and adoption, the report of the committee in respect of the policy statement and budgetary provisions for the Fiscal Year 2008/2009 covering the following votes:

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service; Vote 011 – Ministry of Local Government; Vote 146 – the Public Service Commission, Vote 147 – the Local Government Finance Commission and Votes 501 to 850 – the local governments of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the committee recognises and appreciates the valuable inputs into the discussions of the respective policy statements by honourable ministers and their technical teams. The committee also recognises the efforts of the following officials: officials of the Local Government Finance Commission and the Public Service Commission, Officials of the Uganda Local Government Associations and Urban Authority Associations. The committee greatly benefited from the interactions with the above.

Methodology

The committee received and examined the relevant policy statements in light of the following:
1.	The State of the Nation Address by H.E the President;
2.	The Budget Speech and the background to the Budget;
3.	Actions taken by ministries and departments in fulfilling the previous recommendations of the committee;
4.	Performance standards and indicators set by the ministries and department;
5.	Viability of projects pursued by ministries and department; and 
6.	Optimum utilization of funds.

Consideration of policy statements

Discussions were held with the respective honourable ministers, chairpersons of commissions and their technical staff. The committee also met and held discussions with the representatives of the Uganda Local Governments through their associations.

The committee’s report highlights the following aspects:

1.	Sector missions;
2.	Performance of previous budget for the Financial Year 2007/2008;
3.	Achievements of the sector in the Financial Year 2007/2008;
4.	Planned activities, projects, programs for 2008/2009;
5.	Funds requested for from the Ministry of Finance to implement the planned activities; and
6.	The committee’s observations and recommendations.

Vote 005 – Ministry of Public Service

The ministry’s mission is to develop policies, systems and structures that provide for an effective and harmonized public service supported by a well developed and motivated human resource that will deliver timely and cost-effective public services that are affordable by the Government of Uganda and responsive to the needs of the people, especially the poor.

In the Financial Year 2007/2008 the appropriations were as follows: recurrent expenditure had Shs 4, 113, 168, 000; development Expenditure was Shs 1, 100, 922, 000; the donor projects had Shs 41, 279, 077, 000, and the statutory expenditure was Shs 78, 240, 000, 000.

Supplementary appropriations

They only got Shs 139,617,000 000 for recurrent expenditure and the justification was that Shs 72, 820,000 was additional funding required to cater for medical expenses of Mzeei Godfrey Lukwonga Binaisa, former President of Uganda. The other Shs 66,797,000 were funds requested to cater for the publication of pensioners’ details in newspapers.

On the amount of funds requested by the ministry in that financial year, the actual releases were as follows: recurrent expenditure was Shs 2,655,748,885; development expenditure, Shs 1,985,320,000; the donor projects, Shs 10,714,145,195; and the statutory, Shs 78,240,000,000.

Achievements of the Ministry of Public Service in the Financial Year 2007/2008:

1.	The ministry paid pension arrears amounting to Shs 186 billion to 44,024 public officers who included traditional civil servants, local government staff, teachers, former employees of the East African Community, and officers and men of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. Included here is Shs 17.5 billion, which was paid to 3,300 local government pensioners. 
2.	The Public Service Commissions Act and the Public Service Negotiation, Consultative and Dispute Machinery Act were passed by Parliament.  
3.	Disseminated the revised Performance Appraisal Instrument and the Performance Appraisal Guidelines.
4.	Introduced the Reward and Recognition Scheme to the Public Service.  
5.	Provided technical guidance and support and supervision to appointing commissions including district service commissions during the recruitment of public officers.  
6.	Completed restructuring of the Uganda Police Force and the Ministry of Education and Sports.  
7.	Developed a framework for baseline data values for the Public Service Reform Programme. 
8.	Commissioned the consultancy for the independent review of the Public Service reform programme.  
9.	Held a joint annual review on the implementation of the Public Service Reform Program. 
10.	Conducted a civil society and private sector organizations workshop to build partnership for improvement of service delivery.  
11.	Conducted Public Service Reform Programme outreaches in local governments as well as ministries, departments and agencies, which are called MDAs.  
12.	Introduced the client charters to three ministries and three local governments. 
13.	Reviewed the implementation of the Results Oriented Management in the Public Service. 
14.	Completed the Wage Bill Management and Pay Reform study.  

Planned Activities for 2008/09

1.	Cascade a revised staff performance appraisal system in 15 MDAs and 15 local governments and to provide technical guidance for implementation. 
2.	Settle outstanding pension liabilities for retired public officers, including officers and men of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, traditional civil servants, teachers, former employees of the East African community and local government staff.  
3.	Commissioning and conducting the National Service Delivery Survey 2008. 
4.	Pay severance package to public officers who may be retired due to restructuring of MDAs of government.
5.	Finalize the revision of the standing orders. 
6.	Dissemination of the revised standing orders, code of conduct and rules and regulations to 15 MDAs and 15 local governments.  
7.	Training of human resources managers in schemes that will promote payroll data integrity in MDAs and local governments.  
8.	Conducting regional training workshops in E-governance payroll and records management.  
9.	Conduct public service HIV/AIDS policy awareness workshops and training. 
10.	Complete the Wage Bill Management Framework. 
11.	Conduct a review of three operational systems in MDAs and local governments, to facilitate reducing of red-tape, simplifying procedures and enhancing client focus in service delivery.  
12.	Conduct training in process re-engineering in MDAs, and local governments to carry out cost effective studies in four ministries and four local governments.  
13.	Improving the monitoring and evaluation capacity of the ministry of Public Service.  
14.	Conduct research on key public service reform implementation areas. 
15.	Hold a joint annual review of the Public Service Reform Programme to appraise stakeholders on the overall performance of the reform initiatives.  

Committee observations

The committee made the following observations on the activities of the ministry of Public Service:

a)	Payment of salaries: the committee noted with concern the untimely payment of salaries especially for local government staff caused mainly by the delay in accessing the payroll and failure by commercial banks to credit employee accounts on time.  

b)	Vice-President’s residence: whereas the arrangement of renting residential accommodation for the Vice-President at Shs 66 million per year appears to be economical compared to acquisition of a permanent facility; it is the considered view of the committee that it is high time the government procured a permanent facility that can serve both as office and residence for the Vice-President.  

c)	Pensions and pension arrears: the committee noted with appreciation the priority given by the government to clear pension arrears. It further noted with approval the continued support to local governments to clear pension arrears where in addition to Shs 17.5 billion paid last financial year, Shs 30.09 billion shall be spent in Financial Year 2008/09 on pension arrears in local governments. 

	The committee, however, was concerned with the lack of transparency in the payment of local government pension arrears since the actual individuals who benefited are not yet known. 

d)	Selective salary awards: the committee noted with concern that whereas inflation and the cost of living have gone up, the government has not considered it necessary to review and enhance salaries of civil servants across the board. The government has instead decided to go in for selective salary awards to reduce shortage of skills in certain professions like in the health sector. 

e)	Payment of severance packages: whereas the government is continuing with restructuring, there is no provision in the budget for Financial Year 2800/09 for payment of severance packages whose requirement amounts to Shs 11.37 billion.   

f)	The increasing size of ministries and numbers of local governments has not only raised cost implications but has also impacted directly on the Ministry of Public Service’s ability to control the size of the Public Service and to plan for the implementation of pay and pension reforms.
 
Vote 146 - Public Service Commission

The mission statement: the commission was established under provision of Article 165 of the Constitution and it exists to provide government with employees of the right calibre, right numbers, placed in the right jobs at the right time.  

Performance of the previous budget

In Financial Year 2007/08, the following were the appropriations: current expenditure 2,778,178,000, development expenditure 625,536,000, and donor projects 318,459,000. They received no supplementary appropriations.  

Actual releases by the Ministry of Finance were as follows: recurrent expenditure, they received Shs 2,672,890,148; development expenditure they received Shs 599,639,000; and for donor projects they received Shs 282,459,000.  

The achievements were as follows: 

1.	The commission handled the renewal of contracts for permanent secretaries. 
2.	They conducted interviews for posts submitted to the commission. 
3.	Handled appointments, confirmations, promotions and disciplinary actions both at the centre and districts. 
4.	Processed and released advertisements to the press. 
5.	Conducted interviews and performance improvement programmes for district service commissions. 
6.	Determined appeals from persons aggrieved by the decision of the district service commissions.
7.	Determine the appeals from persons aggrieved by the decisions of the District Service Commissions.
8.	Develop staff selection guidelines used by the District Service Commissions in implementing new schedules for local governments. 

In addition to the above achievements, the Public Service Commission hosted an AAPAM international workshop for African countries under the theme: “Fostering good governance: the role of appointing commissions/authorities”. Its main objective was to share experiences and instill modern personnel management and development skills among appointing commissions and authorities.

Key participants from Uganda came from the Education Service Commission, Judicial Service Commission, Health Service Commission and the 80 District Service Commissions throughout the country. 

The exposure helped participants to appreciate experiences and lessons learnt from sister commissions from all over Africa and globally. 

During the new Financial Year 2008/09, the Public Service Commission plans to continue with its traditional role of providing government with employees of the right caliber, in the right numbers and at the right time. 

Planned activities

1.	They intend to conduct skills enhancement programmes for the newly inaugurated District Service Commissions.
2.	Conduct written examinations and psychometric tests for line ministries and key posts in the local governments. 
3.	Fill vacant posts for critical skills.
4.	Develop competence profiles for managerial jobs in the service.
5.	Conduct the graduate recruitment exercise.
6.	Review the Public Service Commission regulations, guidelines to District Service Commissions, Public Service Commission forms and operational documents. 
7.	Produce the annual report for 2007/08.
8.	Produce the final strategic plan of the Public Service Commission.
9.	Introduce a new performance appraisal instrument for permanent secretaries.
10.	Complete construction and furnishing of the resource centre and purchase of equipment and necessary reading materials. 
11.	Put in place a system that would enable job applicants to access adverts online and also carry out aptitude tests online.

The Commission explained to the committee the need for financial support for critical areas for the enhancement of optimal output. And the committee felt that the requests were reasonable and therefore recommends that with availability of funds, the Ministry of Finance could fund these activities, namely:

1.	Enhancing entitlements for the chairperson, deputy and members of the commission.
2.	Funding for vehicles of entitled officers.
3.	Facilitating performance enhancement of the District Service Commissions particularly the newly created ones.
4.	Providing office equipment and retooling of the commission.

Given the wide mandate, the need to equip the commission adequately in order to give it capacity to deliver in tandem with the public service sector manpower requirements cannot be over emphasised. Addressing the funding gaps mentioned will go a long way in enhancing service delivery in the Public Service Commission. 

Committee observations on the activities of the Public Service Commission:

1.	With the limited resources, the Public Service Commission had performed relatively well. 
2.	The number of District Service Commissions was increasing but the Public Service Commission has not got additional resources to guide, advise, and mentor these District Service Commissions. 
3.	Many ministries and local governments are still understaffed despite the fact that they have approved structures. This limitation is caused by lack of funds for wages.
4.	Many students in higher institutions of learning were pursuing courses, which were not relevant to the requirements of the job market. Therefore, national manpower planning is required so that training institutions, parents and students can be guided.
5.	The committee expressed concern over the “localisation” of civil servants in the districts, which has not only curtailed mobility but also limited their national outlook.
6.	Whereas the Public Service Commission is supposed to conduct regular visits to districts in order to develop the capacity of District Service Commissions, the Committee was informed that due to limited resources, this function was not fully executed in the last financial year. 
7.	The committee learnt with concern the failure of many districts to have fully constituted membership on the District Service Commissions.
8.	The committee noted that there were only 27 fully fledged District Service Commissions with five members each. 25 District Service Commissions have four members each. 25 District Service Commissions have three members each. Four District Service Commissions have two members each; Terego and Maracha districts have none. So you can look at the annex attached to this report to see where your district falls.
9.	The performance of many District Service Commissions is being affected by political interference thereby affecting impartiality, which is a prerequisite for an efficient and effective service.

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government

The mission of the Ministry of Local Government is to guide, harmonise, mentor and advocate for all local governments in support of the vision of government to bring about social, economic transformation of the country.

Performance of the previous budget

The ministry had the following funds appropriated for the Financial Year 2007/08:

1.	Recurrent expenditure, 4.61 billion;
2.	Development expenditure, 3.6 billion;
3.	Donor project, 47.44 billion.

They got no supplementary appropriations. The amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance was Shs 2.93 billion for recurrent expenditure; and Shs 0.82 billion for development expenditure.

Votes 501 to 850 - Local Governments of Uganda

The amount of funds appropriated for the Financial Year 2007/08: recurrent wage was Shs 564,016,115,429; non-wage Shs 304,815,616,316; development expenditure Shs 181,205,176,608, which gave a sub-total of over Shs 1 trillion.

Supplementary appropriations

Local governments got GT compensation of Shs 12 billion, which we approved as supplementary, and Members you are aware of this. Then they also got Shs 12,991,419,000 to cater for salary shortfalls. 

The amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance to local governments: recurrent releases were wage, Shs 542,443,365,146; non-wage, 304,356,905,866; development expenditure added up to Shs 173,170,132,093 which gave a sub-total of Shs 1 trillion.

Performance of the previous budget

We were not able to capture the performance of the local governments but the performance of the ministry is contained in their policy statement. There are a number of activities, which they did but they were left out during the typing of the document. But the planned programmes and activities for the Financial Year 2008/09 are as follows:

•	The ministry is to carry out inspections, supervision and monitoring of local governments; 
•	They will enforce accountability of public funds in local governments;
•	They will strengthen procurement systems in local governments;
•	They will enhance the capacity of local governments to mobilize local revenues;
•	They will strengthen local governments’ capacity in financial management, planning,  budgeting and human resources management;
•	They will implement the key recommendations of JARD 2006 and review the progress  during JARD 2007;
•	They will also induct, orient and train local councils on their functions and roles;
•	They will support the implementation of various cross-cutting government policies and   programmes;
•	They will support local governments to deepen community based participatory planning,  budgeting and management process;
•	They plan to strengthen information and communication systems for local governments;
•	They will assist local governments in implementation of new structures;
•	They will assist in strengthening the physical planning function in urban local governments;
•	They will support implementation of the local government’s Rural Development Strategy initiative.
•	They will support the functioning and operations of local council courts; and
•	They will carry out a national assessment of local governments.

Development activities to be undertaken

1.	Naguru-Nakawa development project.
2.	Relocation of jua kalis; and 
3.	Improving market infrastructure.

Then they also have other projects, which are special programmes in the Ministry of Local Government.

1.	They will complete implementation of LGDP II;
2.	Design a follow up on LGDP II, which is LGMSDP;
3.	They will complete design of DLSP and commence its implementation;
4.	They will complete design of CAIIP and commence its implementation;
5.	They will continue implementation of ASPS II; and
6.	Then they will also continue with the implementation of PDM.

Achievements for the sector for FY 2007/08; the ministry had the following achievements: 

1.	Processed into law a Bill introducing two new taxes for local governments (the Local Service Tax and Local Hotel Tax) and developed the guidelines, which will guarantee proper and effective administration and collection of the taxes.
2.	They assisted local governments to carry out property evaluation in order to determine rates payable by the owners.
3.	Undertook a number of measures aimed at improving the local tax regimes of local governments and to streamline the administration of local taxes.
4.	Issued new government, financial and accounting regulations as well as accounting and internal audit instructions.
5.	Trained local governments account staff in various financial disciplines and internationally recognized professional courses.
6.	Supported implementation of IFMS in 14 local governments.
7.	Trained all local governments public accounts committees in order to enhance their capacity to critically examine financial reports.
8.	Inspected 70 higher local governments and 140 lower local governments including 32 special investigations.
9.		Carried out a national assessment of local governments.
10.		Issued local council courts regulations, the trainers’ manual and a simplified version of the Constitution to all local governments.
11.	They completed training of officials of local government courts in 27 districts.
12.	They assisted 55 local governments to formulate capacity building plans and provided on job training kits to them.
13.	They trained 47 officers from relatively weak local governments in human resource management.
14.	They supported 105 local government officials who are undergoing professional and carrier development training at post-graduate level.
15.	They trained 33 districts and their sub-county technical planning committees on how to integrate cross-cutting issues namely environment, gender and HIV in development plans.
16.	They supported the implementation and use of local government information and communication systems in 39 local governments.
17.	They supported 31 districts to cascade result-oriented management to lower local governments.
18.	Facilitated the creation of six new town councils which took effort from 1st July.
19.	They created 59 town boards across the country, bringing the total number to 137.
20.	They assisted 76 urban local governments in the development of their structure plans.
21.	They formulated a policy to streamline the development and management of urban markets in the country.
22.	They completed a feasibility study on major urban markets in the country. 
23.	They held the fourth, joint, annual review of decentralization involving all stakeholders across the country.
24.	They implemented a number of strategic activities under the local government sector investment plan.
25.	They revived the Transport Revolving Fund Scheme and procured and delivered 13 vehicles to local governments.
26.	They completed the implementation of LGDP II and continued to implement AAMP, CAIIP, ASPS and PDM.

Let us now go to Vote 147 – Local Government Finance Commission

The mission for the commission is that it exists to promote equity in sharing of revenue between the central government and local governments and to promote efficiency and effective in local government revenue mobilisation and generation.

The budget performance: the appropriations were as follows: recurrent expenditure was Shs 1.77 billion and development expenditure, Shs 0.12 billion. They got no supplementary appropriations.

The actual releases from the Ministry of Finance were as follows: recurrent expenditure was Shs 1.32 billion and development expenditure Shs 0.09 billion.

The achievements were as follows:

a) 	Dialogue was enhanced with sector ministries to ensure full implementation of the fiscal decentralisation strategy principles to allow increase in resource allocation between sectors by local governments to address local and national priorities within the Local Governments Sector Investment Plan (LGSIP) and the PEAP.

b) 	The commission carried out outreach dialogue and interfaced with stakeholders on major policies and issues that impact on fiscal decentralisation in the country.

c) 	They provided technical support to strengthen the local government planning, budgeting, reporting processes and transparency especially in new local governments.

d)	 They undertook studies aimed at strengthening and enhancing local government’s taxation on policy and administration.

e) They undertook a study and made recommendations for the streamlining and establishing the extending of grants to lower local governments.

f) 	Provided technical support to local governments in preparation of development plans, budgets, and budget framework papers in accordance with the fiscal decentralisation strategy.

g) 	They co-ordinated and facilitated the meetings and functioning of the Local Government Budget Committee (LGBC) to oversee the implementation of FDS. 

h) 	They facilitated and coordinated the annual negotiations between government and local governments.

i) 	They reviewed more options for financing local governments to come out with a long term regime for viable financing of local governments.

j) 	They supported local governments to implement the incentive and sanctions system for encouraging local revenue improvements.

k) 	They sensitised the public and the political and civic leaders on the issues of local taxation.

l) 	They co-ordinated and facilitated the Local Revenue Enhancement Coordination Committee (LRECC) to streamline activities aimed at improving local revenue performance in local governments.

m) 	They completed the process for developing Public Private Partnerships in local revenue mobilization/ generation as well as provision of public goods and services.

n) They implemented the approved human resource policy and communication strategy so as to improve efficiency and effectiveness of the commission. 

Development/Capital activities

(a)	They procured one station wagon motor vehicle.
(b)	They procured assorted office equipment, which included computers and accessories.
(c)	They procured assorted office furniture. 

Planned activities for 2008/2009

a)	They intend to complete ongoing studies on streamlining payment of loyalties to local governments, identifying peculiarities in local government service delivery and identifying new sources of local revenue.
b)	They intend to provide technical assistance to local governments in planning and budgeting.
c)	They intend to facilitate negotiations between sector ministries, managing conditional grants in local governments. 
d)	Monitor performance of grants in local governments.
e)	Analysis of budget framework papers and annual budgets in local governments.
f)	 Support revenue enhancement activities in local governments.
g)	Review the organisation and manpower structure of the commission.
h)	Review and update the commission’s corporate strategy.
i)	Support the implementation of the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy.
j)	Ensure that all salaries and wages for staff are paid.
k)	Ensure that all monthly and annual allowances for entitled staff are paid.
l)	Ensure that rent for office accommodation is paid for and utilities and bills cleared.
m)	Provide training of staff in performance and skills improvement.

The above plan is to provide support to the implementation of activities planned specifically under the Local Government Sector Investment Plan, which is currently not funded through the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. To support the function above, they expected Shs 2.02 billion. The work plan and budget for LGSIP for the Financial Year 2008/2009 is annexed to the policy statement. You can refer to it.

General observations of the committee on the Local Government Sector

The committee made the following observations covering activities of the Ministry of Local Government, Local Government Finance Commission and all the local governments of Uganda.

The funds from the central government to districts to finance decentralised services are still inadequate relative to their tasks and mandate, and this has derailed the policy of decentralisation. It is also worth noting that the entire allocation of the unconditional grant is virtually used to meet the wage bill, with hardly any funds left for running other decentralised services.

Whereas the principle behind Graduated Tax compensation was that funds were to be shared by all the units that used to share graduated tax revenues namely LC V, LC IV, LC III, LC II and LC I; the Ministry of Finance chose to create a conditional grant by directing that Shs 33 billion out of Shs 45 billion be spent on recruiting and paying salaries for new staff. This, therefore, meant that the actual funds that went as Graduated Tax compensation without condition last financial year were only Shs 12 billion. The effect of this has been that many local governments especially LC IIIs have virtually closed because they have no funds for recurrent expenditure. 

The same trend is to continue in financial year 2008/2009 unless Parliament directs otherwise. The committee would like to draw the attention of Parliament to the contravention of section 4 of the Local Government (Amendment No. 2) Act, 2008. Madam Speaker when we were enacting this amendment, it was made a condition in the law that government shall continue to compensate local governments for three financial years by not less that Shs 45 billion. That law was passed in Parliament here but according to this budget we are providing Shs 12 billion. So, really we are running counter to the laws, which we make ourselves. We should not accept this.

Nakawa-Naguru project: the committee was informed that the government had secured a developer for this project, which is estimated to cost US $500 million and that the interests of sitting tenants were to be catered for. The project has, however, not taken off following the intervention of the IGG in December last year. To date no report has ever been produced by the IGG so the project has stalled. It is important to note that government concluded the necessary agreements with the developer and the delay may attract damages and interest to the detriment of the taxpayers of Uganda.

The committee was guided on the criteria used to create new town boards and districts: 
Town boards: the ministry ensures that the area has at least 2,000 people, enough land for future expansion, a reasonable number of permanent buildings to form the core of the proposed town board, and the area should also have reliable water sources. Financial implications for the proposed town board have to be taken into account and consultations are carried out involving the key stakeholders before the area is declared a town board.

As for new districts, in analysing requests for creating new districts and making subsequent recommendations, the ministry is guided by the criteria provided in Article 179(4) of the Constitution. So the criterion is very clear there. So those who want districts invoke that Article.

The committee noted that the ministry’s capacity to inspect all the 80 districts is inadequate because it has only 12 inspectors. Madam Speaker, districts are on the increase but the ministry’s capacity to inspect is very inadequate.

The committee noted that the term of office of the current village and parish councils expired in May 2006. In the interim period, their tenure of office was extended by the Minister of Local Government through an Administrative Instrument and, therefore, the legality of these institutions is doubted.

The committee noted that there is inadequate staffing in all local governments, which has affected service delivery. This raises concern of how the Prosperity-for-All programme which is implemented in a decentralised framework will succeed without addressing the issue of staffing in local governments.

Hon. Members, you are aware that the NAADS programme was restructured and reformed and was supposed to be implemented by civil servants of the district. However, there is no staff to implement it. So we wonder how this programme will succeed with no implementers on the ground.

Concern was expressed about the performance of district contracts committees especially on multiple roles of civil servants namely: they are the initiators of procurements, they are the supervisors, inspectors and they are the ones to effect payments. We were informed that the accounting officers in most districts lack powers to enforce laws and ensure transparency and accountability.

The committee noted that it was taking too long for government to constitute the Local Government Finance Commission after the expiry of its term on 13 April 2008. Over four months have elapsed and this commission is not in place yet it is supposed to do a lot of good work for this country.

The increasing number of local governments without adequate financial provisions and inadequate financing of manpower is severely constraining service delivery in particular and decentralisation in general.

The Kampala City Bill, which will give Kampala city special status as the capital of Uganda to be administered by the central government has delayed. This has brought a lot of uncertainties in the management of Kampala city.

The national assessment of local governments that was carried out by the Minister of Local Government showed that 53 percent of districts were penalised because of poor performance. 

These districts exhibited the following:

a) 	Failure to co-fund projects.
b) 	Lack of record keeping of meetings of Executive committees and councils and their failure to hold meetings was justified because of the non-availability of funds. Councils, LC IIIs and LC Vs are supposed to hold regular meetings at the sub county level but because of lack of money to pay councillors, they do not meet. By not meeting, that also attracts a penalty.
c) 	Failure to synchronise development plans with the budget.
d) 	Under collection of local revenue.

In spite of the previous recommendations to increase the equalisation grant to Ugshs 6.5 billion, the committee notes with concern that the Ministry of Finance has continued to avail a negligible and stagnant amount of Ugshs 3.5 billion. The result is that the intention of balancing development, as envisaged by the framers of the Constitution, is defeated and outcries from the affected districts will never end.

The poor performance and subsequent penalisation of districts raised concerns as to whether districts are manned by competent chief administrative officers.

Local government political leaders who work on full time basis complained about the failure of government to pay them gratuity. They are reported to be the only category of public officials who are paid salaries by the government that is subject to Pay As You Earn tax and never get gratuity.

The number of districts has drastically increased from 56 in 2005 to 80 in 2007. Already the Ministry of Local Government has over 30 additional requests for granting of districts. While new districts have a perceived advantage of taking services closer to the people, the split of local government units has led to simply dividing the existing budgets of mother districts. After splitting the budget and sharing assets, the liabilities are left with the mother district, which is very unfair. 

We have got a case in point of one district called Tororo. The government has been splitting it and creating new districts and now liabilities have accumulated to over Ugshs 1.5 billion. They take them to court, attach their assets etc so we shall make a recommendation. We should take note of this.

The conditional grants allocation formula that was developed by the Local Government Finance Commission two years ago has not been operationalised because of resistance from sector ministries. Therefore, there are no transparent criteria used to allocate grants to districts. This is very unfortunate.

While the government is mostly concerned with the modernisation of agriculture, this process can only be meaningful with a corresponding plan to support urbanisation. Many towns have continued to degenerate with squalid conditions characterised by slums, poor infrastructure, poor sanitation and poor waste management mechanisms.

The committee made the following recommendations:

1.	The Ministry of Public Service should streamline the procedures for accessing the payroll to minimise delays in payment of salaries.

2.	The government should prioritise and construct an official residence and office for the Vice-President.

3.	The Ministry of Public Service should publicise information about payment of pension arrears in local governments so that beneficiaries are known. In this regard, copies of payment schedules should be sent to the benefiting local governments. 

4.	The committee further recommends that the ministry should develop a system that will enable automatic access to the pension payroll upon retirement.

5.	The Minister of Public Service should also provide Members of Parliament with information regarding pension payment on a quarterly basis because this is a grave matter.

6.	The government should consider reviewing and enhancing salaries across the board next financial year to mitigate the effects of inflation and the increasing costs of living in the country. The practice of promoting selective awards will precipitate industrial action and disharmony in the public service.

7.	The Ministry of Public Service should be considered for supplementary appropriation of Ugshs 11.37 billion for severance packages when the opportunity arises.

8.	The wage component of the unconditional grant should be increased from 65 percent to 100 percent of the approved structures to have a meaningful balance for running other decentralised services.

9.	Graduated tax compensation of Ugshs 45 billion should be given to local governments without any conditionality to allow them share it according to percentages used to share graduated tax before it was abolished.

10.	Funds dispersed to local governments as conditional grants are reported to be increasing. Therefore, the inspection role of the Ministry of Local Government should be stepped up by recruiting more inspectors and facilitating them.

11.	Disciplinary measures should be taken against districts that persistently under perform.

12.	Local governments should be supported to recruit requisite staff to manage the Prosperity for All programme.

13.	The newly introduced procurement system in local governments should be closely monitored and evaluated by the Ministry of Local Government to guard against abuse by errant civil servants who may beat the system and award themselves tenders.

14.	The Ministry of Local Government should expedite the appointment of new members of the Local Government Finance Commission.

15.	The Minister of Local Government should give more technical support to local governments that are consistently failing to meet set standards of service delivery as shown in the national assessments.

16.	The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that for the conditional grant to be meaningful, it should be increased from Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 6.5 billion. 

17.	The Minister of Local Government should consider and explore possibilities for local government political leaders who are paid salaries to start getting gratuity.

18.	The spirit of local governments to create new districts should not only stop at sharing of assets but also consider settling of liabilities. The government should take over payment of liabilities preferably before splitting so that mother districts are not left at a disadvantage.

19.	The Ministry of Local Government should expedite the production of the Kampala City Bill and cause its first reading within this financial year.

20.	The Ministry of Local Government should assist the Local Government Finance Commission conclude the conditional grants allocation formula to be used next financial year in the allocation of grants to local governments. Madam Speaker, we have taken long without concluding this issue of having a transparent and clear allocation formula for conditional grants. Ministries are resisting; so, there is no clear formula. I think this should be the last financial year when Parliament allocates money this way. In the next financial year, we should be guided by a clear allocation formula. 

21.	The Minister of Local Government should spearhead efforts to plan for development of urbanisation. The ministry should move away from mere declarations of setting up town boards and town councils to concrete interventions that promote infrastructure development, land surveying, physical planning, installation of social services and implements in sanitation and waste management. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we are making the following recommendations on the budget proposal for the financial year 2008/09:

VOTE 005- MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

Unless there are changes made by the Ministry of Finance, this is what we had in the committee:

a)	Recurrent expenditure, we are recommending Shs 3,938,709,000;
b)	Development expenditure, Shs 1,331,042,000;
c)	Donor project, Shs 29,667,884,000;
d)	Pension statutory, Shs 78,295,850,000.

VOTE 146- PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
a)	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 2,935,876,000;
b)	Development expenditure, Shs 631,791,000.

VOTE 001- MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
a)	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 4,608,801,000;
b)	Development expenditure, Shs 3,609,955,000;
c)	Donor project, Shs 58,134,856,000.

VOTE 147- LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION
a)	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 1,898,362,000;
b)	Development expenditure, Shs 121,700,000.

VOTES 501 – 850, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS OF UGANDA
a)	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 924,265,675,000;
b)	Development expenditure, Shs 227,996,901,000.

We are however making a note, Madam Speaker, that this is what the Ministry of Finance provided but we are also recommending that Parliament should be mindful and should respect the laws it makes. We passed the Local Governments (Amendment) Act in this Parliament, which brought into motion the local service tax and the hotel tax and in that Act, there is a provision for transitional arrangements, which reads as follows: “Not withstanding the provisions of this Act, government shall continue to contribute the amount of at least Shs 45 billion to local governments per year for a continuous period of three years, to compensate for the vacuum created by the abolished graduated tax.” So, Madam Speaker, there is no reason why we are providing for Shs 12 billion. There is no reason why we are introducing conditionalities to stifle local governments.

We are saying that Parliament should approve the budget with a clear provision of Shs 45 billion to go to local governments to finance recurrent expenditure. As of now, Madam Speaker, you represent a constituency, sub-counties are not operational. The councillors have left all the development activities to two people namely; the chairman LC III and the sub-county chief. Those are the ones who get salary. No councillor can go for a meeting unless they are going to refund his transport and to pay his allowances. So, graduated tax money was that money which councillors used to divide and they would be able to get some money for recurrent expenditure to make councils run.
 
We are recommending that we should also provide for Shs 45 billion. This Parliament passed this law and it should be the same Parliament to appropriate. Otherwise, we are defeating the laws we make ourselves. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, and all your Members. The report has been signed by 16 of the 20 Members. It more than qualifies for debate, but let me ask the shadow minister for public service to come. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we are experiencing winter in Parliament here and that is why you see some Members are unable to come in. May I request that the people managing the system adjust? Otherwise, this winter is discouraging some people from participating. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think if more Members were here, the place would be really warm. Isn’t it? (Laughter)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much. For the first time, we are really discussing the reports exhaustively. This report that we are discussing is very important but the Minister of Local Government is not there and neither is the Minister of Finance, and I hear the Minister of Local Government has gone to give out a district in Buikwe. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance; what do we do under these circumstances? Because most of the issues discussed without the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Local Government will not be implemented, and they involve a lot of money. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance is here. As for the ministers of Local Government, if they are not here by the time we close the debate, we will withhold consent to their vote and proceed with public service. I am not going to adjourn because two ministers are not here.

About the cold, I hope they will adjust. But if Members could really come, things would be better. (Laughter) 

11.47
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As Opposition Members of Parliament, we have a view to give in response to the ministerial policy statements of the Minister of Local Government and Public Service. I will handle the public service sector. 

Madam Speaker, as Members of the Opposition, we are dismayed to notice that the public service in Uganda has come to symbolise the poorly paid public servants, the poorly facilitated, the de-motivated, and they are really struggling to give service delivery to the people. And the people now tend to be in difference because they do not know what public service is doing to make sure that they have relevant service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, we have a few observations to make as Members of the Opposition:

1.	The level of wage payment of the public servants in this country vis-à-vis the inflation rate is appalling. We observe that whereas it is stated that the mandate of the Ministry of Public Service is to keep the President of this country advised and updated on the human resource development in the Public Service to enable him make informed decisions, the President’s intervention at times like he did in Makerere University and for the health workers seems to be uncoordinated and we feel probably the Ministry of Public Service has failed its mandate of advising the President on what should be done.  

2.	Madam Speaker, we also feel that the Ministry of Public Service seems to have fallen short of the mandate of guiding and coordinating public service in carrying out their mandate as mandated in the Constitution of this country. The local governments have so many vacant positions not filled. An example is Buliisa with nine percent of the public service vacancy filled and others are at 30 percent while others are even below.
 
3.	We also noted that the civil servants at the moment at the local governments are the young graduates. They are qualified but there is no clear way where they can climb the hierarchy. We also noted that, for example, the assistant CAO who supervises the sub-county chief is an assistant secretary and the sub county chief is also an assistant secretary. So, they supervise the people with whom they are the same level and it is bringing a lot of insubordination in the civil service, especially at the local government level.  

4.	We as Members of Opposition want the government commitment to eradicate ghost employees on the payroll to be more convincing. The ghost employees may not be visible, but the people who create them are highly visible and can be identified. They are known and we want them not to act with impunity. They must be handled effectively and we must be convinced that the persons who created ghost employees are handled.  

5.	The pension reform is well overdue and we feel that the people who work for this country must be respected as they retire. But we note that it takes a long time for them to access the payments and we also believe that there are some ghost pensioners still as there are ghost employees. We feel that the level of the package given to them is very low and we also believe that they spend more money in trying to access their pensions. This must be corrected.

Madam Speaker, we have some recommendations as Members of the Opposition:

1.	Given that the national economy grew by 8.9 percent, yet on the other hand the inflation rate has hit two digits in this country, there should be modest relief for the employees by improving their payments. Government should increase the wage package of its long suffering servants if the work they do is to be appreciated. Madam Speaker, you will believe me that the rates of all the essential goods have moved up and the inflation rate in this country is getting to an alarming level, but the civil servants have remained at the same rates.  

2.	We would like to recommend that the government, especially the Ministry of Public Service, tries to determine the current capability of the respective district service commissions in terms of professional and ethical competence, and we would also like to ask the Public Service Commission to find out what exactly is making the district service commissions fail to perform their duties diligently. We also recommend that possible strategies be put in place so that the district service commissions are able to perform.  

3.	You have already been told that we have no inspectors even in the Ministry of Local Government. I believe even in the Ministry of Public Service the number of inspectors could be few. So, we are recommending that this must be done so that their functions are improved in both the short and medium term.  

4.	Madam Speaker, as Opposition members of Parliament, we do not believe that borrowed funds or foreign experts are needed to fight the ghost employees. We believe that the political will is more important to tackle this case of the ghosts in the public service and we therefore recommend the following:

i.	A commission of inquiry should be instituted so that we can find the nature, the extent and the perpetrators of the ghost employees.
  
ii.	We also believe that if we cannot have a commission of inquiry, then this Parliament has the mandate to have a select committee which can investigate the ghost employees in the civil service.  

Madam Speaker, we expect the government to clear all the pension arrears by 30 June 2009, as they have made an undertaking.  We also expect that the government makes a special effort to institute pension reforms this financial year 2008/09 so that we expedite the pension payment of our public servants who serve this country, and so that we are able to shift the members who retire to the pension roll immediately, not like now where it takes time.  

Madam Speaker, we believe that we do not need a civil service college because Uganda Management Institute is doing more than enough of what can be done.  

In conclusion, we feel it is crucial that the morale of the civil service be taken seriously by the government. It is not possible to have quality service delivery from demoralised staff members.  Madam Speaker, I would like to give an illustration that as Members of the Opposition, we are like one reverend who sat in a bus, going to western Uganda. Now, on that route there used to be a very popular trading centre where people would refresh themselves.  When this reverend got out of the bus, people were laughing at a certain woman because she had not sat properly. 

This reverend went to tell the lady which was risky because a man to tell a woman, “Madam, your dress has pulled up” is not very easy. The woman looked at him and asked, “Atunda ebibye yekweka?” Then she answered herself saying, “Nedda. Atunda ebibye teyekweka.”  So the reverend went away very embarrassed. But I want us to find out, who was more sincere? The people who clapped or the reverend who told her the truth? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. We can now debate for five minutes each.  

11.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise as the shadow minister, to make a brief response to the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government for the financial year 2008/09. I had expected that a few copies would be available, but for some reason they have delayed but eventually I hope they will arrive here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But can we have one for the Leader of Government Business?

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, the general state of local governments regarding financing, staffing and service delivery is very far from satisfactory. This brings to mind the question, are the goals of decentralisation being achieved on the ground beyond the political field good and the reward support to the NRM? Obviously the answer is no. 

The key points of concern in the prevailing local government scenario include the following:

(a)	The regional tier government concept means different things to different people. Whereas people in many regions take the regional tier system as a coalition of the willing, people in some regions believe it should be a binding institution based on the traditional kingdoms or cultural entities.
  
(b)	Whether by accident or by design, the creation of new districts has also caused ethnic and tribal sentiments to rear their ugly heads on our national political arena thus, our country has become fragmented into a multitude of unviable administrative units that are white elephants.

(c)	The local government tax, for all intents and purposes, seems to be graduated tax re-branded and therefore, we the Opposition are strongly inclined to regard it with distrust and suspicion because there is no assurance that its administration will be substantially different from graduated Tax. This is the proverbial trickery of trying to use new cloth to patch old cloth or to put new wine in old wine skins.

(d)	  The inclusion of farmers among the payers of local service tax is bound to have an adverse effect on our rural farmers who are aspiring to adopt modern farming methods which will qualify them to be commercial farmers. This is a blow for the agricultural sector which is severely under-funded. Government is in effect preparing to milk perceived cash cows that are not well fed and can hardly stand on their own feet.  This is contrary to the tax holidays, land and cash incentives that are being given to foreign investors and favoured local business people.  

Key observations:

(a)	Almost all districts created over the past three years are incapable of sustaining themselves and seem to have very limited viability options. The seemingly laudable purpose of taking services closer to the people cited for creating new districts has been defeated. Some districts have collected a paltry Ugshs 5.0 million as annual revenue. This scenario is compounded by general financial constraints affecting all local governments including the long established one. The government has demonstrated that it is incapable of providing local governments with resources for even just moderate service delivery. 

	Madam Speaker, The New Vision of Wednesday, 13 August 2008 captured this in a way that I, myself, could not even have done.  Allow me to quote:

	“Today, new districts are created for narrow, selfish, political reasons. The most common reason cited is taking services closer to the people, but the truth is that, these districts are created in return for votes. This is most unfortunate because the proliferation of new districts has a devastating domino effect on our fragile economy. New districts come with economic burdens which put a lot of pressure on the tax payer.”  

(b)	Graduated tax compensation to local governments has not been implemented in a transparent and rational manner.

(c)	The number of unfilled vacancies in many local governments is unsustainably high and it implies a serious incapacity for service delivery.  

(d)	Given the slow pace at which the vacancies are planned to be filled, combining with the high attrition rate in many of the local governments, the human resource capacity gap in most local governments will remain wide for the very long time.

(e)	In an effort to be seen to be responding to calls for genuine devolution of power to the people, it seems that government has offered the regional tier as a solution.  Unfortunately, this has failed to take off because it is not what the people want.  

Recommendations of the side which sits on your left, Madam Speaker:

The vision, mission and mandate of the Ministry of Local Government is to be measured in terms of actual outputs and outcomes on the ground, using known and accepted criteria and standards as yardsticks against the expected outputs and outcomes.  

There is need for clear guidelines for the assessment of local service tax for self-employed professionals, artisans, businessmen and women, and other players in the informal sector who form a very significant portion of gainfully employed people. 

There is need for a high priority capacity building programme targeting local government staff who will form the core of local government tax administration structures to kick-start and expedite the implementation of local service tax by these local governments.

Local government inspection should comprehensively cover both efficiency and effectiveness measures. Whereas efficiency measures include compliancy with stipulated policies procedures and processes, effectiveness measures include levels of service delivery, outputs and outcomes. Disproportionate focus on measures usually result into ineffectiveness measures being overlooked and ignored yet we are talking about Result-Oriented Management (ROM). A system can be very efficient but without necessarily delivering efficiency results. On the other hand, an effective system will not necessarily be reasonably efficient.

Government should not rush to establish regional governments while the current local governments set up have many critical issues and constraints that still remain to be resolved, for example, inadequate financing and staffing. In any case, the government should clarify the concept of regional tier and harmonise it nationwide before implementation of any sort is attempted.

Government should, as a matter of priority, commission a study of the recently created districts conducted by the National Planning Authority jointly with the Ministry of Local Government to determine:

1.	the viability and sustainability of the respective local governments in terms of resources, financial, human and so on;

2.	the constraints impeding reasonable delivery of services by the local governments;

3.	the possible strategies for strengthening respective local governments with a view to achieving reasonable delivery of service in the medium term.

Government should suspend the creation of any more new districts until the report of the aforesaid study on new districts and option for restructuring local governments has been received and debated by Parliament.

In conclusion, I want to say that if government cannot take serious consideration of our concerns for the good of the people of this nation, we in the Opposition, intend to table a resolution to declare all counties in Uganda districts and restructure local government administration in a manner that will respond to call for federal or regional tier to ensure:-

1.	reduced cost of public administration;
2.	effectiveness of administrative posts;
3.	effectiveness of service delivery; and
4.	national cohesion. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. Now, honourable members, as I said yesterday, I will continue to give opportunity to those who have not yet contributed, but I am happy for all of you who are here. So, if I bypass you it is because I am looking for the people who have not spoken. We will start with hon. Opange to be followed by hon. Ekanya.

12.10
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, allow me thank the Members of this committee for bringing a very elaborate report and having identified the key issues affecting the economy of this country.

Madam Speaker, I have a few issues to raise regarding the policies of these ministries. In Uganda, there is actually need to have automatic change from regular salary to pension when one clocks the age of 60 years. I am saying this because I have noticed that there is a problem in public service. For example, one time I started chasing for pension for one of my voters in the year 2001, but this voter got through to the pension payroll in 2006. This is very discouraging because if someone is used to earning regular salary and he/she takes five years without getting it, it means such a person is not economically empowered. That is a big problem to our people.

The other issue is about the recruitment of staff especially into the health sector. You find that there are hard-to-reach areas where when the district advertises for the posts of doctors, it will not get applicants for such posts. For example, recently we advertised posts for doctors in Pallisa, but nobody responded because many doctors find it very difficult to work in such areas. So, there is need for the Public Service Commission and the Ministry of Public Service to reconsider changing the policy so that such people can be centrally recruited. This is important because when a doctor is transferred to say, Katakwi, he/she will only work for a specific period and later on transferred to say, Kampala. This will be a good policy for this country because it will enhance service delivery to the people of Uganda. A particular doctor will be able to work in those hard areas because he/she will be sure that that is only for a specific time. 

Let me say something about the official residence of the Vice-President. The committee says that Shs 66 million per annum is economical. This is actually an average of Shs 5.0 million per month for renting the residence of the Vice-President. But the question I am asking is, to whom is this money paid? Is it the Vice-President or the landlord? If it is to the landlord, that landlord could be the Vice-President. That is why we should ensure there is an official residence for the Vice-President. 

I am saying this because recently we were invited to the ‘state house’ of the Vice-President, which is very far from here, but it looked very costly for Members of Parliament who may want to consult with their Vice-President. That is why I am saying there is need to have an official residence for the Vice-President.

The issue of creating new districts is a phenomenon in Uganda, which is a vote-catching trick. But when you create a new district, you are actually increasing public expenditure because of the new posts that are created. The only available option for Uganda is to look at and verify all the counties that qualify to become districts and we declare that all such counties become districts. 

I am saying this because recently, when the President was in Ngora, he assured the people there that they would get a district this financial year though when I looked at the budget, I did not see any figure. Maybe the ministers of Public Service and Local Government will tell us whether there is some vote for the creation of new districts this financial year. So the only option is to look at those constituencies that are having the necessary qualifications for becoming districts. The harsh one is to ban creation of districts for the next ten years while we study the new ones that we created recently.

Madam Speaker, another thing that is creating corruption in the district circles is the issue of not facilitating the district councillors and standardising the allowances of the district councils. You find that councillors are supposed to hold meetings quarterly and in each meeting, they are paid Shs 10,000 which is not enough for the welfare of those councils. So, the only available option is to interfere with the procurement systems in the districts. The ministry should standardise the district council allowances and emoluments so that when you are a district councillor in Mbarara, you get the same allowances with one in Pallisa. That is really a very important concept.
 
Finally, there is need to facilitate the districts in creating administrative units in form of sub-counties, town boards and town councils. This is a way of taking services nearer to the people. However, we have heard some of these districts claiming that each time the district service council passes a resolution to create town councils and town boards, the Ministry of Local Government takes a long time to take action to approve this. The districts have been frustrated; when the people are told that they have been given a sub-county or that the district councillors passed that the sub-county be divided, they become anxious.  

12.18
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Yiga and his committee, and the shadow ministers, hon. Arumadri and hon. Atim, for the exposure and the critic they made in presenting the position of the Opposition to the government. I think we may have to change the method of discussion because we make recommendations here year in and year out and according to English law, a parliamentary recommendation is really very powerful - it is the strongest in the legal world. Our recommendations may sound like ordinary recommendations here, but they are a must. Therefore, when Parliament passes a report like this one with recommendations, it is mandatory for the ministers to implement them or come back here and explain to the country why they have not been able to implement them. 

We are not going to just become a talking shop. We sit here and discuss, year in and year out, and recommendations are taken as mere recommendations. This should be a warning to the ministers and technical officials; parliamentary recommendations are a must in English law. Do not think that we just put them in for the sake of recommending. It is just the polite way to do it. If you travel in a plane, they say “you are kindly requested to fasten your seat belt”, but if you refuse, you can be pulled off the plane. Therefore, we have the power to invoke constitutional provisions and even censure or recommend removal of ministers who do not implement parliamentary recommendations. 

I wish to add that what we are going to pass now - recommending that Shs 45 billion be given to the district LG tax - is a must; Minister, this is a must. When we are passing the finance bill – and I am on the Committee of Finance - we are going to cut from the Ministry of Finance operational recurrent budget so that the local government can have the money.

Madam Speaker, I think also that we need to understand the concept of creation of districts. I want to commend President Museveni as a very principled man on this matter. He is not an opportunistic President on some of these issues. Let me be very clear; if it were for votes, Tororo District would have been created. The one thing the President was told when he was campaigning was to say that a district is created in Tororo and he would get one hundred percent votes, but he said, “No, I will not say it”. All the people run away and left him on the podium alone but he said, “I will still win”. So it is not just for vote cashing. Districts have been created in the North where President Museveni has not got votes for all these years. So, let us understand the key principles. 

The purpose for creating districts is in the Constitution, and I have a copy here, and also in the Local Government Act, to extend services to the people. However, what the Opposition is saying is that when we create districts, we need to restructure the whole of the local governance in this country. The budget for the districts in this whole country is just twenty percent. I have been to Europe; in France, the budget for all local governments is 70 percent of the national budget and the central government takes only 30 percent. For us in FDC and the Opposition, when we form a government, the districts will take 50 percent and the centre will also take 50 percent –(Laughter)– for a start. 

When hon. Arumadri says that we are going to recommend that all counties become districts, he is serious. We should make sure that 50 percent of the budget goes to the districts and 50 percent to the centre. As the years progress, we should move on to 60 percent going to the local governments so that sub-county offices are not closed. This will also help to tame corruption in this country. If you look at the civil servants, they are paid Shs 200,000, Shs 500,000, but some of them are driving very powerful vehicles. So I want to urge government that we should sort out the issue of creation of districts and implement regional governance. We need to restructure; for example, we do not need three engineers in a district. (Member timed out)

12.23
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for their report and most especially for what they highlighted concerning the difficulties in the local government operations. 

On page 18, under the Local Government Finance Commission, the second point is on identifying peculiarities in local government service delivery. I wish to talk on two areas of service delivery in the municipalities. I will specifically mention the municipalities because we have peculiar problems which may not be found across the board. 

The first area that I want to address is that of fire services. Over the years, we have had problems of fires in all of the municipalities. We hear about fire in the markets and property is destroyed. Last year, we had a fire in Lira Municipality and the nearest fire engine was at Gulu Airport and the next was in Soroti, and we were advised to get fire engines while the fire was raging. So, the property which was on fire was completely destroyed. The budget line for the municipalities does not allow them to acquire such services in order to be able to protect the property and the lives of the citizens with their properties. 

I would recommend that government tries to address this problem with specific concern. As urban centre are increasing in population, people are trying to do business but their property is at great risk and we have no way of controlling tragedies when they strike. 

The second area I wish to address is the area –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Akena, for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to address my information to my colleague in line with fire fighting as a function of local government. We have been here every time we have been clamouring over where this function actually falls. The Minister of Internal Affairs clearly came with a law and showed us that it is the function of local governments to fight fires. However, it has not featured anywhere in this report as an observation, a recommendation or a planned activity. I would strongly recommend that this report gets amended and we include that element. This is the information I wanted to give my colleague. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR AKENA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information and I hope the recommendation will be taken. 

The second area I wish to address is the area of solid waste management and disposal. In Lira Municipality, at the moment we have one vehicle which was provided by the UPC government in 1984. They used to be two but the only reason why the single one is still surviving is because the old one, which is completely broken down, is being cannibalised to keep one of them on the road. 

The waste generation in Lira municipality is 70 tonnes per day but what we can remove is roughly 14 tonnes. Therefore, we keep on getting waste heaps growing into small hills, and some of them have grown almost as big as buildings. At the moment the local government cannot acquire sufficient capacity to remove the waste. This is not unique to Lira Municipality; most of the municipalities have similar problems. 

There is a programme supported by NEMA and the World Bank, which is going to provide an additional truck to the municipality, but the new dump site is about 10kms from the town. Therefore, the rate of the removal of waste is not likely to increase. 

We had a problem in this area, in that, the municipality was supposed to do some of the public works but the municipality had to hire the grader from the district. In the end, it became cheaper for the municipality to hire from a private company in order to do the works as if we in the municipality are not part of Lira District. (Member timed out)

12.28
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 19, the committee talks about the process of decentralisation. We were very happy when decentralisation was introduced, and we thought that decentralisation would bring equitable development to this country. To our surprise, however, it is the rich who are becoming richer and the poor becoming poorer. The rich are exploiting the poor. I think this is because of too much influence from the central government. There is too much influence and control of the local governments by the central government. Local governments are not independent at all. They cannot make decisions that can enable them to deliver services to their people. 

Madam Speaker, on page 15 of the report, among the achievements during the last financial year, the committee –(Interruption)

MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance is represented in this House by only one minister of state. First of all, he came late and then since he came, he has been engrossed in reading a newspaper. Rule 62 is very clear; it prohibits this, unless the MP gets permission from you. Is he in order to continue reading the newspaper even when he is supposed to be listening and taking notes on these very serious issues? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If he is reading a newspaper, he should stop. Also, can he kindly move and be near the Prime Minister. (Laughter and Applause) Come nearer to the Prime Minister so that hon. Oryem does not engage you on that side.

MR PIRO SANTOS: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to give information to the honourable member on the point she raised when she said that since decentralisation, the poor were getting poorer and rich were getting richer. I would like to inform her that it is written in the Bible that even the little that the poor have, the rich shall take away. So, this seems to be the trend of events now under decentralisation. Thank you very much.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that on page 15 of the report, the committee mentioned some of the achievements in the last financial year. Among them, they say that the ministry held the fourth Joint Annual Review of Decentralisation (JARD). Madam Speaker, I think it is better and more prudent for the ministry to make sure that the JARD recommendations are documented and disseminated for the whole public to access this information. This is the general picture: this government comes up with good ideas, good intentions, romantic ones, good programmes and plans but to put them into reality is a very big challenge and a very big problem. 

On the creation of new districts, I think it is not a matter of just dreaming or just waking up and demanding for a new district. We heard that some people ate rats. You will soon hear that some people will even undress because they want new districts. The most important thing is that if we want new districts, we need to come up with clear parameters of creating these new districts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nampijja, you only have five minutes. If you donate your time, that is your business. 

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Another issue is on page 5; one of the planned activities for this financial year in Public Service is monitoring and evaluation. You know very well that even in local governments, monitoring and evaluation is not taken as something that is serious. In fact, these people even fear to document their weaknesses; they fear to expose their weaknesses. How sure are you that these guys will be interested in monitoring and evaluation? In fact, yesterday the committee was even proposing to borrow a huge sum of money to facilitate the monitoring and evaluation, which the Ministry of Local Government and that of Public Service do not want. I think that is not even necessary.

Madam Speaker, lastly I would also like to talk about the overlap of the roles of RDCs, district chairpersons and CAOs. The roles, functions and responsibilities of RDCs, CAOs and district chairpersons are well stipulated in the Constitution and the Local Governments Act as amended. I can give you an example. In my area, my deputy RDC has become a real problem in the area. She is now acting as a market manager.

12.36
MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. Madam Speaker, I also want to echo hon. Ekanya’s voice in this House as regards the powers of Parliament. We come here, debate, pass resolutions and nothing happens and again we see these honourable ministers during the budget discussions of political statements of their ministries’ budgets, only to come and make new demands. I think Parliament, other than maybe two things they cannot do - change a man into a woman and a woman into a man - we have all the powers to make recommendations because we can even impeach the President. So, how come that when we make these recommendations, they are not implemented? We cannot just come here and talk, go out and talk and the next day we talk. 

Madam Speaker this is the only time we have when we are discussing these policy statements of these ministries. We are concerned because we represent our people and we want the ministers concern and technical staff to implement these recommendations. We are going to be very tough during the next budget process. I am very glad, Madam Speaker, that you have given us a chance to debate these policy statements so that the ministers can know.

On page 10, item No. 2, it is noted that the number of district service commissions was increasing, but the Public Service Commission has not got additional resources to guide, advise and monitor these district service commissions. You can see that people have talked about increasing districts. We must as Parliament now make benchmarks. If you are going to give a district, what are the benchmarks of a district? They have -(Interjection)   

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information which I am giving you is in reference to Article 179 on boundaries of local government units. If you could allow me to read clause (4): 

“Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, destiny of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.” That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA: I thank you for the information. I already have it in the Constitution here. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I think let us be realistic. I am talking from experience. There are some districts which have not even been able to convene council meetings because they lack funds. I come from a rural constituency and I know it. I know some of these districts that are being created hardly convene council meetings. In this report, we have been told that some district service commissions do not have people; the members are supposed to be five on the commission but they are only two. Now, what is the purpose of creating a district that cannot even have qualified members of the commission?

Madam Speaker, in this report they have said that when we are creating town councils and boards, they were  considering  the population, facilities like water; this recommendation should be adhered to. I belong to the Opposition, as you know, so we do not have chances to interact with the President like you people in the NRM caucus. I want to invoke Article 101(2) that Madam Speaker, you liaise with the President to come here and explain to us as a constitutional obligation as to why he is creating these districts that are even unnecessary. (Applause) 

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 179(1) (b) of the Constitution reads as follows: 
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may- 
(b) create new districts.” 

Is the honourable member in order to continue insinuating that it is the President or it is the government creating new districts when actually districts are created by Parliament?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no district that can be created other than through this Parliament. So, you are out of order. (Laughter)

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. His Excellency the President has been in Ngora and said, “I am giving you a district.” Did Parliament give the district? He was in Buikwe during the campaigns -(Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nsubuga, the fact that he said it does not mean that he has created it. The House is the one which creates that district. They will have to come here in order for that district to be created. That is the law and that is the practice. He can say it but cannot create it; it is this House that creates districts. (Laughter) 

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to move to page 20 - (Member timed out)

12.42
MR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. I have a few points I want to make to the Public Service and Local Government ministries. I represent a rural constituency, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo District. Bundibugyo District has been in existence for the last 34 years but it operates as if it has just been created. One big problem we have in that district is lack of technical staff. Mention any sector, we have very few staff. For example, for health workers, many advertisements have been made but the district has not attracted any doctors. You remember we had Ebola and we had to get workers from UPDF, WHO and other organisations to come to our rescue. I will not mention the few that we had; some even lost their lives during that time. 

I am appealing to government to consider some of these areas like my district so that they give us some special consideration. We have lost very many mothers who have to be transported from my constituency to Fort Portal regional referral hospital. It takes a patient three hours to reach the referral hospital. We have no midwives. In the whole constituency, I have only two midwives at one health centre IV. The entire health centre IIIs, IIs do not have any midwives and we have lost many mothers as a result of that.

Madam Speaker, when we move to agriculture, you know very well that NAADs is being rolled out in the whole country in all the sub-counties. We do not have any extension workers, and I am afraid this programme may not really help our people once we do not have technical staff to guide the farmers. Farmers have attempted to grow different crops, but many have not yielded any products and we have ended up losing a lot of money. 

One other thing I would like to mention is the 30 percent increment for hard-to-reach areas from public service. I am afraid this might not work under the circumstances because you cannot attract a worker from Kampala to go and work in Bundibugyo to only have 30 percent of his Shs 200,000 salary. Unless this is looked into very seriously, whether you add 30 percent or not, I do not think the situation will improve.

Recently, I read in the papers about the restructuring of public service. The biggest problem in public service is lack of motivation. These people are not motivated, whether you cut down and streamline the public service workforce. Unless the wage package is improved, whether you cut it from 250 to 50 and maintain the current salary, the problems will not be addressed and the situation will remain the way it is.

Lastly, to local governments, we have had outstanding problems especially border issues between districts and sub-counties. It is becoming very hot. Local administrations are rising up to fight each other because of these districts. You know, land now is a very serious issue; everyone wants to have land and these border problems have not been solved. One outstanding one that has been on for the last 34 years is the Kabarole and Bundibugyo border dispute in my constituency. Up to now, nothing has been done. Even when the team from the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development visited the area, it was never resolved. 

About infrastructure in local government units, some of the local government administrators in sub-counties are sharing office space with prisoners. It is very appalling that the sub-county chiefs and the LC III councils do not have offices at all. (Member timed out)

12.49
MRS FLORENCE NAYIGA SEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee members for the report. I stand to support the recommendation for the provision of Shs 45 billion for the local government graduated tax compensation. A lot of money is now going to the sub-counties in form of NAADS and other government programmes to fight poverty. Without proper monitoring by the local government councillors at the sub-county, we may not achieve much. So, I support that.

Secondly, I am concerned about the kawonawos. Here in Buganda, they call them kawonawos, but I mean the World War II ex-service men. This report says completely nothing about these senior citizens. Some of them are still alive, others have died one by one, but they feel cheated. We need proper explanation. In fact, one of them was my grandfather, Laubeni Lwabi; he fought and died feeling very cheated. So, I want proper explanations. 

The whole country should know, for those who are still surviving, what the Ministry of Public Service has to say. At first these old people were asked to go to the Ministry of Defence with passport size photographs, files and everything. They went and reported. Finally, they were advised to go to Ministry of Public Service, but when you look at the budget, there is completely nothing in the pension arrears. Where are their entitlements? The country needs to know, the grandchildren need to know and we all want to know what is there for these ex-service men of World War II. We want to know whether they should forget completely, then we shall be, as leaders, completely saved from them coming to beg and to ask about their entitlement. I thank you very much.

12.51
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. I would want to first seek clarification from the honourable minister of Public Service on what the public service structure for local government is. I am saying this because many young people who are recruited at local governments and have very good qualifications when recruited are hardly promoted. Many of them get demoralised at the end of the day, leading to very poor service delivery to the people and they even become corrupt. So, honourable minister, you better explain why these young people are not getting promoted yet they are highly qualified. Is it the issue of age? Is age wisdom?

Two, I am concerned about the low staffing levels in most local governments. The shadow minister in his presentation mentioned Bulisa with only nine percent. Unemployment remains a big challenge to this country. Many young people who are qualified are rotting on the streets moving up and down, day and night, without work and yet there are vacancies at local governments. What is the problem? I know fundamentally, it is the responsibility of the District Service Commission but what are the two ministries doing in supervising and monitoring to ensure that the vacancies that do exist in the local government are filled.

Finally, the issue of the official residence for the Vice-President keeps coming up every year as if nothing is reflected in our law. The Constitution, which is the supreme law of Uganda, has a provision to that effect. Article 108 (6) says: “…article 106 of this Constitution shall, subject to this Constitution, apply to the Vice-President”. The provision of Article 106 is on the terms and conditions of service of the President, so all those terms highlighted in Article 106 equally apply to the Vice-President.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament went ahead and passed the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act where the second schedule states among the benefits that whoever is appointed the Vice-President of Uganda should have a free fully facilitated residence. The law has spoken. This Constitution was promulgated when I was not in this Parliament and the same applies to this other Act but this is the position of the law. Why are we failing to abide by the provisions of the law? Thank you.

12.55
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to be on record as one person opposed to the creation of new districts and I have reasons for this. In 1991 after five years of NRM, there was the retrenchment and we reduced the Public Service to make it more efficient. Immediately after doing this -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Muhanga is my friend but I have to rise on a point of order because I, hon. Muhanga and others have sworn to protect and uphold this Constitution. Is hon. Muhanga in order to stand up and say she is now ready to oppose this Constitution, which she swore to uphold, by objecting to the creation of new districts? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even the Constitution allows you to give your opinions and we are not voting.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know that he is obsessed with having a district in Tororo, which they are about to split into three non-entities. I do not think that it is really prudent of you my dear friend to argue that Tororo should be split into three. It has already been split enough.

Madam Speaker, when we retrenched in the Public Service to make it more efficient, we created more commissions and statutory authorities. We have now created an obese structure that this government can no longer manage. The cost of public administration has gone so high and now we want to create more districts on tribal grounds. Some tribes want to split and clans will end up with districts sooner than later. Now we want to create 30 more districts to make 110. That means 30 more women MPs and more costs on public administration. 

Creating districts for the sake of creating jobs will not help because this country is for all of us and we need a better country for our children. We do not want a country where they will find a clan has got a district and people have been divided on tribal grounds like in hon. Ekanya’s constituency where people are eating rats to prove a point.

Madam Speaker, I come from a district where we have had a problem -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, as I stated, hon. Muhanga is my respected friend but I find it very erroneous for her to state that I ate a rat to prove a point. I have not eaten a rat. The people of Tororo County expressed to the President that a rat is a symbol of their culture and attempted to eat one until the President stopped them. Is she in order to make allegations here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware that it is not you who ate the rat; it was other people who ate it.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much for your wise ruling. I think he just wants to eat into my time, Madam Speaker. 

My district was split in 2000 and right now we are still embroiled in problems with pensioners. They fall in Kamwenge and Kyenjojo but because we inherited all the liabilities and we split the assets, Kabarole District up to today is embroiled in cases in court. Some of our properties were attached in 2006 because the pensioners had gone to court and won a case. That is why I am saying that I am really against the creation of new districts. Now we are creating town boards. Aren’t these really good enough? Should we split up to the last unit of administration?

Sooner than later, some legal gurus will challenge the legalities of some districts. You find a district, which has two sub-counties, just four councillors, where everybody is on the executive and cases where there is no councillor while others are speakers. (Interjection) I shall not take any information because I have no more time. When we are challenged in court, this is when we shall wake up to reality and know that creation of new districts is a crisis that we have created as Members of Parliament. Even the members of the Opposition one day will use it against us and say that it is those people who were in power at the time all these units were created and yet they are the very people who are creating these districts.

Lastly, the Tororo District issue not withstanding, there are those others who want districts right now on tribal grounds. As a Parliament, I want to warn you, gentlemen and ladies of this House, please, let us not create a web and choke on our own meal. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.00
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I also want to thank the committee for this report. The reason as to why the civil service was put in place was mainly to extend services to the grassroots. However, services should be extended effectively and efficiently but this is not happening on the ground. You find many civil servants employed and a lot of money is spent yet the people at the grassroots and families that are supposed to be commercial units are not receiving these services. 

When I read this report, I identify three major hindrances. One of them is rightly mentioned here on page 10, observation No.5, and I want to read it verbatim: “The committee expressed concern over the localisation of civil servants in the districts which has not only curtailed mobility but also national outlook”.

I remember very well that we recommended some time back that key positions should be centralised including the chief administrative officers because these are very important officials in extending services to our people. However, since then I do not think much has been done. The essence of centralising those CAOs was to make sure that the centre can hire, fire, transfer and discipline. But in some cases you find that CAOs who have lived in some districts for over 20 years become so integrated that they are influenced by local issues. I think government should make sure that this provision is put in place and utilised.

Another hindrance that I read in this report concerns tax compensation. Some of us felt very happy when the grassroots’ person was relieved of the burden of Graduated Tax. But on the other hand, we are now sad that since then minimal services are being extended to the people because of scraping Graduated Tax. I want to urge government to not only make sure that it compensates Graduated Tax but also does so in a timely manner to ensure that our people are not denied the services they used to get.  

When you go to the districts and sub-counties, you feel so sad to find civil servants seated and saying they do not have allowances or fuel to travel and provide services to farmers, fishermen and entrepreneurs who badly need these services.

Another thing of major concern that I have read in this report is a constitutional provision that we ourselves put in after consulting a number of stakeholders and this is the issue of regional governments. Regional governments were provided for in the Constitution after making wide consultations countrywide and many people conceded to the provision. However, up to today this provision has not been effected. 

I want to ask the Leader of Government Business to tell us why the implementation of this provision has failed. We want an official position so that we can sit down and review this. If it means revisiting the provision and amending the Constitution, let it be so. We have heard a number of rumours with some saying the package was good but the nomenclature was bad. Others are giving varied reasons. We would like to get an official position as to why the regional governments have not been effected because after putting them in the Constitution, we thought that this was going to be another vehicle of extending services to our people. If it has failed, can we know and then find a solution? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.06
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for this very elaborate report.

On the creation of districts, I want to agree with my sister, hon. Margaret Muhanga Mugisa but I want to say that there are clear guidelines in the Constitution about creation of districts. If people request for the creation of a district, it is this Parliament to say no or yes according to the guidelines. If Parliament thinks that Tororo does not qualify because of certain reasons, we shall not pass that district but if they qualify and have genuine reasons as stated in Article 179, sub-section (4) such as means of communication, geographical features, density of population and economic viability, then Parliament can pass it.

On Graduated Tax compensation, I also agree with the committee that the Shs 45 billion recommended should be compulsory because I have always said that serious under-funding of local governments is a very dangerous development and that we are sitting on a time bomb if we do not improve funding of local governments.  

I agree with my brother hon. Akena that some local governments do not have enough locally generated funds to engage in activities like purchasing fire fighting gadgets. The revenue base of these urban areas, for instance Fort Portal Municipality, cannot support this. That is why the other day on the Floor of Parliament I requested the Minister of Internal Affairs that the six fire fighting gadgets that have been acquired from Japan should be distributed to Jinja, Fort Portal and Arua. You may recall that I proposed that - and I hope the Minister of Internal Affairs will consider that very seriously.

On pensions, the other day the hon. Minister of Public Service said that Kabarole District did not make submissions in time and that is why they were not paid. However, I have contacted my people in Kabarole and they have given me copies of their submissions. I am wondering, out of this Shs 17.5 billion, was there any money left for districts that never submitted in time? Furthermore, I want to get clarification and assurance from the minister that using the Shs 30.09 billion allocated for this Financial Year 2008/2009, Kabarole will be catered for in terms of pension arrears.

Lastly I want to talk about the equalisation grant. I support the committee’s recommendation of raising this grant from Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 6.5 billion. As hon. Muhanga was saying, when these new districts are created the mother districts inherit all assets and liabilities and if these districts are given enough equalisation grant money, these baby districts can use that equalization grant to offset some of their liabilities from the newly created districts. Otherwise, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

1.11
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee for this report. However, I have a few things that I would like the chairperson to clarify on.

On page 3 on Vote 005, the committee gave us figures of the development expenditure that was approved as Shs 1,001,922,000 but I noticed that on the amount released by the Ministry of Finance under development expenditure, it was Shs 1,985,320,000; and yet in this report, he does not seem to show that there was a supplementary. So, I am wondering why the monies that were released by the Ministry of Finance for development expenditure are higher than what was approved by Parliament.

Secondly, on page 7, point (f), the committee has observed that the increase of ministries and local governments is increasing public expenditure. In our committee of ICT in 2006, we did point out that probably with the start of the ministry of ICT; government would start having a showcase ministry that can be lean but efficient. We indeed, in our committee report, recommended that the ministry of ICT could work with less than 50 members of staff. We were told that when the ministry of ICT went to the Ministry of Public Service with a structure of a lean staff, the Ministry of Public Service told the minister that, “You cannot choose and pick an establishment, but you have to take the entire lot just like any other ministry.” 

Here we have a ministry of ICT with an approved staff level of 110 people, including 2 principal personal secretaries, 8 personal assistant secretaries, 10 office attendants, 11 drivers, 1 office typist, 1 stenographer, 5 stenographer secretaries, 1 askari, 1 receptionist, 1 senior personal secretary, 1 senior office superintendent; meaning that this ministry of ICT has a number of 42 non-core staff out of 110, and out of the 42, they have filled 28 positions while only 8 of the core staff have been filled. So, I completely agree with the committee’s observation that it seems public service is interested in creating big establishments and raising public expenditure [Ms Mugerwa: “Information”.] Yes, I will take the information as long as you are brief.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, public expenditure will not go down unless actually strict measures are taken by the Public Service. When I look at all headed papers of the ministries, there are no e-mail addresses. People are still using faxes! So, ICT is not helping really; transport is not reduced through communication, ease of information is not given. So I want to beg government, through Public Service to ensure that all headed papers of all ministries have got e-mail addresses so that we can reduce on the cost of information. Thank you.

MR KALIBA: Thank you, honourable member. The point I was making - and I think what is being echoed by my honourable colleague is that the ministry of ICT could have been a showcase of a lean ministry and probably we would have had a start where we can go on and reduce these big ministries. But when you force such a humongous structure on the ministry of ICT, it defeats the whole purpose. I cannot imagine a ministry of ICT having a personal secretary, principle personal secretary, assistance secretary, stenographer; I think this is just –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me appeal to the members of the committees of the reports being discussed; please, let the other people comment because the reports are yours. Really, if you know you are a member of the committee, please leave me. I will see you at the other stage but let other Members comment on your reports. Hon. Kiyingi, hon. Safia Nalule – I am calling step by step and I will go to hon. Muwuma there. I have seen you and I have got the list of Members here. 

1.17
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): I wish to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also wish to thank the committee for the elaborate report. I have some few issues to raise.

On page 5 of the report there is mention of a staff performance appraisal system, which has been in place in the Public Service. Madam Speaker, staff performance in the Public Service has been the word for a very long time but when I visit a number of ministries, I do not see any significant change in terms of attitude. You find the old civil service reading newspapers, taking their tea when people are lining up waiting for the service to be delivered. They are actually bosses; they are not civil servants. I wish I could get a report from the minister that actually all this has changed - civil servants are civil servants.

On the question of pensions, there is a lot of money, which was reported to have been allocated. Personally I have pensioners; I have been pursuing pension for the last four years and up to now they have not been paid. I do not know what formula people use to get money for pensioners who are in their areas, but for me it is a nightmare!

On the question of districts, I do agree with the sentiments expressed by hon. Muhanga but I think there is a more fundamental problem that we have not addressed in definite terms: how resources are allocated from the centre and disbursed to reach the grassroots. Because the scuffle about districts is a scuffle about resources not reaching people and services not reaching people. How do you ensure that everybody wherever he is gets access to national resources? I think that is the challenge. We are not using the National Planning Authority adequately and as a result, much as there are legal formulae, which are in the Constitution and the Local Government Act for allocation of resources, what is the on the ground is slightly different from what is in the books. I think we have to address this matter. 

And related to this is the question of decentralising the functions of the central government, the central government is a big spender and when it spends, purchasing power with the population is enhanced. I have never understood why all ministries must be centred in Kampala particularly the big spenders. Why, for example, should Agriculture be in Kampala? Why should Energy be in Kampala? Why should Defence be in Kampala? 

It would make a very big difference if we had for example the Ministry of Works in Budiope. Because in that way the infrastructure would be there and the minister would know how bad the roads are; the problems of no power, the problem of inadequate health facilities and issues would be fixed. But if you have all the ministers in the comfort zone of the centre they simply cannot feel the countryside and as a result we are having a jam because purchasing power is centred in Kampala. 

I wish to urge very strongly that in addition to decentralisation we should decentralise the functions of the central government -(Mr Kyanjo rose_)- you are going to take my time but you give it.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way in your precious time. I think he is raising an important issue but we should start with ourselves. It is high time Parliament considered having sittings in different regions of this country so that we go to a region and we sit there for a month or two and we acclimatise ourselves with the problems over there. We pay for the hotels there, we pay for the meals there in the same way other Members come and pay these monies in this region. Thank you, Mr Kiyingi.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, that is precisely the point: enhancing purchasing power, and forward and backward linkages in the regions. Why must everything happen in Kampala? 

It would also help in uniting this country in a manner that we have not thought about because this bickering about local, small governments here and there, which are not accompanied by real big spending, is nothing. Even investments upcountry could be enhanced. Just imagine what would happen to Kamuli if the Ministry of Health was located there with all those so many vehicles, all the many big spenders, hotels would boom, restaurants would boom and it would be a big achievement for the district.

1.24
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification on page 26 where it talks about the total recurrent expenditure and the development expenditure. I thought that development should take the biggest share but I am seeing the recurrent expenditure taking the biggest share. So, I just want to seek clarification whether it should be like that.

The second issue is the report on work done and achievements. For example on page 15 they are talking about having done a feasibility study on markets. And also on other pages they are talking about procurement of facilities and so on and so forth. To me as a Member of Parliament with a national constituency, I would love to see where this work was done. For example if a feasibility study was done in so many districts on the markets, I would see whether the issues or the concerns of my constituency are taken care of. So, I do not mind a big report but I would like to see where work was done so that I can crosscheck for my interests.

The last point is that I realise that in this report there is an annex outlining the people who were selected to sit on the District Service Commissions. Madam Speaker, the law provides for a person with disabilities to be appointed on the District Service Commission but when you look at the composition of some of these commissions there is no person with disabilities. I would like to thank districts like Bushenyi where we have that representation but in other districts there is no such person. 

And also the committee noted on page 10 with concern the failure of many districts to have fully constituted membership. However, when you look at the recommendations there is nothing like a solution to this problem. So, I do not know whether this issue was taken seriously. What is going to be done and specifically in those District Service Commissions where we do not have a person with disabilities. What are we going to do? Are they breaking the law? So what is going to happen? Thank you very much.

1.27
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you. Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the committee members for the report and capture a few observations starting with page 19 (3), the Naguru-Nakawa Redevelopment Project. They are saying the project has stalled but this is not the first time that government has assured sitting tenants of taking care of their interests. It is in this vein that I am saying we need to move an extra mile. This august House should be informed about how the interests of the sitting tenants have been catered for instead of waiting to get petitions like we have got for Nakasero, Kisekka and Owino Market. We should desist from this. That is an observation I wanted to put to your attention. 

The other issue is about the creation of new districts. I am a Christian and the Bible says that he who seeks shall be given. I disassociate myself from Members who are saying districts should not be given. If somebody has travelled to Budiope, if he has moved to Luwuka and Buikwe, there is no reason as to why you should deny people getting districts. The issue that we should address is, it is healthy to produce children but how are we to fend for the children that we are producing?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much hon. Muwuma for giving way. At the risk of making my very good friend unhappy, I really do not agree with him that creation of districts brings services or goods nearer to the people. I am aware that for example, in some districts the staffing levels are up to 38 percent. You find some teachers acting as county chiefs and others as NAADS co-ordinators. So, even the very purpose of giving people services and jobs is not achieved. By creating more districts we are actually manufacturing more problems. I thank you, hon. Muwuma.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Tashobya, but I want to say that the issue - as I was saying what we should address is how to fund the districts. If the commitment is there and the Shs 45 billion is released to the districts, I think we shall have a break even. We should not deny people services. 

Still on the creation of new districts, I want to inform this House that letters have been written and circulated and this morning CBS radio was passing announcements calling upon people to go and join the Minister of Local Government in launching Buikwe District. I had hoped to see something in this statement about the creation of new districts in this financial, but nothing has been stated to that effect. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR BALIKOWA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it is not only Buikwe. The hon. Minister of Local Government, Kahinda Otafiire went to Luuka and launched a district and actually the people there are busy canvassing for votes. (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, that shows the magnitude of the problem. The issue that you will address is about the Shs 45 billion to the districts. Yesterday I was in Iganga in a sub-county called Nakalama. But what surprised me is the fact that this sub-county gets only Shs 120,000 as Graduated Tax compensation. I have facts and ink on this and I wonder how this sub-county runs on this little money. 

It is just benefiting from penalties because when it comes to considering they always say that for a district to qualify for LGDP, there should be minutes of committees, but even the committees are not sitting. In the end the sub-county is penalised thereby losing out gradually. It is in that respect that I am urging government to ensure that it foots – this should not be a recommendation per se - we should say this is a directive from Parliament that the Shs 45 billion be released with immediate effect.

Madam Speaker  –(Member timed out)

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the committee so I am not debating. But arising from what hon. Muwuma has said that even before matters are brought to this House, already the Minister of Local Government is moving on ahead to launch new districts; and people are already campaigning for new districts? I think this is contempt of Parliament. Already we are disturbed that wherever the President goes to any county, he just announces, “I am going to give you a district” yet the powers to grant a district lie with the Parliament. I think that is procedurally very wrong and if it is happening, then the Minister of Local Government should actually stop it forthwith.

1.33
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the committee for this report. However, I would like to refer to activity No. 3, which talks about commissioning and conducting the National Delivery Service survey in 2008. 

I see this as duplication of work. I want to inform this House that the Uganda Bureau of Statistics is known as a centre of excellence as far as data collection and information dissemination is concerned. And this is one of the major activities carried out by UBOS and indeed in this financial year the Ministry of Finance allocated money to UBOS to undertake this activity. So, I wonder why the Ministry of Local Government also intends to do the same work. This is what I am calling duplication of work; it is wastage of resources. So at an appropriate time I will ask the Minister of Finance to explain to this House why he has decided to allocate funds to this activity.

Secondly, let me say something about the creation of districts. The committee observed that districts have increased from 56 to 80 and that we have 30 more coming. But I want to say that the criterion is there and if I can recall before we started Parliamentary work, we were sworn. During that exercise, I remember being given a Constitution. In that Constitution, there is Article 179. Madam Speaker, it would not be prudent for this Parliament to deny the people of Uganda this constitutional right. By doing so we will create a political, economic and a social –(Interjection)– I am not taking it. I know that hon. Muhanga is concerned about the expenditure.

When you look at the structures in local governments, you find that a district has the CAO, the ACOA, the DEO and an assistant for every sub-county  –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, when we stand to request for clarification, it is an indication that we are not following. If a Member simply says, “I do not accept the clarification” then he is wasting time addressing us. We need your guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the time I must ask a Member to sit down is on a point of order. So, if you are giving information and the Member on the Floor does not want to take it, I cannot force him. And for this debate, Members have only five minutes.

MR BALIKOWA: Madam Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling. There are criteria on how a district should be created. I do not think all the 30 counties that submitted requests will be granted districts. So, it would not be prudent for sure for a constituency like Budiope with a population of 325,000 people to be denied district status. And when the President visited that area he assured the people of Budiope that really they needed a district status because there was great need for the people of Budiope and I do not think it would be wise for this House to deny the people of Budiope a district status. I want to urge government  –(Interruption)

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 21, under item 12, the committee shows that 53 percent of the districts were penalised because of poor performance and those districts failed to secure co-funding, they lack records and there was failure to secure involvement plans and there was under collection of local revenue. That means that some of these districts are poor, they cannot sustain themselves. So I wish to defer from the argument he is advancing.

MR BALIKOWA: Thank you for the information but we have the equalisation grant and I want to assure the House that the constituency I represent has a very big economic muscle, therefore, this business of co-funding will not arise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.37
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues’ to thank the committee. My problem is with the untimely payment of salaries especially to the local government staff. These people are poorly paid so when their salaries delay, then it is a big problem. On top of that we are running a country that is faced with a problem of inflation at a rate of 11.2 percent for the period ending May 2008. So you can imagine a civil servant who gets Shs 200,000 that does not come in time and is affected by inflation! 

The other issue is about the under staffing of the local governments. Surely as we talk of creating new districts, those that already exist are under staffed. I bear in mind the fact that giving district status is a constitutional matter, but we as Parliament need to understand the progress of our economy. If we cannot sustain the already existing districts, why create new ones? That is self defeat. 

And on creating districts, it is very unbecoming that the Minister of Local Government is going around giving districts; I think that is contempt of Parliament  -(Ms Muhanga rose_)- wait a moment. (Laughter) 

Accountability for public funds in the local governments: Madam Speaker, these local governments are misappropriating government funds and have not seen any action being taken. This goes hand in hand –(Interruption)

MRS LAGADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I just want to inform you that when new districts are created, the funds that are taken are just a reduction from the existing provisions. For example, about four years ago we had 56 districts. The women councils, youth councils and company were receiving Shs 2.5 billon. Since then the districts have increased and the money has never been increased. If anything it was decreased. From Shs 2.5 billion, it is now Shs 1.5 billion because one billion was taken to the cultural leaders. Now, Shs 1.5 billion is being disbursed to 85 districts. So is there sense in that?

Secondly, the sub-counties are our centres for development but the last time the sub-country councils were trained was, I think in the last government before 2006. Since then we are two years into the new government and I have not heard of any training for the local councils to be able to effectively use and monitor the money that we are disbursing to sub-county councils.

MR KASAIJA: On local council courts, if I may allude to the report of the committee, the local councils I and II are in place by administrative measures so any time they can be challenged in court. But they still continue to curry out court procedures. So I urge the Ministry of Local Government to quickly help this government hold the local council’s elections so that we can move on well.

Civil servants who may award themselves tenders – Madam Speaker, it is not only the civil servants, even politicians; the local councillors and the district chairpersons are the people involved in these tenders. So it is unfair if we say only the civil servants. Let us take on the politicians and the civil servants together. This county is moving as if we have no laws. 

On the issue of taxation, the Opposition talked about taxes; we are not taxing the poor but only those people who are taxable. The only thing we need to do is observe the principles of taxation so that we look at the progressive line – we should tax someone according to his ability. But to say that taxation is bad is not true. If we do not tax our own people where shall we get the money to run our country?

1.45
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The most important resource in every organisation is human resource. Without very well motivated human resource, you cannot have proper delivery of services. The first UPC Government was able to deliver the way it did simply because it found a well motivated public service in place. Even the little the Amin’s Government was able to deliver was a result of that. Without a well motivated civil service – it is through the civil service that the services are delivered to the people – you cannot get services. 

A government can have very good policies in place but if there is no proper channel of delivering these services, the government will not achieve its objectives. The issue of motivation of our public service has come up not only on this Floor, but also in the media and in the public. Some of us who come from upcountry witness this everyday. We put institutions like health centres in place but you do not find staff there. 

I want to put it to the Minister of Public Service. What is lacking? What is it that you are putting in place to make sure that the civil service is motivated and is able to deliver the services? Because as far as I am concerned, if I am to deliver to the NRM Government, I must have an efficient civil service. I have noted, Madam Speaker, that ROM is the one that is being emphasized. To me this is a theory and a concept, and these come and go. To me the result oriented method basically emphasizes tasks. Does it apply in all government situations? I am looking at a method which will motivate and not only look at tasks. Minister of Public Service, how motivational are these policies?

Madam Speaker, if you remember the structural adjustment programme, it was a concept. It was implemented but what are the results? In our case of public service, you look at the constant threats of retrenchment, public service reform programmes and so on. How motivational are these to our civil service? I do not want to talk about the salaries but salaries or money is part of a motivation factor but that alone is not enough. So, what is the Minister of Public Service to do to make sure that we have an efficient, effective, motivated civil service that will deliver the good intentions of this government?

Madam Speaker, we have created about 80 public service commissions, even for small districts. We put these policies in place. What would be wrong if we regionalised this? For example, instead of having, say - let me quote an example of the greater Mbarara, the then district. What is wrong with having a regional public service commission, lean but handling a number of districts? Because at one time, we had one public service commission and I worked under it but I do not think we were efficient. But why should we put all this? I think that is what has created the concept of tribalisation which is being mentioned almost everywhere and that is a fact. In fact, during my civil service, something I hated to be was permanent and pensionable in one district. I would not have an outlook of a national character. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

1.50
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin by reinforcing the submission by my colleague hon. Obua Dennis. There is one point he left behind vis-à-vis the employment of young people in the public service.  

Madam Speaker, this is the time to now outlaw all the hindrances that are halting young people from accessing jobs in the public service. You may find that these requirements, like of experience among others, are not needed at this moment in time. What we need to do now is to make sure that somebody is trained on job to gain the experience he requires. Because in the period I have lived in this world, I have never heard of any college of experience. This is halting young people from getting employment opportunities. 

Actually I would like to encourage the Public Service Commission to greatly embark on employing young people. I have been in youth leadership for 12 years and I have come to realise that young people are not very corrupt. This will save our country and we shall achieve our objectives expeditiously.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, the honourable member convinced this House, just moments ago, that experience was unnecessary. In his subsequent submission, the same Member said that he has used his own experience as a youth leader. Is he in order to mislead this House on what choice to take, experience or no experience?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, sometimes you interrupt unnecessarily. Everybody has five minutes; let him make his points. Those are his opinions. Move on.

MR KIBEDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Secondly, about the creation of new districts. It would not be bad but it is like one misunderstanding the concept of family planning. Some people think that family planning is to have two or three children. But family planning is to plan for whatever number of children you get. The challenge we have now is to plan for the districts that we are creating such that they are healthy. I am privileged to be a representative of 26 districts. There are some districts that you reach and you find them very miserable. You may find that my home is even more active than some of those districts because I represent a very big constituency. So, when we create these new districts, let us plan for the good of these districts.

However, there is a challenge again according to the committee on page 20 No.5, it was stated: “The committee noted that the ministry’s capacity to inspect all the 80 districts is inadequate because it has only 12 inspectors.” So this brings me to an idea of an alternative that we can come up with just like the system is in Britain, in Nigeria, and in Namibia. How can this work? Maybe we can change these districts to become inspectorates such that the services, the planning, the implementation goes down to the counties. This will save us from the problem of creating more districts which we cannot facilitate. Then it also solves the challenge the committee has noted of having insufficient inspectors. So, this will be very important for us to make sure that we have a win-win situation. 

Therefore, Members, I would like to encourage you to be patient because as Youth Members of Parliament, there is research we are carrying out, which is going to help us with this problem such that we can come up with an alternative that is better than creating more districts; an alternative that will help even young people get employment from these districts. But you find that even in the district service commissions, young people are not getting the chance to be employed.

And because these new districts are not well facilitated, it is just inciting corruption. You find that every councillor now has got a company. Most councillors have got companies where they do not even have the experience for the contracts they are bidding for. You can find somebody owning a construction company yet he has never even entered one single class of engineering. So it is very important for us to change so as to make sure that we can achieve the best out of these objectives. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.55
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sincerely thank you for giving me the chance and I would like to extend my gratitude to the Committee of Local Government and above all the minister who amended a bit of it to allow Members of Parliament to be ex-officios at the district. Otherwise, at the beginning we were barred from attending local government meetings. 

Madam Speaker, arising from the point of the districts, I am seeing my colleagues who have already benefited from the districts are the ones blocking. Why is it that after you have got a district, you become an obstacle -(Laughter)– and yet the principle of getting a district is to take service nearer to the people? 

Madam Speaker, I know there are issues in the local government especially at the district level. The issue is in my opinion; the Local Government Act is a problem. It is the mother of all these issues that arise from the district; corruption, it is there in the district Act. This Act needs to be amended. The current Local Government Act has made the local councillors so big that they do not recognise an MP when you go for a ceremony. And they have even hijacked our title; you find the local councillors calling themselves “honourable,” what is this?  (Laughter) I thought honourable is for national governance. Madam Speaker, you are a lawyer by profession, I need this to be amended. Stop calling these local people honourables. (Laughter)

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, I come out on the issue of corruption. The poor performance and recruitment on jobs is because the district service commission is not autonomous. This is an institution that is controlled by the LC V chairman. If an advertisement for a job is done and they want a graduate, the LCV can recommend anybody who has got the equivalent to the level of a graduate. So, let us make sure that district service commission becomes autonomous, and then it is not necessarily people from the area to interview the candidates aspiring for the job. This could be advertised that people of such experience are the ones who are to be on that panel. So, we should advertise it.

Then on corruption, I would like to say it is easier to squeeze blood out of a stone than to uproot corruption. I repeat it is easier to squeeze blood out of a stone than to uproot corruption. Corruption is impossible because of decentralisation. Resources that go to the districts - the other time my colleague from the North was saying, “Northern region has so much money but we have no access because we are locked out.” Who swallows this money? There are special people because MPs are barred from doing this and that. Corruption; we could have talked about this issue in your committee.

Then finally, Madam Speaker, when we talk of districts, we should also balance power. You find that a certain region has five districts with only one minister. And you know when you have people like this, they can pull resources, where you find only one minister, he will only be minding about his constituency. So, that one also should be addressed. It is like in the executive council, if you do not have somebody in your area – I am not a regular speaker but I stand on the point that we are facing a very big problem in the district unless this Act is amended. And completely from today onwards, I want the journalists wherever they are, remove the word “honourable” from councillors. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, 21 Members have spoken so far on this matter. I have noted those who have not spoken and I will give you an opportunity in the next committee report. So, now I invite the Minister of Public Service to respond.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta Sezi): Thankyou, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I want to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government for a good report and an analysis of our policy statement. And I want to thank hon. Members of the committee for their contribution and seeking clarification when we were invited as the ministry to clarify further the issues that had been raised in our statement.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I want to thank you for the lively debate on this subject of public service and for the inputs that you have given on this Floor of Parliament. I have taken note of all your concerns hon. Members and I want to request through, the Deputy Speaker, that I summarise some of the issues together because the concerns are related and therefore I want to request that I do not refer to the individual Member of Parliament by name. 

What I have identified in your concerns are the late structures and in these structures you have indicated an example of using information and communications technology as having a large structure. I want to state that restructuring is a process that is undertaken between the sector ministry with the staff and then the clients of that sector, including the private sector. In this case of ICT, if the structure is a bit unwieldy for its business processes, the ministry should raise it to the Ministry of Public Service and we shall review it. 

There have been concerns that there are support services in that ministry and we have used personal secretaries at their different levels, we have used drivers. I want to state that support services are a common service; it is a common cadre and therefore when a ministry is set up, we identify these staff from within the public service and that is why those positions have been filled faster. 

The professional structure on ICT is a recruitment process because the ministry will need skilled personnel in technology and that goes for the Public Service Commission. The ministry has to declare those positions and the Public Service Commission will identify the skilled personnel for the ministry. That process is ongoing. It may not be moving at the same pace because the skills and competencies required in this area are highly unique. We need to crosscheck with the Public Service Commission on how many submissions they have received from the sector ministries and when they recruited the initial group, did they find constraints? We can bring this information, Madam Speaker, to this House.

On the issue of structures of the public service, I would like to confirm to honourable members that restructuring is an ongoing process depending on the demands of government. As policies change and we move to “Bonna Bagaggawale”, we go to any other policy then the structures of those particular ministries must be reviewed to take into account the new policies. Therefore, restructuring is a continuous process. 

I also want to confirm to honourable members that structures are not built for promotions; structures respond to the concerns of that sector. What are the business processes? What are supposed to be their targets? What are supposed to be outputs and structures are created in such a way that they may have no promotional outlets or they may have. Promotions demand that you have an elongated structure, but in this restructuring we are looking at cost efficiency in a ministry and therefore we are not creating positions for promotion for the sake of it. There must be business to be performed.

Madam Speaker, the structures may also provide for promotions because there is a need for a hierarchy and a supporting hierarchy so you will find that in some local governments, in some ministries, there are promotional outlets but they are based on competencies for those particular jobs. The individuals to be appointed and promoted must have the necessary skills. 

The second issue that has been discussed by Members in the debate is the issue of pay. I want to agree with you that the public service needs to be well paid. I want to agree with you that the issue of pay is at the centre of government. However, pay must be looked at within the resources available to the government. We continuously review the issue of pay and we have a standard policy or procedure that on an annual basis, we must take into account the purchasing power of the salaries, save for this year and this has been explained to honourable members of Parliament, why the salary award was not given. This salary award on an annual basis takes into account the lower level who are poorly paid so that once resources have been given to us, we focus on those lower levels for improvement. 

The selective award. This can exist in any organisation and in the public service it does exist. We must look at the demand and supply of labour. You have over time in this House had an outcry over the staffing of health facilities. There is an outcry of different skills that are lacking in the public service. As an active organization, we must see where service delivery is getting weakened and therefore we must selectively award some groups of skills that we look for; now we have petroleum, we have the doctors, we have the scientists. 

Members talked about the 30 percent. I think the 30 percent hard to reach and hard to live is a good percentage if salaries improve, because it is a factor of salary. Therefore, to increase it, in the future it may not be affordable. So the quantum improves as the salaries improve. 

There was an issue on the district service commission and its membership and how it performs. I want to confirm that the district service commissions are appointed based on the Constitution and the Local Government Act. The Public Service Commission does supervise and does train. Honourable members are aware that in the past we have had a problem of recruiting the sons and daughters of the soil. The recruitment was based on localisation of the public service and the Public Service Commission is actually trying to handle that, so that we move away from localisation to the national character of the public service and jobs are advertised, the responses given. 

I have through my experience seen young men and women moving to other districts and I can provide evidence of those staff who are out there.  I want to use Mbarara District as a very good example, which recruits the skills and competences it requires without looking at the localisation. But there is also movement of labour. Public servants are allowed to move from one district to another, to move from the district to the centre, to move within the ministries to another ministry. That facility is there. Anybody can get a job anywhere. 

Let me link recruitment with experience. Experience is required for the jobs that need that experience. I want to assure honourable members that the recruitment of graduates is on an annual basis done and it does not need experience. That is a specific exercise for graduates, which we conduct annually and they go there with their certificates and compete. I think the best thing to say is that, they must go knowing that everybody is looking for a job and it is highly competitive and they must pass the competence tests before they go into the orals. There is no experience required and each year on average we recruit over 400 young graduates and distribute them in the public service, in line ministries save for the local government which also has its figures.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue of performance of the public service. I want to thank Members for approving the loan because that is supposed to help us to orient the public service and give it the skills for targeted capacity building.  

There was an issue on national service delivery. The national service delivery is a function of the Ministry of Public Service but we work and use UBOS to actually undertake the exercise and that exercise is supposed to inform us on which part of the public service is performing well, where are the weaknesses and so on. So, we are partners in that national service delivery.

There was also an issue raised on pension arrears. On Monday this week, I gave a response to the budget on the concerns of pension and pension arrears. I understand from the Clerk that some copies of that response are still available for Members who did not get a copy. I think I sufficiently addressed that issue.  

On the issue of pension reform, we are waiting as a ministry to reform into a contributory scheme because we have realised that the current system of non-contributory is not affordable and not sustainable. We are waiting for the framework of the regulatory framework to have a regulator and we shall bring our proposals. After going through Cabinet with the principles, we shall bring a Bill here on moving to a contributory scheme.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised on why our budget was high and apparent under performance. This was because we had anticipated the approval of Uganda Public Service Enhancement Programme (UPSEP) which was not done at that time. 

There was an issue of ghosts. I think there is a misconception that ghosts are created. I want to say that if you know that there is somebody who has walked out of the civil service without giving us notice and is elsewhere, honourable members, let us be partners in this process and our priority is to delete. We have had a number of studies which have informed us on how to improve the payroll and payroll management and as we develop the IPPS we shall be able to improve. Payroll is a management function and there have been a number of studies and the committee was given the report on payroll cleaning for their information.  

Madam Speaker, I want to thank honourable members for their contributions and for appreciating that we need a good public service and for supporting the report of the chairperson.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I want you to move that we adopt the report only with regard to the budget of Ministry of Public Service and the Public Service Commission.  Those who did not come we shall not touch their budget. You amend and we move forward.

2.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Anthony Yiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Members for the discussion generated by the report and since we are going to consider the component of local government, there are some other amendments which we shall handle later. So, I would like to move that we adopt the portion in the report concerning the Ministry of Public Service and Public Service Commission. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the chairperson be adopted as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall resume at 3.30 p.m. to consider the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. The House is suspended to 3.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.19 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 3.41 p.m._) 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

3.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Abraham Byandala): Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to present the ministerial statements for the two ministries of Works and Transport and Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Before I start, I thank my colleagues, the Members of the committee and my vice-chairperson, hon. Margaret Baba Diri for enabling me to prepare this report.

The committee held meetings with ministers and officials from the ministries of Works and Transport and Lands, Housing and Urban Development. In addition, the committee reviewed the following documents: 

•	Ministerial policy statements for the two ministries for the financial year 2008/09. 
•	Ministerial policy statements for the two ministries for the financial year 2007/08.
•	Report of the committee on the ministerial policy statement for the two ministries for the fiscal year 2007/08.
•	Reports of the Budget Committee on the preliminary revenue and expenditure estimates for 2008/09 up to 2012/13 and 
•	The report of the Physical Infrastructure Committee on the preliminary revenue and expenditure estimates for financial year 2008/2009 up to 2012/2013.

Methodology 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, some of these things are standard. You don’t have to go through the methodology, they are all the same. Just go to the important areas.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your advice. On page 2, preliminary budget performance. Ministry of Works Vote 016; the table shows the funds that were budgeted for 2007/08 and the amount of money spent by the end of May. The last part of the column shows the performance of each Vote function. I will not read the text, Members can read.

The second part of that Vote is the Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) which has just been formed but before we had the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU). The table that follows shows the monies that were budgeted for RAFU, what was spent up to the end of May and its performance.

Let me now go to the physical performance under three of the Ministry of Works, Vote 016. I will start with administration. The objective of the Vote function entails production of safety for the administration of the ministry. Under this function, the ministry had the following achievements. They are listed down there and I don’t have to read for the Members. I can add what is not in the report that they concluded and consolidated recent and selected issues in the sector of District Urban Community Access Roads (DUCAR) report. 

The transport regulations sector objective is to entail promotion of safety and to ensure effective regulatory framework for rail, water and air transport. The achievements are shown there and for ease of reference, honourable members, if you look at the ministerial policy statements on page 17, you will be able to follow all of them.

On the transport service development Vote function, the objective of the Vote function is to develop and maintain economic, efficient and effective transport services of all modes of transport. As regards achievements, for ease of reference, you can look at page 22.

The next Vote function is the construction standards and quality assurance, refer to page 33. The objective of this Vote function is to develop policies, laws, standards and regulations that will ensure effective, safe, sufficient and adequate delivery of services in the construction industry. Achievements are indicated on page 33.

District Urban and Community Roads (DUCR) achievements for this Vote function are listed down. The objective of this Vote function is to provide overall planning, coordination, monitor and provide policies, standards and guidelines to local governments in the implementation of their road programmes. They are indicated on page 27.

Let me turn to Vote 113, RAFU which is UNRA now. As you are aware, UNRA commenced its activities fully on the 1 July this year. During FY 2007/08, the major activities under this Vote function by UNRA was recruitment of staff, setting up financial and administrative systems, and planning for financial year 2008/2009. The committee was informed that UNRA had recruited almost all the critical staff required to start on this mandate.

During the financial year 2008/2009, there were key planned activities, which will be seen as we go later in my report. However, Madam Speaker, allow me to say that before the UNRA was born, the ministry had RAFU which was sort of an operation arm of the Ministry of Works and Transport and it was handling road design, construction and maintenance. Most of the physical and financial achievements reported in this report for the financial year 2007/2008 were executed by RAFU; you can see what they did under the sub-heading of national road maintenance. In your policy statement, you can look at page 52.

RAFU also handled national road construction. The following major road links were completed: Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima, Kafu-Masindi, Orweny-Pakwach, Fort Portal-Hoima. In addition, works are on the following roads are continuing: Kampala Northern Bypass, which we hope will be finalised by the end of this year; the rehabilitation of the Jinja-Bugiri Road will also be completed next year by March, and the rehabilitation of the Kawempe-Luwero-Kafu Road, which will be completed in June next year.

It is worth noting that works on the following roads have started: Soroti-Dokolo, Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana, Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi, and the reconstruction of the Masaka-Mbarara road, which was inaugurated recently. In addition, the ferry for Nabuganyi was procured and the existing ferries maintained during that period.

Proposed Budget for Works and Transport Sector for 2008/2009

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the total budget of the works and transport sector for financial year 2008/2009 is Shs 1.117 trillion. This represents an additional Shs 514.884 billion up from the Shs 602.116 billion which was approved in the last financial year, 2007/2008. Whereas the ministry of works and transport will take Shs 169.113 billion, which is roughly 15 percent, UNRA will take a lion’s share of Shs 948.63 billion which represents 85 percent of the Shs 1.117 trillion. UNRA will spend much of the funds ear-marked for the works and transport sector. From this, 84 percent is meant for road construction which should roughly be Shs 800 billion.

Madam Speaker, as we were discussing this, the committee demanded a detailed work plan for each of the projects to be undertaken by UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport. The minister promised that it will be provided to Parliament before the end of this month. My committee intends to periodically go to the field and inspect these works to ensure that things are moving smoothly.

Page 9 shows the proposed budget outlook for financial year 2008/2009. The first one is for the Ministry of Works and Transport, Vote 016 with the five vote functions as shown in the table. I hope members can read all that. To save time, I will just read this one: The committee recommends that funds be sought to finance – maybe let me go up, Madam Speaker, this could be interesting for the members. The committee was informed that the reduction in the duka funding - if you look at the table under vote function 4; district urban and access roads, you will see that there is a decrease in the funding - is due to the fact that 8,000 kilometres of district roads have been upgraded to national roads and will be maintained by UNRA. 

Madam Speaker, the ministry contacted all district chairmen and copies of the letters were given to all honourable Members of Parliament to suggest roads which can be upgraded from district level to national level. From that list, the ministry is extracting the 8,000 kilometres to be upgraded from district to national level.

However, the committee did not support this decision of reducing the funding as districts were also expected to upgrade and take on more community roads to district roads using these funds. The committee recommends that funds be sought to finance the 8,000 kilometres upgraded from district to national roads instead of reducing duka funding.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you may have realised now that many reforms have taken place. The Ministry Of Works and Transport has been reformed, UNRA has been formed, funding has increased, and the Road Fund was also put in place. The committee therefore would like to register its appreciation to Government for prioritising the works and transport sector. (Applause) Adequate funds have been provided for this financial year to enable the ministry and UNRA to improve the service level on our roads and other related infrastructure. Secondly, the reforms which have taken place in the sector have also been done with the objective of improving service delivery to the public.

Madam Speaker, UNRA has been formed replacing RAFU. UNRA will be in charge of development and maintenance of national roads, actual road control and ferries’ service. The Ministry of Works and Transport will now concentrate on policy formulation, setting standards, research in building materials and supervising the stand alone votes under its jurisdiction.

The other major reform is the formation of the Road Fund and I will at a later stage give more details on the Road Fund. The committee noted that the enhanced funding and the reforms which have taken place have come with new challenges, and before I go into the vote functions, allow me to throw some light on these challenges and issues which the ministry should take very seriously: 

1. 	The absorption capacity of funds by both the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA has to be looked into. Tremendous money has been put there and they need to show capacity to absorb the funds.

2. 	There is a need for crash training of both the staff in the ministry and UNRA. The work in UNRA is businesslike; this business of “I am permanent and pensionable” or “it will be done tomorrow” cannot be tolerated. We want them to work as a private company to produce work. Of course, those in the Ministry of Works must also know that their role in the delivery of services to the Ugandans has changed. As I said, their functions are well spelt out up there.

3. 	Supervising and checking design work done by the consultants in order to reduce the unnecessary claims and extra works. We have read and heard that for nearly every programme, there are design problems and these can be seen. You have read about the Northern Bypass, Jinja-Bugiri, Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana; these are areas where we think - and the ministry also concedes - that there are going to be improvements in the supervising of the consultants hired to do these works. Also, there needs to be supervision by the top management on some lower cadres. 

Madam Speaker, last financial year, Shs 9.94 billion was not utilised for the district roads just because variation orders of works were not approved. Again, Shs 7.37 billion in districts was never utilised because the consultant could not finalise the report. To me, these are flimsy excuses which should not have resulted in denying districts billions approaching 20. 

Madam Speaker, supervision goes also on the works as outside. You heard what was in Fort Portal where the Bishop demonstrated. People were talking about Entebbe Road, but all in all, we are asking that there should be an improvement in the supervision of the contract works and we were promised by the minister that this is going to be done.

The question of the unit costs of the roads has been in papers for years now. We are demanding that a clear and acceptable explanation must be given. Explanation given so far has not convinced Ugandans. Facts may be right, but maybe the packaging is wrong. So, we are demanding that they make it clearer so that people can know that their work is being put to good use. 

We are also advising that the ministry should take it upon itself - maybe together with the committee - to attract credible construction companies to come to Uganda. When we have many companies, competition will arise and rates will be forced down. 

We are also saying, develop local construction companies but this should be done with limited interference from the ministry. Let the ministry lay out the framework. Let the people who can, do the work plan on how they are going to develop these companies. Without the local companies, rates will never go down. I know several years back, the ministry visited their colleagues in Tanzania; I hope they will go back and finalise the work.

Research into new construction methods and materials is of paramount importance. The materials that we are using these days are getting more and more scarce so the ministry must use its labs to do research in that line. 

In this House, people have talked about the traffic in the city and we are saying that a programme to reduce traffic congestion in the city should be worked on by the ministry to see that Ugandans do not lose money by staying for hours and hours in traffic jams.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of road safety; day in day out, people are dying on our roads. I know it is not fully the responsibility of the Ministry of Works and Transport but they have a big role to play. We are advising that they should work hand in hand with their colleagues in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Sports to handle this issue of road safety.

Ministry of Works and Transport’s Planned Activities for Financial Year 2008/2009:

Administration: What they intend to do are listed there. You can also refer to the document.

Transport Service Regulation: What to be done is there. A total of Shs 3.199 billion is required under this function, of which Shs 1.376 billion is for recurrent and Shs 1.832 billion is for development. 

What is going to be done is shown there; it would be interesting for you to see that among those, they are going to prepare two bills for the amendment of the Traffic and Road safety Act of 1998 and the Inland Water Transport Control Act of 1939. You will also see the formulation of regulations for the implementation of the Lake Victoria Transport Act of 2007. We also have to implement the peace road safety campaigns. These are issues of road safety. Also, they are going to procure two private firms to carry out vehicle inspection for road worthiness. This is a new innovation – something you should take interest in.

Transport Service Development: Madam Speaker, under this function, a total of Shs 48.16 billion has been earmarked to implement activities during Financial Year 2008/2009 of which Shs 1.36 billion is for recurrent and Shs 38.01 billion is for development. Activities are shown and you can even read them from page 22. Maybe I need to tell you that among the activities they are going to do is to coordinate, monitor and evaluate the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project, which is very important to the East African Community.

District, Urban and Community Access roads (DUCAR) 

Madam Speaker, a total of Shs 30.518 billion has been earmarked to implement the following activities planned for Financial Year 2008/2009. These are spelt out and maybe the interest of members will be on the last, which talks about the bridges, because I know many honourable members here are interested in the bridges. These include, among others: to complete the construction of Enyau Bridge in Arua, Ngusi in Hoima, Nchwera in Kasese, Oraa in Nebbi, Alaa in Arua and Oguta in Nebbi. They will also start construction on many others and I will just mention a few like Agua Bridge, Saaka River crossing and so on. You can read more from page 27 of the ministerial policy statement. There are also others that will be at the stage of design like Apac, Kaguta, and Kabaale in Kyankwanzi, Karujumba and Semuliki. All these are well laid out in the policy statement.

Let me now talk about the construction standards and quality assurance vote function. What will be done is shown there. You will see an interesting item about undertaking research on local construction materials and operationilising the National Construction and Industry Policy. They are also going to complete 50 percent of the redevelopment of the Kyabazinga Palace and rehabilitate up to 30 percent of the late Gen. Tito Okello’s house.

Vote 113: The Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) 

I would like to say that funds are shown according to what is proposed in this financial year. It should be noted that for the first time Uganda has provided more funding for development expenditure compared to what we are getting from our development partners. Out of the total of Shs 795.909 billion earmarked for development, Shs 491.266 billion is from the Uganda budget compared to Shs 304.643 billion from our development partners. While we congratulate ourselves, I want to thank our development partners for the continued support given to us.

Madam Speaker, I now move on to the vote functions on finance and administration on page 15. What they are going to do is well laid down. Honourable members can read through it even from the ministry’s policy statement.

On national road maintenance, what they are going to do is also shown accordingly. You will see a substantive increase of the work that was done by RAFU compared to what UNRA is going to be doing.

The figures you will see in the ministerial policy statement are slightly different because the ministry got more money after they had prepared the document. Otherwise, these are the latest figures we got from the minister.

On page 15, the report talks about what the ministry is going to do. However, let me also take this opportunity to inform you and honourable members that two more ferries through the Office of the Prime Minister are going to be purchased. One is going to operate on Lake Bisinia and the other on Bukungu-Kagwala.

About the parastatal bodies under the Ministry of Works and Transport, I will start with the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). During the Financial Year 2008/2009, CAA has earmarked Shs 1.6 billion to undertake the activities laid down there. I hope members will read through. 

Most interesting for this financial year is the East African Civil Aviation Academy in Soroti. This academy had been under funded for long, but I am glad to report that substantial funding has now been appropriated for it. 

The committee was informed that the total allocation for the Soroti Flying School is Shs 9.7 billion. The following are its planned activities for the Financial Year 2008/2008: 

•	Procurement of six new training aircrafts  
•	One simulator 
•	Rehabilitation of staff quarters and some transport for them.

Madam Speaker, the committee therefore, recommends that the ministry should expedite the process of recruiting the required calibre of staff to man the school and live within their expectations.

Now let me turn my attention to the Uganda Railways Corporation and the Rift Valley Railways Ltd. I will start with the performance of the latter. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, railway transport is the cheapest means of transport for bulk cargo. In November 2006, when Uganda Railways Freight Services were concessioned, the role of Uganda Railways Corporation changed. The role that remained was to monitor the railway concession and to provide technical support to the government on railway matters.

Last year, Parliament had recommended that Government should review the concession to ensure that RVR performs to the expectation but government assured Parliament that the concessionaire was doing well. The committee was however, surprised to hear from the minister that the railways concessionaire, Ms Rift Valley Railways, had not performed to expectation. The concessionaire has breached several important provisions in the concession agreement including those relating to payment of concession fees and maintenance of conceded assets among others. 

The committee was further informed that RVR was looking for an equity partner to bring in the required financial resources and management. I am glad to report that we were informed after we had written this report that they got a partner from Austria to assist in the management of this concession. 

The committee strongly recommends that government quickly intervenes and ensures that no further loss is incurred, and renews its interest in railway transport to save our roads that have been constructed with a lot of money and spent painfully as soon as possible. 

Let me now talk briefly about the railways. Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that Uganda Railways Corporation was unable to perform all its obligations using its own resources. For that reason, the ministry has ear-marked Shs 280 million to carry out maintenance of the railway lines during the Financial Year 2008/09. These lines are:  Kampala-Kasese, Tororo-Pakwach (just beyond Mbale) and the Busoga loop. It should be noted that these lines are conceded but are not yet taken over by the concessionaire for operations. 

The maintenance activities I talked about for the Shs 280 million include: safeguarding of the railway assets, stopping encroachment and controlling vegetation on the railway lines. 

The committee was further informed that feasibility studies for the reopening of the Tororo-Pakwach railway line and the Kampala-Kasese line will be undertaken this financial year. The committee therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that government should seriously consider earmarking enough funds to the railway sector to provide for passenger services in addition to cargo. 

Observations

Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, I wanted to elaborate on the Road Fund. During the Financial Year 2007/08, government abolished road licences which were remitting Shs 80 billion to the government treasury and instead introduced the fuel levy. The revenue from the fuel levy was estimated to be Shs 201.3 billion. 

This parliament passed a Bill on the Road Fund and I presume it has been assented to. So, when the Road Fund Act was passed, the intention was to have the Road Fund money ring-fenced strictly for road maintenance in addition to the budget form the government treasury. What I mean is that besides the Road Fund, we still expect some money from the Consolidated Fund. The committee was however informed that the ministry’s proposed budget included part of that money from the Road Fund.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that Parliament directed the ministry to table the criteria to be employed in allocating the road funds. The committee was informed that a scientific formula based on a well developed scientific model was still under formulation. The rules of the formula are premised on the principles for setting the road fund instrument tariff levels and social responsibility. They include full cost recovery and equity considerations. 

The committee recommends that government should prioritise road maintenance and give it greater attention. We are requesting the minister to urgently table in Parliament this formula so that members are informed and can tell their constituents. 

The other observation is on the delay of construction projects. I talked about this and I do not have to repeat it. 

Poor designs and encroachment on road reserves: I shade some light on the poor designs, but encroachment on the road reserves has not yet been addressed.

Bridge maintenance and development: I have talked about this and members can look in the policy statement document for the details. 

Water transport: The committee noted that water transport in this country is still faced with many challenges. For a long time, many accidents have been occurring but without serious attention from government. There are no aides, for example, to guide water traffic along waterways. The committee was however informed that this financial year, the ministry will commence the procurement and installation of navigation aides along the Lutoboka-Nakiwogo route on Lake Victoria. However, we need more to save the lives of our people. 

The committee commends government on this step but recommends that this undertaking of marking routes on the lake should be expedited to curb loss of life on the lake.

MV Kabalega: Madam Speaker, you recall that government lost colossal sums of money as a result of the sinking of MV Kabalega. It was reported that the ship had not been insured at the time of the tragic accident hence making it difficult to recover the costs involved. The committee wanted to know the results of the investigations of the accident of MV- Kabalega and the current status of both MV Kaawa and MV Pamba as regards their safety and worthiness to be on our waters. 

The committee was informed that improvement and/or repair on MV Pamba are being handled by the Privatisation Unit of Ministry of Finance with a view of making it sea worthy while MV Kaawa was being directly handled by the Ministry of Works. The committee therefore recommended that government should expedite this exercise to avoid a repeat of the scenario of MV Kabalega that sunk.

In addition, Madam Speaker, water transport is key in connecting various districts across water with the help of the ferry service. Despite the effort of the ministry to acquire a new ferry, such as Nabuganyi Ferry, to link Kayunga to Kamuli, there is dire need for functional and well built landing sites across the country. The committee was surprised to learn that most of the landing sites are not functional or properly functional and are in a sorry state. 

The committee recommends that government should, with effect from this financial year, allocate funds to rehabilitate and to build landing sites across all waterways to make ferry services more efficient and effective. 

Generally, these are the issues and works which have been handled by the Ministry of Works and Transport and also UNRA. However, there are other crosscutting issues of gender and HIV and they are being handled adequately in the ministry.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I beg to move that this House adopts this report and approves the budget for the Ministry of Works and Transport sector of UShs 1,117,743,000,000 for the Financial Year 2008/09 as follows: 

VOTE 013: MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

Total budget – UShs 169,113,140,571 
Recurrent - UShs 43,312,733,598 
Development - UShs152,800,406,973. This, Madam Speaker, includes taxes and domestic arrears.

VOTE 113: UGANDA NATIONAL ROAD AUTHORITY 

Total budget - UShs948,630,000,000 
Recurrent - UShs152,721,000,000 
Development - UShs795,909,000,000. Madam Speaker, that also includes taxes and domestic arrears. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move. (Applause)

Allow me now to go to part (b) of my report. This is Vote 012 and Vote 156 of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and that of the Uganda Land Commission. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has four vote functions, which are enumerated there, but the last one should be corrected to “housing function”. When you look at the table that follows, it shows the budget of the last financial year 2007/08, what was spent and the performance. Let me talk about this for a short time. 

If you look at physical planning and urban development, the performance is 28 percent. I took interest to find out why the performance is very low. I found out that the total amount of money, which was released by Finance to the physical planning and urban development sector was actually Shs 491,963,756. However, from the policy statement we received, which you can see in the table, it shows that they received only Shs 0.148 billion. 

There are two issues here for you to observe. The important thing you should note here is that by the end of May, they had only released Shs 148 million to the vote function of physical planning and urban development. Between May and the end of the financial year, they had released Shs 491,963,756 which indicates that a lot of funds were released at the end of the year when little time was left. This means these funds are subject to misuse or hurried use to finish it up. So, I appeal to the Ministry of Finance to release these funds in time so that they can be put to proper use.

The Uganda Land Commission 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I request that you do some correction; there was a typing error in that table. When you look at it, it says that it was spent by end of June; it should be May. Also, the figure for management of development land spent by end of May should be 0.271 and not 0.50. Support to Uganda Land Commission should be 0.65 and not 0.68. The total also changes to 0.836 and not 1.18. The percentages also change - the first one should be 54.2 percent for management and the Uganda Lands Commission is 53.6 percent. Overall, total is 53.9 percent.

Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. What they did under administration and finance is shown there. When you go to land administration and management, they are also shown. On housing development and estates management, on page 3, it is also well laid out. On page 4, physical planning and urban development  –(Interruption)

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, this session is very important; it is very important and very technical but in the morning, I came a little bit late. I do not know whether the Prime Minister told us who was acting as Minister of Finance. And this afternoon unfortunately I was on time but I do not know who is acting as the Minister of Finance. Really, we should take the session very seriously because it is going to affect us throughout the year. So, who is the Minister of Finance here, Mr Prime Minister? (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I had assigned the Minister of Finance to sit near you in the morning. I do not know; where is he this afternoon? (Laughter) We would like to know who the Minister of Finance is before we proceed. I am asking the Prime Minister.

HON. MEMBERS: And they are four ministers!

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, two days ago in this House after the Ministry of Finance were castigated for not being there, the Minister of Finance made a commitment. He apologised – in fact when you were appealing to them to be present I got up and said that it is the duty of the Minister of Finance, because the Budget is theirs, to be there and, therefore, it was even inappropriate that you were appealing to them - and they committed themselves to be here. I suspect because they wanted their loan discussed; now that there is no loan request on the Floor of the House, they have all disappeared. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the government bench to pick an individual who was obviously not assigned by the Minister of Finance to act on their behalf; to come and masquerade as the Minister of Finance, particularly when you have not received any formal communication from the Minister of Finance that they will be committed on some important matters and which would have allowed us to accept their absence from the House? This is not being fair to us. This morning we discussed the report of the Ministry of Local Government but the ministers were not there. We cannot go on like this, Madam Speaker! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I want to know from you: where is the Minister of Finance because you are the Leader of Government Business?

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Henry Kajura): Madam Speaker, I have sent an urgent message and the Minister of Finance is on the way coming.
 
MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you Rt hon. Prime Minister for giving way. The information I would like to give is the understanding of the Ministry of Finance as they are on the way coming that even when we start, we start with policy statements, which are sectoral because the budget has already been discussed and allocated and now the sectors are defending the budgets that have been allocated to them. That is why even when we go to defend our policy statements at the sectoral committees; we do not go with the Ministers from Finance. We go on our own with officials from Finance -(Interjection)- anyway, I hope the House can be patient, since our Rt hon. Prime Minister has assured us that the minister is on the way as we debate it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Government Business, there is absolutely no excuse for the Minister of Finance not to be here. (Applause) None at all! The minister is responsible for the entire budget of all the ministries seated here. So, there is no excuse; absolutely no excuse. So if by the time we conclude debate the minister is not here, we shall not deal with the budget of the Ministry of Finance; that is what we shall do. 

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, since the Minister of Works seems very ready to put his neck on the block, we want to hear from him because I am almost tempted to move a motion that the House adjourns –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, thank you for – I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition giving way. My statement was that noting that we are starting with discussing the policy statement and we are coming with the final figures for approval later and the Leader of Government Business has assured the House that a Minister of Finance is on the way coming, I was praying that the Speaker allows us to continue debating the policy statement as the minister arrives. And that is as far – so that we do not delay given the time that we have. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just rose to provide information as the Vice-Chairperson of the Social Services Committee that even when we were deliberating in the committees, we were frustrated by the absence of the officials from the Ministry of Finance; I think they are making it a habit. We had issues to do with our sectors: education and health on which we wanted the Ministry of Finance to clarify. We even set a date and invited the ministry but they refused to come. We called the minister, he was very hostile on phone and we are bringing the issues to Parliament. (Applause) And yet there are five ministers within that ministry. So I think the minister should take this exercise - in any case this is the motion by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I really want to emphasise that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take this exercise very seriously and be physically present in this House for us to proceed.

MRS OKORIMOE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I just want to give additional information that even at committee level in the Committee of Finance, we have been finding difficulties in meeting ministers of finance and yet we know they are many. We have four state ministers of finance but they are full of excuses and apologies. We can not continue like this! (Applause)

MR KAKOOZA: I think our colleagues in Finance are letting us down. For instance, there is information which the chairperson of the committee gave that even the budget we passed had a shortage, which was not released to the Ministry of Transport; who is going to answer this? We are handling a budget of Shs 1.67 trillion and this is infrastructure where we have most concerns, politically, economically and socially. And the Minister of Finance just disappears, I do not know whether deliberately or not. 

I urge this Parliament to wait for the minister to come or we suspend the House for some minutes and give him time to come because these are new items introduced in the budget, which we need to understand. There is a component of new infrastructure equipment for over 89 districts, how is it going to work out? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got other business on the Order Paper. Let us go to the next item, namely the motion to pay tribute to the Late President Mwanawasa.

MOTION FOR THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE LEVY MWANAWASA, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA

4.47
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: I am just informing the Prime Minister that there is a Speaker in the chair. (Laughter)

MR KAJURA: Madam Speaker -(Applause)- my apologies for the little omission. This is a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late, His Excellency Dr Levy Mwanawasa, President of the Republic of Zambia.
  
"WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with deep sorrow the tragic news of the death of His Excellency Dr Levy Mwanawasa, President of the Republic of Zambia, which occurred on the 19 August 2008 at Percy Military Hospital in Paris, France where he had been hospitalised since he suffered a stroke during the 11th African Union Summit held in Egypt last June; 

AND WHEREAS President Levy Mwanawasa was an industrious leader of the sisterly Republic of Zambia with which Uganda enjoys very cordial relations;  

NOTING THAT President Levy Mwanawasa has not only played a big role in consolidating the strong ties between our two countries, but also in pushing forward the integration agenda of our region and Africa as a whole;

FURTHER NOTING that just before his death, President Levy Mwanawasa played a major role in the region as chairman of Southern Africa Development Corporation (SADC). 

AWARE THAT the late President Mwanawasa was a renowned lawyer who as a head of state launched the biggest anti-corruption drive and was a strong advocate for democracy and good governance not only in Zambia but across the Continent;

APPRECIATING his leadership skills and intellectualism demonstrating his effective participation in the sub-regional, regional, African and international fora;

SATISFIED that the Late President Mwanawasa indeed dedicated his life to serve not only his country but the entire region and that therefore deserves recognition of this Parliament.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 

1.	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the government and people of the Republic of Zambia upon the untimely loss of their beloved President, the Late His Excellency Dr Levy Mwanawasa. 
2.	That Parliament, recognising the dedicated services that the late President Levy Mwanawasa rendered in the course of his life to the people of Zambia, to the region of Africa as a whole and in particular the relations between Zambia and Uganda.
3.	That the Almighty God gives strength to the bereaved family and grants the late President Levy Mwanawasa’s soul eternal rest."

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR HENRY KAJURA: The justification for this tribute is as follows: the late President Mwanawasa who died on the 19 August 2008 at the age of 59 was born in Mufulira, then Northern Rhodesia. He was a holder of a Law Degree from the University of Zambia. He worked in various private firms from the year 1974 to 1978. He formed his own law firm, Mwanawasa and Company and was a high profile lawyer in Zambia. In 1985, he served as the Solicitor-General of Zambia.

President Fredrick Chiluba named Mwanawasa Vice-President in December 1991. The late Mwanawasa served as Vice-President until he resigned in 1994, citing gross abuse of office and corruption by some leaders. In 1996, he successfully contested for the presidency in his party, the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MDD) against President Chiluba. However, in 2000 the National Executive Committee elected Mwanawasa its candidate for the 2001 elections. Mwanawasa won the elections and took office of the President in January, 2002 and remained President until he passed away. 

6.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion moved by the Rt hon. Leader of Government Business. I know that the motion that was circulated is actually different from the motion that was read by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. To lay to rest the wonderment that I see in the eyes of the few of our colleagues, this motion is being moved by the Parliament of Uganda on behalf of the people of Uganda and it is only appropriate even in our parliamentary protocol that the Leader of the Opposition seconds the motion. I am most pleased to do so, on two very important grounds. First of all it is based on the first ground that I said, and secondly the fact that when I make my contribution, you will see that both sides of the House and this country can learn something from the politics of the late President Mwanawasa.

It is very appropriate that this Parliament and the country pay respect to the late President of Zambia, His Excellency Levy Mwanawasa. Many of us who are in this House know the history of the relationship between the people of Zambia and the country, and the people of Uganda and our country. Both countries over the years fought together to see independence for the people of Zimbabwe and South Africa. Both countries championed the cause of the third world, through the activities of their presidents, then President Milton Obote and Kenneth Kaunda - if Members can remember the Mulungushi Club - therefore, we have very long associations with Zambia.

Secondly, there are very many people in this House who after the overthrow of the government of Milton Obote by Iddi Amin ran and took refuge in Zambia. Even after Milton Obote himself got overthrown the second time, many Ugandans, including our honourable colleague, Jimmy Akena, took refuge in Zambia. Therefore on all occasions, the government and the people of Zambia never discriminated against Ugandans when they needed refuge. Whether you were chased by this or that government, Zambia saw you as Ugandans and always accorded you the refuge that you needed. And on this ground we would like appreciate and we are under obligation to share the great loss of their President with us.  

Turning to the late President - and I said that we would learn something from his life as a leader; as was reported by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and you have read in the media, before he entered into active politics, he was a very active lawyer fighting for the rights of politically tormented people. Eventually that responsibility led him to becoming the Vice-President of President Chiluba and subsequently to being the President of Zambia. I would like to associate myself with the record of President Levy Mwanawasa’s activities as the President of Zambia particularly on two grounds.

First is the fight against corruption. He fought corruption in Zambia knowing very well that corruption is the cancer that eats away the fabric of a country’s development. He fought it without fear or favor and without any selfish desire to punish those who were considered corrupt. He even went to the extent of actually moving against his own President on account of the evidence the State had against President Chiluba. Because he fought corruption relentlessly, he got the international support and utilised the opportunity to turn around the country’s economy and well being to the extent that when you listened on radio to comments made by ordinary Zambians, they feel a great loss at his death.

Secondly, the late President Mwanawasa came through a political process that for many countries is truly challenging; to move from one president to another and in that process others lose power and yet you have to deal with all of them. 

Under his presidency, his actions against President Chiluba for example did not take away his responsibility to recognise him as a former president. The President, in spite of the court actions being taken against him, was still accorded the recognition of a former Head of State of Zambia. When he fell sick, it was still the State of Zambia that took responsibility for caring for him and I think that this is important for us in Uganda. We have reconciled with former leaders and accorded them the status that they deserve but truly our politics has elements of the conviction that your political opponent is an enemy and, therefore, we need to learn something from the life of President Mwanawasa. 

In fact I listened to a gentleman he contested with and he was saying that as an opponent in the Opposition, even when he fell sick, the President accorded him personal attention. He said that before he went to Alexandria, he spoke with him and he said that as far as he was concerned, there was nothing left between him and the President in terms of disagreements and that he deeply regretted the loss of that great leader. 

Finally, I feel privileged as Leader of the Opposition to be able to say these words and to bring forth these examples, which should be in our minds as we undertake our politics. The information is that the Vice-President is now the acting President of Zambia and that they are moving towards holding elections in three months. We would like to again reiterate our deep condolences to the people and Government of Zambia and to wish the Vice-President and the people of Zambia a smooth transition from the late President to a new leadership dispensation. May the Good Lord rest his soul in eternal peace! Thank you, honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have very brief contributions of three minutes each?

5.06
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late President Levy Patrick Mwanawasa, the third Republican President of the Republic of Zambia. As somebody who had the privilege of knowing the late President Mwanawasa and being hosted in Zambia, it is truly a sad moment for Africa to lose a true son of Africa. 

Much has been said about him but there are a few things that I would like to add on the life of the President Mwanawasa. As a lawyer, he was somebody who was totally opposed to the death sentence and even when he took some of the most difficult cases, he was able to prevail. One notable case was a treason case, which involved General Chrysestom Thembo who succeeded him as Vice-President when he resigned. 

A point where we could draw lessons as Ugandans is that when the late President resigned, he did so on the issue of mafia within Cabinet, which later became known as the Mbala Mafia. He felt that as a new government coming into office, there was need to maintain integrity and despite trying to fight the battles within the government, he chose at the end to resign and keep his integrity. He was at that time the Vice-President of the Movement of Multiparty Democracy and he held that post until he opted to stand for the presidency of the party. 

Later on during the development of Zambia and after leaving office, a rare trait in Africa politics, when the question of the third term arose in Zambia there was a lot of controversy. Another lesson for Uganda is that there was a lot of pushing for who could be at the front of the queue. With the failure to find an agreement within the Movement of Multiparty Democracy, there was need to find somebody whose integrity remained solid and that is how, because of his work and the acknowledgement of the society of Zambia, he was the person who was seen as most fit to take the leadership of the party and to lead it into the elections hence becoming the third Republican President.

As has been mentioned, his zero tolerance of corruption was one trait, which he held all along. He distinguished himself as somebody who would not tolerate corruption. He would act fast and immediately on the slightest rumour of corruption to ensure that the corruption does not grow and he treated the whole problem of corruption as a cancer to the nation and saw the need to have it uprooted from society.

From a life of somebody who was committed to that extent, I think all of us in politics and especially those in government can draw valuable lessons as we pay tribute to a great son of Africa. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.10
MRS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to President Levy Mwanawasa. I met President Levy Mwanawasa last year on January 29th at the AU Conference in Ethiopia. We had gone with hon. Latif Sebagala and we met him as we were entering a committee room for deliberations on the AU. We greeted him, introduced ourselves and he asked us to meet him later after a session so he could take us and show us Zambia’s exhibitions. After the session, we actually walked with him and went to see what Zambia was exhibiting at the AU conference. He seemed a very humane person and a good educator. He sat us down to tell us the problems of Africa and why Africa is impoverished. I saw a leader who really had a vision for his country and who could perhaps prosper it to greater heights.

During that time there were many African countries exhibiting but he showed us the technology that Zambians were producing because in some parts of Zambia, they had started experiencing winter and people had started – I think it is called biogas – on their own to produce heat in the homes of people who were living in places that were affected by winter in Zambia.

I also want to remember when I went to Zambia in 2004 while he was President and I went to visit the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote. Having grown up in a UPC setup, I felt I should go and visit this great man. So when I got to hon. Akena’s home - he is the one who ushered us in. I had been reading in the press that Obote was living in very pathetic conditions; that his House was leaking, he had no one to take care of him, but when I got there - I think thanks to President Mwanawasa - he was living a very decent and comfortable life. We had a good time. I actually entered Dr Obote’s home at around 5.00 O’clock and I told him, “I am here for only two hours….” but I left close to midnight because what I found was not what I had expected. We sat and chatted; Akena was always on the Internet. Obote took me to his room where he was watching CNN and I found that surely, President Mwanawasa had put him to a level that Ugandans would not expect because people had been portraying Obote as living in very pathetic conditions in Zambia and that the Government of Zambia had neglected him.

Madam Speaker, during the AU Conference, we took several pictures with President Levy Mwanawasa. They are in my mail and somebody has been asked to print them and when they come here, I shall lay them on the Table. I thank you. 

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Oryem Okello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, government received with deep sorrow the tragic news of the death of His Excellency Levy Mwanawasa, President of the Republic of Zambia. Today is a sad, shocking, and dark day for Zambia, Africa and all. 

It might be a natural process that at one time a human being should die. However, all death comes with pain and consequences. Leaders are humans who stand apart from others. Leaders are designed by God and God does not make many leaders. The loss of a leader of any institution will always have far reaching consequences, positive or negative. At the age of 59, the late Mwanawasa was young in comparison. He still - I am sure - had a lot to contribute to Zambia and Africa. The consequences of his death will be felt in Zambia and Africa. His ideas, visions and skills have all gone with him. Yes, there will be a successor; yes, life has to go on; but let us pray for Zambia. Let us pray for his successors that they have the strength and courage to lead Zambia so that the consequences and the impact of Mwanawasa’s death are positive rather than negative for Zambia and for Africa.

Uganda and Zambia enjoy warm and cordial relations. On several occasions, their Excellencies President Museveni and the late President Mwanawasa had met on various international fora. The death of His Excellency Mwanawasa is a great loss not only to Zambia but also to the region, the continent and to the international community. Until last weekend, President Mwanawasa was Chairman of the Southern African Development Cooperation (SADAC), where he had played a critical role in efforts to resolve Zimbabwe’s political crisis. 

The Government and the people of Uganda join the people of Zambia in mourning this gallant son of Africa. Uganda stands firmly today with the people of Zambia, and the Government of Uganda looks forward to continue consolidating this bilateral relationship with the new leaders of Zambia.

Our condolences go to the family and relatives of the late Mwanawasa. Uganda will be represented by a high level delegation to the funeral of the late Mwanawasa. Farewell Mwanawasa, farewell, farewell. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to put the question that this House do adopt the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late, His Excellency Dr Levy Patrick Mwanawasa, former President of the Republic of Zambia. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2007/2008
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the chairperson resumes his submission, I do not know whether the Minister of Finance is not going to apologise to this House? You know, I really want you to understand that this House is not a theatre where you come to parade; you are photographed and then disappear. You are supposed to be here. Now you have delayed our work for more than an hour, and I really think you have to apologise, and we do not expect to have to look for you again. Hon. Minister, really!

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this morning, the Minister of Finance was in the House and hon. Prof. Ssemakula left Minister Gagawala in charge to represent the Minister of Finance. The senior minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not think hon. Gagawala was here in the morning. Secondly, if the minister is going to be away, he should inform the Speaker that, “Minister so and so is in charge of my affairs”. Just apologise!

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I apologise for not being around on behalf of the Minister of Finance. 

5.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. By the time we suspended this debate I was discussing part of the report of Vote 012 and Vote 156 of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, and that of the Uganda Land Commission. I had gone through the introduction, the monies for the first financial year, and that is when I talked about the late release of funds to ministries by the Ministry of Finance. 

I had gone through the Uganda Land commission and I went through Vote by Vote: the land administration and management, the housing development, physical planning and urban development, the Uganda Land Commission. 

Madam Speaker, by the time I had reached Physical Planning and Urban Development. What the vote function did is well laid down there. I just want to remind the Members that the Physical Planning Bill was approved by Cabinet and it has already been laid here in Parliament. I would also like Members to recognise the development of the physical planning guideline. Planning is very important; everything fits in the planning. Members may be interested also to know that the ministry prepared structural plans for Isingiro, Bundibugyo, Lukaya, Adwari/Orum, Rusoke and Members may take advantage to know exactly how you come to get your area to be planned.

On page 5, the first one is the paid property rates to three urban councils. Madam Speaker, there are more councils supposed to receive money and the ministry or the Uganda Land Commission is holding money for local authorities which is not fair. And the other one you may want to be interested to look at is that they compensated and bought land in Kibale but the committee is interested to know and to get a list of those who actually benefited to ensure that we are not buying land and giving it to the other people who are not supposed to get it just to satisfy the public.

Madam Speaker, now I turn to the proposed budget of 2008/09 for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The total budget for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is - you will have to make a correction here – Shs 11.22 billion of which Shs 6.14 billion is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 5.106 billion is for development expenditure. The wage bill allocation amounts to Ugshs 2.074 while non-wage is programmed to be Ugshs 4.04 billion. This will leave a funding gap of Ugshs 5.72 billion. This ministry has been restructured and to operationalise the new structure the ministry requires this Shs 5.712 billion for wages and non-wages. There are departments which have been created in the restructuring which are not functioning now. 

The committee noted that with this gross under funding the sector, despite its critical mandates - such as, the establishment of the land fund, the development of the land use plan, the national land policy, surveying district and international boundaries, implementation of the Land Bill when we pass it soon, among others - the ministry will not be able to deliver to the expectation of the public.

Madam Speaker, you realise Members were here talking about districts borders. But when it comes to international borders, the situation is worse and this is resulting in huge expenditures in mobilising, transporting and upkeep of our forces in areas where there are disputes like we had recently with DRC in the western region. 

On page 6 it shows the budget for 2008/09 for the Uganda Land Commission. Madam Speaker, the budget of the Uganda Land Commission has remained static at Shs 1.18 billion. This is Ugshs 3.42 billion lower than what Uganda Land Commission would require to effectively implement its planned activities in the financial year 2008/09. For example, management of government land requires Ugshs 1.78 billion but only Ugshs 0.5 billion has been provided in the budget for 2008/09. 

In addition, support to Uganda Land Commission requires Ugshs 2.82 billion and instead Ugshs 0.688 billion is provided in this budget. Madam Speaker, this funding gap of Ugshs 3.42 billion will result into the following consequences:

1.	Non-payment of property rates leading to accumulation of arrears and legal battles with the various local authorities.

2.	It will not be possible to expand land fund activities to other priority areas in Mbale, Kapchorwa, Bundibugyo, Kasese, Bushenyi, Ntungamo, Nakasongola, Soroti, and other parts of Buganda where evictions are rampant. 

Now I turn to the planned activities for the vote of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Madam Speaker, there is a section missing there for the administration which handles finance and planning but they have got activities that are well laid out in their ministerial policy statements. They will do things like filling vacant posts, prepare ministerial policy statements and disseminate information in the ministry and many others. They are laid out in the document and Members can check.

Then, on the land administration and management, there are many issues laid out. You will be interested to know that the ministry or the sector will induct area land committees - that is very important for the administration of land; rehabilitate and transfer records to districts -emphasising the decentralisation; and then sensitise the general public on land rights and reforms. We have found out that people do not know their rights on land issues and this is going to be very important. 

Now the other vote function is the urban development vote function. Issues to be handled are shown down there but I think it is important for Members to take note of the fact that they are going to initiate planning of the greater Kampala metropolitan area and the Albertine Graben. This is where we are going to get our oil from.

And then they are going to work on the land boards. When we come to the Housing Vote function on page 8, the activities that they plan to do are laid in there. The others can be read from the policy statement. But I think Members should put pressure on the ministry to implement the national slum upgrading strategy because the ministry has been talking about it especially the Kisenyi one. In our view, those slums just need to be erased and not upgraded for the expansion of the CBD.

What the ministry is going to do under vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission – is laid down and more is also in the policy statement.

The ministry also laid down the key priorities that it is going to handle. These include the drafting of the national land policy, which is very important because, Madam Speaker, wherever we go to talk about the proposed land amendment, issue that should be in the national land policy are always talked about.

The ministry has brought the Bill to Parliament for the development of the physical planning law. The Bill also covers reviewing the national housing policy and others as you see them in the report.

Other observations by the committee, Madam Speaker, zeroed on the issue of under funding. I am sorry, I have had to repeat this because this ministry is very important; a lot of social disorder in this country today is related to land. In our view, the government is not giving enough funds to this sector.

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is grossly under funded. The committee interacted with the Minister in charge of Finance together with that of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to seek additional funding to the sector, but we did not get any assistance in that line.

As you are aware, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has got very important and critical mandates to perform. As a committee we had proposed that at least funding to this ministry be upgraded from Shs 11.22 to  Shs 40 billion to enable it handle critical issues like evictions and to pay for the ranches that were taken long time ago, some of which are a one-off. So, if government could provide money at a reasonable level, we would be getting out of this problem.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that additional Shs 30 billion be provided to the sector to enable the following critical activities be implemented this financial year. If possible we could approve a supplementary budget so that these issues are handled to get things moving. One is about supporting land administration and the registry. This is well placed and budgeted for from number one to seven.

Okay, let me now talk briefly about the non-payment of the property rates. The committee was informed that the Uganda Land Commission requires Shs 0.5 billion to pay for property rates annually, but the government is providing only Shs 0.02 billion, which has been earmarked in this year’s budget. This affects local authorities that are already cash-trapped.

On the statutory vote, the committee was informed that while the commission got a vote status in 2006/07, no statutory budget has been provided to the commission. This means that statutory emoluments and allowances of commissions are not provided for. A statutory budget of Shs 0.1716 billion was requested for, however, nothing has been provided as required by the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the land fund has been debated in this House many times. I do not need to emphasise on it more; Members can read more about it from the policy statement. What I can say is that, the committee strongly objects to this arrangement that has been enumerated above. The committee recommends that government should instead provide adequate funds under the road fund to expedite the compensation exercise as a matter of urgency.

Madam Speaker, when you read through the budget, you will realise that some Shs 3.0 billion for compensation is provided for, but not through the Uganda Land Commission. So, our view is that all money for compensation should be administered by the Uganda Land Commission. Spreading it into other areas may cause confusion.

Let me now talk about inadequate office space. Madam Speaker, everybody is complaining about office space at the ministry. The ministry is overcrowded and staff do not have any space. We noted that although the ministry has a building and has plans to add on two extra storey, the funds have not been adequately provided. Therefore, the committee recommends that government should renew interests in owning its accommodation to curtail the huge expenditure currently incurred in the form of rent for office accommodation. This should be a matter of priority. 

We also recommend that the available land should be properly utilized by taking advantage of the vertical space. This is so because the space for the ministry is critical. We noted that one of the ministers does not actually sit at the ministry headquarters due to lack of space; he has taken refugee at another ministry.

Madam Speaker, allow me say something about land titles, road reserves and other public land. This is a very serious issue because government land without land titles is being grabbed, while the road reserves are being encroached on with structures developing, which will make compensation in future very expensive. The committee recommends that funds for the acquisition of land titles for road reserves and other public land be earmarked within the sector’s budget.

I now move on to land title forgeries. Madam Speaker, forgeries of land titles are known to everybody. We are just appealing to the ministry to expedite its computerisation exercise to curtail or reduce on the forgeries taking place in the ministry. Therefore, the committee recommends that adequate funds be voted to the ministry to facilitate the establishment of the land record centres in all districts decentralising the function. We also recommend that the ministry expedites the process relating to land registration.

On the urban development function, Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that the ministry was sharing available resources to fund critical activities under physical planning and the urban development department. While Parliament was informed in April 2008/09, that Cabinet had approved the new structures there are no funds to operationalise these in this financial year. It is the Shs 5.721. I talked about the shortfall to operationalise the approved structures.

Madam Speaker, we are also saying that the development and the planning of the Kampala structural plan has no funds at the moment, while we know all activities, either transport services or whatever, all of them have to fit in the structural plan. So, we appeal to government and the ministry in particular to ensure that funds for the development of the structural plan of Kampala are got.

National land policy and land use plan

The committee was concerned about the delay in the development of the national land policy yet the land use plan was launched. The committee recommends that Shs 1.3 billion and Shs 0.5 billion is needed for the development of the national land policy and the land use plan respectively should be sought to expedite the process without any further delays.

Public servant housing scheme

Madam Speaker, the committee was concerned about the delay in implementing the public servant loan scheme. It should be noted that this scheme was meant to start in 2000, but its implementation was delayed by various preparatory processes to-date. The scheme is expected to be funded from the revolving fund accrued from the sell of government pool and institutional houses; but to-date nothing has been done and we were with a view that we should help our public servants to have this.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House adopts this report and approve the budget for the Lands, Housing and Urban Development Sector of Shs 12.4 billion for the financial year 2008/09 as follows:

VOTE 012 – MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

Total budget, Shs 11.22 billion
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 6.114 billion;
Development expenditure, Shs 5.106 billion.

VOTE 156 – UGANDA LAND COMMISSION

Total budget, Shs 1.185 billion
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 0.496 billion;
Development expenditure, Shs 0.68 billion.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and the committee. The report has been signed by the minimum numbers of signatures. It is eligible for debate. But let me invite the shadow minister to present, but please try to summarize.

5.42
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I thank you for opportunity given to me to say a few things about the Ministry of Works and Transport budget policy statement. We do not have enough stationary to have these copies go around and I will request my colleagues on government side to bear with us. 

Madam Speaker, the Opposition would like to thank government and particularly the Ministry of Works and Transport for developing a policy statement for the financial year 2008/09 without having recourse to duplicating previous policy statements.

We also would like to thank the development partners for continuously contributing towards our development expenditure in the sector. And I would like to note, Madam Speaker, that the ministry budget this financial year, if approved, will strike the one trillion mark. This is a rise from Shs 602 billion appropriated last year which represents 85.6 percent increase from that budget. By this astronomical raise in the budget, the Opposition and the entire population of Uganda expects nothing less than an improvement in performance and we shall not hesitate to put the Ministry of Works and Transport to task and if possible to shame should they fail to perform to the expectations of the population.

Permit me, Madam Speaker, just to highlight a few key areas of performance and observations on the financial year 2007/08. Ninety seven percent of the funds towards the ministry’s development expenditure were released and we do not expect excuses in failure to perform because the Ministry of Finance performed its duty - gave nearly all the funds to the Ministry of Works and so it was upon the Ministry of Works to do due diligence in their responsibility.

Permit me at this point to highlight some specific failures that the Opposition feels need to be mentioned:

The non-timely completion of projects

The non-completion of the 21 km Kampala Northern Bypass Construction project, which the ministry promised this august House, would be delivered in December 2007. But it still remains an eye-soar in the eyes of the population of Uganda. The Opposition is disappointed by this sluggish performance and demands an apology from government to the citizens of this country and certainly deserves an explanation for this mess.

Shs 42 billion was swallowed out of the maintenance budget last financial year in works that turned out to be, in the words of the ministry, “Temporary rehabilitation works on the Kampala roads ahead of CHOGM 2007.” This was an admission of the ministry. These roads lasted only one month before redeveloping ugly potholes. The Opposition believes that this funding which deprives roads in the rest of the country of the much needed maintenance was merely misappropriated and calls on government to put the Ministry of Works and Transport to task to explain this loss in investment.

The 44km Kafu-Masindi road upgrading project, which should have been completed several years ago is still dragging on. I know it is reported in the policy statement that it has been completed but I would like to contest this because I have only returned from Masindi the day before yesterday, and this road is still wanting. There is still loose aggregate flying all over the place, and the road furniture and marking have never been provided. This certainly is not a complete road.

Permit me, Madam Speaker, to talk about slow start of projects. After what amounted to a campaign gimmick meant to hoodwink the population of Uganda, work on Kampala-Gayaza-Kapeka-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi roads and Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kanyika road projects at last started. And I wish to congratulate the government for this. (Applause) The Opposition thanks the government for this but observes that the projects have got up to a slow start and may turn out to be part of the statistics of road projects not completed on time. So take precaution, honourable minister.

Thirdly, non-adherence to specifications. On an inspection visit to the Soroti-Dokolo road upgrading project, the Opposition registered unexplained deviations from the specifications especially the treatment on the many swamp crossings on the project roads. It confirms our previous suspicion of the lack of close supervision of the different projects being implemented by the Ministry of Works and Transport on behalf of the government of Uganda. 

Fourthly, for value for money on the works to be realised, there is need for the ministry to take close interest in what both the contractor and the consultants on all the projects are doing. 

Fifthly, failure to control axle loads. Axle load control perhaps remains the greatest challenge the ministry has in the preservation of the road network whose cost and development and maintenance remain the highest in the region. I know the minister has passed a document around which indicates that we are doing well in as far as the condition of roads is concerned. I do not know whether it is a ministry document but it could seem to be. But I would like to dispute this. This exposes the inefficiencies and possible rot in this particular department of the ministry. 

The Opposition minister has visited some roads whose life is being threatened by this lack of efficiency. Specific observations of potholes developing on the newly upgraded Sironko-Muyembe-Kapachorwa and the Arua-Nebbi roads, among others, will definitely result in a loss in investment on these roads and low return on investment. Early failures have also been observed in the Malaba-Bugiri Road, which began to fail before its commissioning. 

Sixthly, the limping railway sector. Madam Speaker, the Opposition wishes to observe that no meaningful growth of the economy can be realised without an efficient and cost effective or cost friendly railway system. This is especially true for a landlocked country like Uganda, most of whose exports currently go by road. Besides this, some of the traffic needs to be taken off the road as this would relieve the road infrastructure of the high cargo bearing traffic plying the roads, which contributes to increased road maintenance costs. 

It is very sad, Madam Speaker, despite that observation that the trend continues to worsen. And I would like to mention that there is a disaster in this particular sector of transport. The concessioning of the Uganda Railway has turned out to be the greatest miscalculation by government in the sector. The concessionaire, Rift Valley Railways, or is it Rift Valley Fever RVR, that was under obligation to invest up to US$18 million in rail infrastructure, has failed to do so and this threatens the partial risk guarantee given by government through a loan given by this House. 

Despite all the assurances given to Parliament by the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, the concessionaire appears to be ill-equipped to carryout the task before them. This assurance amounted to duping of Parliament to pass the partial risk guarantee. The Opposition demands an adequate explanation to this failure on the part of government. 

Besides, although promised, Madam Speaker, the government through its line ministry did absolutely nothing in the direction of developing connectivity to the big market in the Sudan. We wish to encourage the government to walk the talk and not to continue feeding the country on lip service. 

On holdbacks of potential investors. Although there appears to be a real commitment by the government to promote air transport in the country, there is a need to continue maintenance and observance of standards in the various airfields in the country. My recent visit to Pakuba in Murchison Falls National Park a few days ago, reveals that although there is an electric fence installed around the runway, there is still game roaming within the runway precincts of the facility.

There is also selective issuance of licences to operate privately-owned airfields. And a case in point is the denial of a licence to operate an airfield with a 2km long gravel runaway in the tourist destined Kanungu area. This facility, owned by a local investor, Mr Garuga Musinguzi, cost over Shs 1.0 billon and has a hotel facility next to it with an investment of US$ 1 million, which has been denied power, which is just next door from it. It is unfortunate that although government wishes to make us believe that they encourage investment by local people through public/private partnership, it continues to frustrate this particular investor who fulfilled all the conditions for acquiring a licence well over one year ago. The Opposition demands an explanation to these double standards.

Roads reserves non-compliance

This is a matter that the report handles quite well but I would like to observe that the Opposition is very concerned in as far as the laxity on the part of observance of road reserves by the ministry is concerned. It is sad to note that although a lot of money is being invested in roads, the legal ownership of both road and rail and their reserves is in a grey area. This is manifested by the rampant developments sprouting within the road reserves. Jinja, Entebbe and Masaka roads and the recently compensated properties on Kampala Northern Bypass project road reserves, being the most affected. 

The ministry has conducted a study on road reserves and has produced a report. It would be interesting to see what is in the report for a problem that is so glaring to require a study. 

Permit me now, Madam Speaker, to go to water transport. Although funds were drawn last financial year, ostensibly for the improvement of ferry landings on our several lakes where the ministry operates ferries, ferry landings in Wanseko, Panyimur, Luuku, Kalangala, Laropi, to mention but a few, remained in a poor state. The Opposition expected the ministry’s plans to be translated into actual work, which the ministry has miserably failed to do. And I would like to add that I have visited these landings and seen for myself and therefore what I report to this House in my opinion is accurate.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about this year’s budget proposals and to say that the state of the roads to day as was the case a year ago is still appalling. In our honest judgment as the Opposition, only 10 percent of community access roads are fair, while the remaining 90 percent is in bad state and in need of urgent attention.  Since infrastructure is one of the obstacles to competitiveness, the ministry budget focus of providing market support and increasing household incomes will not be realised without infrastructure improvement. The government should note that as the population grows, village centres quickly become semi-urban centre and are in dire need for transport infrastructure.

The government’s vision for Prosperity for All will never be realised unless a robust infrastructure is achieved. Although the ministry downplays the poor state of roads - and I think there is a document, I do not know whether it a ministry document passing around, which seems to lay credence to their belief that actually the road infrastructure is in a fairly good condition - I beg to differ. And I know Members who represent constituencies will bear me witness.

MR NASASIRA: That is a ministry document, but the source of that document is from the African Development Bank. You are free to go to the African Development Bank website, you are also free to go to the East African Community and extract a presentation of the African Development Bank on the infrastructure retreat in Kigali for the East African Community. There were enough witnesses who were there to watch this so we should not discredit facts because of lack of other facts.

MR AMURIAT: I think it will be important, Madam Speaker, for us to get in touch with the source of this document and also present our facts to them and I believe our facts will challenge what is contained in this document. 

The Opposition having scrutinised the ministry budget, observes that there have been sufficient changes in the blueprint from the previous statements, and I observed that earlier. We wish to welcome and hail the government for allocating over Shs 1.0 trillion to the sector in response to our constant call for more money to be allocated to the transport sector. This year’s activities however, will result to nothing if the previous inefficiencies are not checked. Road maintenance needs to be given its rightful place during the implementation of the statements. 

The Opposition wishes to observe that inland water transport in Uganda is characterised by obsolete vessels, poor landing facilities and incoherent oversight with the exception of the construction of the US$ 5 million ship, the MV Kalangala, for which we congratulate government - this ship which operates between the Kalangala islands and Nakiwogo in Entebbe and a few ferries. 

In water transport in Uganda is dysfunctional and largely insecure and I do not need to elaborate this because the committee report highlighted it.  There is therefore a need for urgent budgetary re-allocations to be made to ensure measures are taken to mitigate our concerns. Comprehensive repairs of the landing sites infrastructure, provision of more ferries and improved enforcement of safety regulations should be translated into reality.  

We observe, Madam Speaker, that in the financial year 2008/09 there is a provision for studies for the re-opening of Tororo-Pakwach and Kampala-Kasese railway lines at the cost of Shs 1.6 billion and Shs 0.68 billion respectively. Although we appreciate the need to carry out studies to enhance scientifically established decisions, we would like to challenge the ministry to justify this particular expenditure or find ways of reviewing the cost downwards. 

Madam Speaker, in this year’s statement, it is not easy to appreciate the proper utilisation of funds for maintenance as accrued from the fuel tax levy. You will recall that this levy came into effect last financial year with a promise that these funds would be ring-fenced for the exclusive purpose of road maintenance, and I want to be persuaded that this is going to be practiced.

I would like to turn finally, Madam Speaker, to some policy issues. Let me now turn to some specific policy issues that the Opposition considers important to the sector. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport intends to implement a policy of providing a road construction unit to every district of the country, which in principle the Opposition supports. However, the ministry does not indicate how it will handle the ever increasing number of districts of this country. It creates unnecessary anxiety from potential districts amongst the community in Uganda. The amount of money that we will appropriate during this financial year for the Ministry of Works and Transport will not be sufficient to provide adequate equipment; it will not be sufficient to provide for the maintenance of this equipment; neither will it be sufficient to provide for the running of this equipment. The Opposition demands and requires this explanation to allay our fears.

Currently the ministry is engaged in a major policy shift from using contracts as a practice in road maintenance. This policy was abandoned before in preference to road gangs as they were called before. The Opposition wishes to challenge the ministry to explain such a sudden shift in policy. Is this policy shift one that has been studied and its merits found, or is the ministry engaging in trial and error? We in the Opposition ask for a clarification, which should then stop the speculation at local levels with the result of stifling infrastructure and developments.

Finally, although the ministry is well intentioned, we in the Opposition believe the vision and the mission statements are inadequate. It still has a long way to go before achieving either of the two. It is understood that the government views improved transport services as a central part of its strategy of creating more favourable environment for private sector developments without cause to making road transport a political matter. In the mid-term, the Ministry of Works and Transport needs to concentrate on the big backlog of work requiring their urgent attention including paying of all long standing debts to service providers. This has not been exhaustively tackled in the minister’s policy statement. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for this opportunity and for your kind attention. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really I hope you will be brief. 

6.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you. Madam Speaker, like I rose yesterday, because I am not a shadow minister; I am the Leader of the Opposition; it is required that the Shadow Minister for Lands and Physical Planning would make a response. I would like to apologise because the Shadow Minister for Lands and Physical Planning is on an official trip in the United States. So, we do not have a formal response. However, as I convey his apology, we have a saying in our place that: “If the chief sends you on an errand, you carry the chief’s errand and yours too.” So, as I convey the apology of the shadow minister, I would like to make one or two observations, very specific, that we would need a response from the minister on.  

On page 4, under the Ministry of Lands, there is a list of achievements. The first one is the launch of the National Land Use Policy. Madam Speaker, when you go to pages 7, 9 and 13, there is a confusing reference to the Land Use Policy and Land Policy, and actually on page 13 the committee recommends that funds be made available for the ministry to complete the development of the Land Policy.  

I am an agriculturalist and land use is one of the courses they teach you as an undergraduate. I am just puzzled how you can have a Land Use Policy before a Land Policy. And I need clarification whether we are not trying to duplicate what has already been done because if it is duplication, then the money that the committee recommends to be allotted for the development of the Land Policy should be used for something else. Because certainly land use policy is derived from the principles and the laws that govern land in this country. Those laws constitute essentially the Land Policy, and what you derive from it is the Land Use Policy and I do not, therefore, understand why the ministry wants money to develop a Land Policy when we have already launched a Land Use Policy?

Secondly, on the achievements, the last bullet under 22.1.4 for Physical Planning, they report on the fact that they had finalised the planning schemes for 46 out of 71 urban centers in collaboration with the Ministry of Local Government and the World Bank. I happen to know for a fact that a certain Kenyan company was given a contract to plan many of the towns in Northern Uganda, including the town I come from. The most amazing thing was that the people who are supposed to be staff of this consulting firm were individuals who even travel on matatus, on boda bodas from Kampala to go to Pader, to go to Kitgum, to go to Gulu to develop the plans.

Madam Speaker, I even have a copy of the first draft plan produced by that company, of my own place. When I opened it I said, “Is this Kalongo or this is somewhere else”? Most of the towns actually rejected the plans to be developed by that company. I would like the minister to let us know what the status of that planning really is, rather than the figures that you have given.

And the minister received the copy of my letter - when the young town officials posted to the place got frustrated, they drew some town plan of theirs and without consulting, without submitting for approval, one day they went and opened the streets. I do not know what the process for implementing town plans are, and I would like the minister to give clarification.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to concur with the committee concerned that the ministry is under funded. Urban development is going to be a major aspect. As long as the economy does well, the consequence of that doing well is urban development, and we are going to have to deal with the issue of urban development proactively if we want to maintain sanity in the way our urban centers develop.

Therefore, I concur with the committee that more funds should be provided for the planning of towns but I was grossly disappointed that the surveying and mapping component - and I believe it is under this ministry - was completely not referred to. I went to the cartographic section in Entebbe and I was absolutely shocked at the kind of equipment you see there yet urban development and land use without surveyors means nothing. I would have loved to see a specific request by the ministry for Parliament to provide funding to enable the surveying component of our planning to be strengthened. Otherwise, we thank the committee for the report.

6.15
MR B’LEO OJOK (Independent, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report. I want to go straight to the matters of inland water transport. I come from Kioga constituency and it is a peninsula. Since the colonial days up to 1979, we had ferry services which used to connect Kioga via Nakasongola to Kampala. In 1979, this ferry was destroyed and to date, there has been no replacement. The people pf Kioga, if they are to come to Kampala, have to travel from Kioga, Dokolo, Lira, Karuma up to Kampala, a distance of 460 kilometers. Yet when the ferry was there we used to travel from Kioga to Kampala a mere distance of about 210 kilometers. 

For the last 28 years, we have been travelling this distance and the poor people of Kioga, those who cannot afford the expensive means of transport, that is to say, going the distance I have already indicated - and if you are to go to the Eastern side, you go to Soroti, Mbale, Pallisa, Jinja up to Kampala.

We have been promised a ferry since 1996. The President came to Kioga and promised us a ferry. In 1996 it did not materialise, in 2001, he went back for his campaigns and he promised us a ferry. It has not materialised either. In 2006, the President again went back and promised us a ferry. It has not materialised. 

Madam speaker, I have gone through the background to the Budget and I have not seen any mention, intention or any plan to reinstate this ferry. I have read the ministry’s policy statement; there is no mention of anything about reinstating this ferry. My fears were confirmed when I read this statement. There is no mention, not even a single plan of reinstating this ferry. It is very expensive to travel a distance of 460 kilometers when you can do it in a distance of 210 kilometers. I am wondering what the Ministry of Works has done to reinstate this ferry. 

The last time I talked to the minister he assured me that the ferry was in the budget this financial year but I am surprised that there is nothing to indicate that the ministry has this ferry in mind. May I now ask the ministry to explain to the people of Kioga why for the last 28 years nothing has been done, no plan, no indication? Presidential pledges have been ignored! What is it that the ministry wants the people of Kioga to do in order to access these services? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MRS CAROLINE AMALI (Independent, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I stand to support this report and I am very delighted to talk about water transport. I am going to add my voice to what hon. B’Leo has just talked about on water transport. 

I first must proceed to thank the committee for the precise report that has been brought here and has thrown light on different issues concerning the Ministry of Works. I would like to proceed to page 21 and I would like to read paragraph three verbatim: “The committee has noted that water transport in this country is still faced with various challenges. The committee noted that for a long time many accidents have been occurring without serious attention from the government, for example, there are no aids to guide the water traffic along waterways.” Madam Speaker, at least we should have water aids to guide water transport traffic! But I want to bring to the notice of this House that all the water bodies surrounding Amolatar District have not even life jackets.

We have lost many people, for example, last year we lost a whole family of about eight people travelling on the same boat who were crossing over to the other side just because there were no life jackets on the boats to avert these deaths. I don’t think that life jackets are so expensive for the ministry. Very many people are experiencing these problems simply because these life jackets are not provided. I am disappointed, as I read through this report, that there is nothing to this effect. 

I appeal to the Ministry of Transport to think critically about water transport in this country. As the shadow minister has stated, I feel that water transport in this country is so dysfunctional to the point of non-existence because in the report there is nothing indicated to alleviate emergencies on water transport.

I will proceed to page 22, which states that, “In addition, water transport is key, connecting various districts across water with the help of ferry services. Despite the efforts of the ministry to acquire new ferries … there is dire need for functional and well built landing sites.”  I would like to add my voice to the honourable members’ who have already talked about water transport. Amolatar District, as you have been told, Mr Minister of Transport, is a peninsula and is sitting between two big water bodies. The easiest way to get to that district from Kampala is by water. We would be delighted if we would be accorded the services of a ferry, which has been lacking for all these years as the hon. Member for Kioga has already said.

The hon. Member for Kioga also added that the President has been promising ferry services for all these years -(Member timed out)

6.26
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, can you protect me from hon. Adolf Mwesige? Thank you for giving me the chance. I have very brief remarks to make but before I do that, I have read the policy statement of the Ministry of Works in particular at length and I should say that if what is put in the papers can be transformed into action then we shall see real changes in Uganda.

Over the last two years, looking at hon. Nasasira was a nightmare for me because whenever I would look at him, I would think, “This is the man that is making us suffer on our roads,” but now I think I can smile with him and even have a cup of tea as we talk. 

I want to comment on two or three issues. No. 1 is the Gulu-Awer-Pabbo-Atiak Road up to Nimule. In the policy statement it has been stated that there are some designs supposed to be started but if I look at the Atiak-Adjumani and Moyo roads where the design started almost two years ago and up to now work has not yet started, I think that the rate at which the ministry is working is too slow. 

If you look at the Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo road, which we passed in 2006, year one comprised of the draft of the design. Year two we have only completed the design. Year three will be the tendering process for the contractors, year four; five and maybe six will be when work will begin. That rate is terrible! I am saying this because when war was still very rampant in Northern Uganda, the traffic from Gulu to Nimule was very minimal and mostly comprised of army trucks but as I speak, traffic along that road has increased 20 times over. For that matter, action needs to be taken fast as far as tarmacking that road is concerned to cater for the heavy traffic. 

Initially the ministry was repairing that road yearly but now you have seen for yourselves that the road is so bad that even repairing it once a year is not adequate. I request in the plan of the ministry that priority be given to this road. It is very important to Uganda as it links Southern Sudan, all our traders from Kampala are using this road and a lot of revenue is coming into this country using that road. Please, can you take charge so that matters can move faster?

Secondly, there is a policy in the ministry that stipulates that where new districts have been created, automatically the ministry will take over the management of the roads connecting two separate districts. However, it has come to my notice -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague and the House that in its manifesto, the NRM Government promised this country connectivity of two district headquarters by way of tarmac roads. As far as I am concerned, nothing is being done to ensure that this promise is fulfilled to the nation. It is in the manifesto and I can even quote the page - I don’t remember it now but if you want, I will bring the manifesto here and lay it on the Table -(Interruption) 

MR NASASIRA: Normally I prefer to listen and then respond later, but if my colleague the Shadow Minister makes a statement that is not correct in many respects, I think it is better rather than mislead the House that I come in now and correct it. It is true that in our manifesto we promised to connect district headquarters with tarmac and that is exactly what we are doing. As I talk now, Kiboga is connected, Hoima is connected -(Interjections)- let me come. Kisoro will soon be connected, Bundibugyo will be connected and by the time we reach 2011, we shall list the districts we will have connected. But as we connect, more are produced. So we shall also continue connecting as they are produced and that will go to Pader. 

MR OCULA: Yes, Madam Speaker. The point I was trying to bring up is that automatically, the central government is supposed to have taken over those roads, which connect to district headquarters but in many of the new districts, it has not happened. Like in my district in Amuru, the road from Awek to the district headquarters of Amuru is now in a very sorry state because the district is saying that it belongs to the central government. The central government has not taken charge of it. 

I am also with the Committee on Public Service and Local Government; I have moved in so many new districts and that policy has not yet been implemented. Can the minister move fast enough and have the central government, through this budget, take over the management of these roads connecting district headquarters?

Thirdly, I have only one or two queries to the minister. I am in possession of a directive from the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni to the Minister of Works to the effect that he must make sure that within the Financial Year 2006/2007 he should provide a ferry service to connect Arua and Amuru districts via Rhino Camp. In 2006 I did not see anything in the budget towards that. In 2007/2008 there was nothing -(Member timed out)

6.33
MR ISSHA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to start by asking the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to do thorough amendment or correction to the errors in this report. If you go to page 4, there is a sentence under administration written “… they prepared ministerial, the policy statement, MPs for Financial Year 2007/2008.” As Parliament, we cannot continue to read reports from ministries with these gross errors. On page 6, there is a similar error: “…the draft 10-year district Urban Community Access Roads Investment Plan (duka) has been drafted.” All these errors and so many others in this report make it not authentic. 

But that is not exactly what has made me rise up. I was very concerned when I read the policy statement of 2008/2009 about the roads that should undergo reconstruction. You are aware that the road from Lira to Kamdini was made way back in 1971. It was started in 1969 when the UPC Government was still in charge but from then to date, the Ministry of Works and Transport either deliberately or strategically has never taken any initiative to reconstruct it. 

I was reading the State of the Nation Address; the President reported to this House and the nation that he was informed by the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira, that roads in Uganda are designed to last for only 15 years after which they should be immediately reconstructed. 

But, Madam Speaker, if you read even in this report, there is Masaka-Mbarara road, which is due to undergo reconstruction and following the statement from the President, one wonders why the Minister of Works and Transport will not think of having the road from Lira to Kamdini in the same programme. If you move along this road, you will find yourself really in a very bad state. These are the few roads that the President referred to here; that when he is moving on these roads, he always feels like moving out of his car and walking because he fears the danger on these roads. These are the few roads. 

I am also questioning the criterion, which has been adopted by the Minister of Works and Transport especially on selecting the 8,000 kilometres roads that are going to be taken over by the central roads, now UNRA. I think for transparency and accountability, the Minister of Works and Transport should have listed the details of the roads that have been taken over from the districts because we are worried. 

It is indeed true that this year, through the Minister of Finance and through the call from President Museveni, the Ministry of Works and Transport has done something great to increase the budget on roads up to a trillion plus; but I think this is the time when we should be genuine and we should try to be square in decision-making and planning on how roads should be done in this country -(Member timed out) 

6.38
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. 

There is an issue that concerns me about physical planning. The Leader of the Opposition mentioned the plans that are being prepared throughout the country but I am more concerned about how the allocation of this fund was done because it was based in the Ministry of Local Government and they were inviting the technocrats in the Ministry of Lands to give them a hand. I am wondering: why did we create the Ministry of Urban Development if it is going to be there by name but it cannot manage the funds, which are doing physical planning activities? 

So I feel this is unfair to the ministry. Let the ministry manage its finances and be in position to do its work without being supervised by other ministries. I am concerned and let this not be repeated -(Interjection)- I am not directing but I am concerned and I feel it is not fair to the ministry, which is already in existence. 

Another concern that I have is that although we are developing these plans, I feel they will not be implemented due to the fact that when the restructuring programme was done in this country, it did not take care of the physical planning component and these positions were not officially formulated in the structure, which I feel the government should take up and ensure that there is at least a position of a physical planner in each and every district if really these plans are to be implemented. We can end up with beautiful plans on the desks but without implementation because there is no technocrat who can interpret them. 

So, Madam Speaker, and the Ministry of Urban Development, I wish to call up on you to come up with at least a policy which can be given to all town councils to ensure that they have physical planners. Lack of physical planning has led to the mushrooming of slums in most of our centres.

I am glad to thank the ministry for considering the GIS component. I feel this will help our physical planners if they are trained in GIS. Right now they have been having a problem in preparation of these plans because they have been on the desks and on the drawing boards, which I feel is a slow method if we are to advance physical planning in his country. 

But another area where I would advise the ministry to take charge is in the local governments. You should at least advise these local governments to recruit the planners and have them trained and to acquire this knowledge of GIS then this can speed up the process of physical planning in this country. 

And another area where I need the government at least to take note is to give physical planning priority. It has been long overdue; physical planning has not been recognised in this country for a long time. When they are setting priorities in this country you find that physical planning is not given any priority at all and I feel we are not giving justice to this country. Our country is going to end up developing in an unplanned manner and yet we keep on travelling to other countries and enjoying the beauty in their countries and we cannot produce that beauty in our own motherland. 

Another area is about the sensitisation workshop. The ministry is indicating that it is going to have only one national sensitisation workshop on the role of physical planning. I feel this is too small; let there be allocated enough money for this; let it be given priority. We need more sensitisation programmes on physical planning; let it be in the media, let us have articles in the papers concerning physical planning. Let us have bulletins concerning physical planning and let the people appreciate the role of physical planning. But if we can plan for only one national physical planning workshop I feel this is very little, hon. Minister. We should at least widen the awareness of physical planning in this area.

And when it comes to Works I am concerned about the ferries. The last policy statement for 2007/2008 indicated that we had a ferry, which was going to cross through from Rwampanga to Lango area  -(Member timed out)

6.44
MRS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the budget for the Ministry of Works. I want to first thank the government for having identified infrastructure as one of our critical areas that need to be emphasised. And I want to thank the ministry for having identified and upgraded 8,000 kilometres of district roads to national roads. This is very critical especially if we have to emphasise infrastructure in our rural areas and if we are to enhance the production and marketing of our rural people’s products. 

However, in the budget they have cut down the monies for DCAR (District Community Access Roads) by 6.02. I want to propose that the finances for the same kilometres of roads that have been taken over by the central government remain with the district authorities, which should take over access roads which will be upgraded to district roads because if the district roads are upgraded then the district authorities should be given a chance also to upgrade some of the community roads to district level. So here I propose that the monies to the tune of Shs 6.02 billion should not be tampered with but should be reinstated to continue with our community access roads. 

On the issue of the Land Fund, in this budget very little money has been allocated for the Land Fund and I think the establishment of the Land Fund was a key factor in addressing the land evictions and conflicts that have been rampant. I want to pray that more funds be identified and the Land Fund be enhanced to address the issue of compensation for the absentee landlords so that people can have the right to own land. 


I want to differ from the committee’s recommendation about the Shs 30 billion for the land acquisition loan. I think this was a good allocation especially for those sections of communities that cannot support themselves especially if we want to focus on proper land use. Some people need to be empowered to be able to acquire land and utilise it for their own production if they have to move a long way out of what we are propagating as prosperity for all. I thank you.

6.49
MS PHERRY KABANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have only two issues to raise but first of all I would like to thank the committee for this very good report. My major concern is on the gender concerns. We have been told that there are no specific programmes to address gender concerns and yet the ministry is cutting - like my colleague said earlier - on the district urban and community access roads. In my view, gender concerns include issues like feeder roads to enable women access these roads that are being constructed. 

Look at a woman in Kisoro; unfortunately I have only been to Kisoro where the landscape is bad and maybe there is also Bundibugyo. You construct this beautiful road - the national road - and women are walking in bushes to access the road to carry their goods to the market or even go to –(Laughter)- so you can imagine! The most important and urgent thing to do is for the ministry to reconsider their budget and include feeder roads alongside national roads. 

The other issue is that sometimes we construct feeder roads but forget bridges. A case in point is the Budaka-Butaleja Bridge. Women along the border of Budaka and Butaleja swim across. We do not have a bridge; women just swim across from Butaleja to Budaka and this is terrible. (Laughter) Please, consider us. Imagine we wear busuutis in Budaka and Butaleja. (Laughter) 

Secondly, when considering gender concerns, gender concerns include affordable transport. If you are talking about ferries, then the ferries should be affordable to the women. They should be available and affordable –(Interjections)- eh, yes.

Thirdly, I would like us to turn to part (b) of the report and this is mainly on land administration. It is on page 3, section 2.2.1.2, bullet No. 8. The committee has informed us that a systematic demarcation was successfully piloted in Iganga and Mbale. I would like them to clarify to me which Mbale, because we have a problem between Mbale and Budaka. This problem has caused the Budaka people a lot of pain because the ministry decided to ignore the boundary, which is the river, and planted another boundary one and a half kilometres away from the boundary, which was demarcated during 1962. 

Our people have suffered; we have even had deaths in that area; people have been beheaded and now we have had in total five deaths including one person that was beheaded and dismembered - and now they tell us it was a pilot project, which actually distorted the whole boundary! It is really terrible, and do you know what is happening now? [Hon. Members: “Tell us.”] These people actually come with extended machetes and wait for our people in Budaka. When we grow rice, they wait until the rice is ready and come with their extended machetes and chase away our people. We are in trouble and you know this is not enough. 

Our young men, the youths, have now resorted to vandalising electricity poles. Actually they get the copper wires and import them to wherever, I do not know where. It is terrible. So, the Ministry of Lands do something about this. We do not have any yams anymore; you who use that road, do you see those yams that were there in plenty? And that is the reason –(Member timed out)

6.54
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE: (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know those who spoke yesterday. Please, if you spoke yesterday, allow others who have not yet spoken to speak. Yes, I have seen you. 

MR BARTILLE: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will first of all start by thanking the committee for the report and go straight to thanking government for really thinking of the infrastructure as one of the priority areas in this country or in our budget. 

We all know that without good roads, development is impossible. I would, therefore, like to say that I think for the next three years, let the Ministry of Works be facilitated much more. Let it be given a priority because if we do this, then we shall have actually – you know the roads affect almost every sector of the economy. You cannot talk of high production or high productivity, market access and so on without the roads. We need them and especially I would like us to ensure that all roads that lead to our neighbouring countries should be tarmacked. They should be worked on so that we can have cross border trade and, therefore, improvement of the economy. 

I cannot forget to thank the government for thinking of Kapchorwa-Swam Road. I know it has been a pain in this Parliament and as I speak - I think I will speak with a different tone from the tones I have used ever since because even by indicating that this road is going to be tarmacked, all people in Bukwo and Kapchorwa are so excited. Mr Minister, we are just waiting for the time when the bulldozers come in. I only pray that it should not remain only in the budget books. In the year 2000, this road was No. 3 but by the wisdom of the World Bank this road was neglected. This time we pray that it starts as soon as possible.

The situation in Bukwo is changing. Since the beginning of this year, I want to say I have not passed Kenya to come to this Parliament; there is a very big improvement.

Things have even been improved by the opening of the Kepsikunya-Kurik River, and Swam road; this road is not even complete but is it is already exiting people. I have now reduced my distance home by five hours; I can travel at six o’clock and by midday or 1 o’clock I am in Bukwo. So there is that effort. I am only praying that they complete the security road. It serves three districts: Kapchorwa, Nakapiripirit and Bukwo – it is a security road, it has already changed the security situation. I am only praying that the ministry completes that road as soon as possible because our soldiers will now be able to monitor that area. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about the land administration. It is really a shame that there are conflicts over land all over the country; people are arguing over boundaries of land. The previous speaker has just told you about the problems between Budaka and Mbale. For how long will this happen? Even before Budaka was created, this problem was there, why can’t government come in? The surveying is a big problem; there are conflicts between people and schools and churches and all government institutions are facing this problem. Can we allocate enough money for the Ministry of Lands to carry out surveys and save us form these conflicts?

New districts have been created but I think we are not going deep enough to survey and show where these districts end and so the new and old districts are in conflict. But it is a matter, which can be resolved and it is us to do it.

7.00
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want first of all to thank the committee for the work they have done on this report. I also want to point out the concerns of my people. The Ministry of Works is doing a very poor job in most of the roads they are working on. For example, the road from Walugogo to Kamuli was done and barely four months later it’s in a very bad shape. So I wish to encourage the minister and the engineers to go and see what they are doing. They are doing nothing about the drainage – they work on a road and in just four months, we are back to square one.

This year we have a budget of Shs 1.1 trillion. We want this money to be visible in the rural areas. In our area we have some roads, which are impassable and they have been like that for some time. There are roads where we took ministry officials; they said they are going to make the road and the people clapped their hands and now it is two years down the road and nothing has been done. 

So I want the minister to put some of that money where his ministry had pledged to work. An example is the road between Namungalwe, from Luuka, to Kigulu. It is impassable. There is swamp and it is in a very bad shape and vehicles cannot pass there yet we are busy singing, “Bonna bagagawale”. This cannot be realised unless this budget address the issue of roads.

When it comes to road equipment, I want the ministry to fast track those districts, which have none. A district like Iganga has not had road equipment for the past three years. We took them for repair and every year they tell us that they are bringing them back. So when they are purchasing the road equipment, they should start with those districts that do not have -(Mr Kakooza rose_)– Madam Speaker, he is going to eat into my time. So please, hold on.

We are also concerned – we want to look at the list of the roads that have been taken over by the central government. We want to know which roads are in Iganga District. We cannot access the roads, but they tell us that the road was taken over and at times the district and the central government are both denying the road because we do not have the list. So I call on the Ministry of Works to bring that list.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. I want to supplement you by saying that for the new districts, which were formed in the previous year, the law says that they are supposed to share equipment with the mother districts; but none has done it. And these new districts are being crippled because their share from the mother district has never been received. So it should be considered in this budget that new districts get first – even the road funding is given to none of them. 

MR MULUMBA: Thank you, for the information. Madam Speaker, I want also to talk about the issue of RVR. The Government of Kenya has given them an ultimatum to either bring the money or they go. But what is the Government of Uganda doing? They brought them here and said they are very good people but they have done nothing. In fact they are just bringing it down. Let the ministers of Finance and Works tell us what they are going to do about it.

And lastly, when you look at the costing to roads, it leaves a lot to be desired.

7.06
MRS JANET OKORIMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity and I want to thank the committee for its report. I want to start my comments from page 6 of the report under district urban and community roads. It is said that rehabilitation of 102 kilometres of security roads in Karamoja, Kapchorwa, Acholi, Lango and Teso regions was done.

I just feel that we are moving at a very slow pace of grading just 102 kilometres of security roads and yet security is a priority. I think we are not being very serious and yet in five sub-regions you have graded only 100 kilometres. I do not know whether security is a priority to the Ministry of Works. There is still a lot to be done so that we speed up the process because even some of these roads like Abim-Moroto, should have been taken over under the security roads because those are the areas where major attacks have been happening.  But it looks like all we say falls on deaf ears.

The other one is on page 15. I had a bit of a smile when I read about national roads construction where the committee observes that this Vote will have the lion’s share of the budget under UNRA. But when you look at the activities that are going to benefit from this funding, there is no mention of Lira-Abim, Abim-Kotido roads, Muria-Abim-Kotido road and Sironko-Moroto road, and you are talking of a lion’s share! Who is to benefit from that lion’s share alone? I think we need to be serious because if it is national cake then the case should be benefiting all of us and shared equally because we all matter. (Applause)

The other one is on page 21.  Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Works that finally Dopesi River between Kotido and Abim, which has always been a menace, is now going to be attended to. At least this is a big achievement for those of us who come from Karamoja.  

Then the other one is under Ministry of Lands, page 3 - just a sort of clarification. The committee observes that some activities were covered and they say under the activities that were done; they observed that the development of national upgrading strategy is underway. I am now wondering: if it is underway, why are you putting it under activities that have already been covered?  

On page 6, the committee observes that it will not be possible to expand road fund activities to other priority areas especially where evictions have been taking place. Madam Speaker, whereas evictions in these areas have always been by landlords, there is a different type of eviction in Karamoja that we are experiencing. That is the eviction of people from fertile land in favour of wild animals and forests. We are not able to grow enough food to feed our population because the best part of land is given to wild animals and forests. So I think we need to de-gazette some of this land so that Karamoja is also brought on board so that we can be self supporting. But when you throw us into land that is infertile, what are we going to produce?    

Lastly, a document has been circulated I do not know from what source, but every Member has it. I do not know the message it is supposed to pass but as far as I know, I thought Uganda has had the worst road network in the whole of sub-Saharan Africa. But to my surprise -(Interruption)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, when this document was circulated, as a Member of the dot.com era, I went straight to check on the internet on African Development Bank, which is handwritten here as the source of this document and this thing does not surface anywhere. Here it is reflected that the road network in Uganda is better than Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania. However, we have travelled to some of these countries, for instance to Rwanda, and Rwanda has one of the best roads around, even in Tanzania.  

So, this Parliament has all the rights to question the authenticity of this document because the text of this document cannot be compared to the source. The source is handwritten and the text is computer typed; we must question the authenticity of this document because we are talking about road networks in Uganda and each and every sub-region is crying of a poor road network; and we are giving this document to this Parliament? 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): I want to appreciate hon. Obua’s speed at accessing the Internet and reading on the ADB website – but he read only the home page. There are other website parts that are there for ADB - I have stood here and stated that this document was distributed by me, not the chairperson. I have also said it is an extract from a presentation by the Vice-President of the African Development Bank in Kigali. I will produce to this Parliament the whole presentation, but I have also said you can even access it in part of the ADB website, where you see African development statistics. Now I have owned the document, I have not come to talk about it; everybody doubts it, I think that is bad faith.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, concentrate on the report and the issues being raised to you. Why should you worry about Kenya having bad routes?

MRS OKORIMOE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this two page report was submitted together with the report that we are discussing. I was just supplementing and I want to conclude by thanking hon. Obua Otto for the information he gave, which summarised my point. Thank you.

7.12
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few comments. Number one is on road safety on page 10. I want to urge government that in road safety, we should look at policy and law enforcement. There is a big problem in this country that we have so many laws that can help us but we are not enforcing them. I was confused when I saw taxi drivers going on strike because they have been told to do something, which is very right. Therefore, the Ministry of Transport and Internal Affairs should ensure that most of these laws are enforced and I think we can improve a lot.

The next point is a clarification I want from the ministers of Finance and Works. We have so many road contractors in this country but in the construction industry they require bank guarantees and bank guarantees are very expensive and I know that in this country the insurance sector has grown. I want to know why the construction industry here discourages insurance bonds and instead goes for bank guarantees, which are very expensive and are undermining our local contractors?  

The next point, which I have, is to the Ministry of Works. Recently there was a document by His Excellency the President querying the unit rates used by the Ministry of Works and they were comparing public procurement with private procurement. It is a very extensive document and when I look at the planned activities, I see that we are maintaining the status quo. Hon. Minister, how are you reconciling with your President in view of his letter and his directive that we inquire about government rates which seem to be very expensive? I know that there are some pertinent issues like taxation, like standards, which affect the rates but they need to be explained so that we harmonise the two positions.  

The other issue I have is about urban development. I get confused when I see Uganda maintaining one capital city, Kampala and everyday there is a lot of noise about Kampala. What plans do we have to have other cities in this country? Why can we not plan for a city in Northern Uganda, a city in Eastern Uganda, and for us in Mbarara we are ready for a city. We can even contribute financially to establish that city. Why can we not have other cities so that Ugandans can freely enjoy the life of living in a city when we create other cities in this country? So, I urge the Minister of Urban Planning to ensure that they plan for us more cities and we get more spacious cities in this country.  

I have one query on Vote 156 of Uganda Land Commission. When I looked at their report on page 2, by May this year they had spent 53 percent of their budget and in one month of June they spent it up to 100 percent. I looked at that and it was not correlating very well. So how do they manage to spend 47 percent of their budget in just one month when they actually collected Shs 1.6 billion as non-tax revenue?

Finally, I want to thank the government for prioritising Works, but I want to make a passionate appeal to the Minister of Works that our hopes are in his sector this financial year. Mr Minister, as we approach 2011, we expect serious performance to our expectations; all Ugandans are looking at your ministry, so do not let us down. I thank you.

7.18
MR JOSEPH MATTE (NRM, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without verbosity and circumlocution, I have only two points to make. For over 46 years we are asking for a road between Fort Portal and Bundibugyo, without success. So this time I sincerely thank the government for having allocated us that road. (Applause) This road is very important. I think some people sometimes just look at things. It is going to open up to a lot of things and this poverty alleviation - probably once this road is opened you can even sit down and things will start moving on their own. So I thank the government and I hope it is not going to end up on paper this time and that things will start working out tomorrow -(Interjection)- No, I want to talk realistically because if I say as of today, I will be just talking politics. 

I would also like to say that please, get us a contractor who can make a road. I am disappointed, Mr Minister of Works, by the contactor you gave Fort Portal/Hima road. I drive on that road from time to time; it is already developing potholes before it is even completed. And I would also like to thank you because SBI did a good job from Katunguru to Kasese and to Bwera. They built a good road. Those are the type of people you should get for us to build roads. (Applause) We are happy.

Secondly, the question of a railway between Kampala and Kasese is something like the British said was, “The question of a railway line between Cape Town and Alexandria.” The western part has a lot to offer for example, it will serve the whole of eastern DRC; it will serve Rwanda; it will serve Burundi; it will serve the rich western hinterland. We grow a lot; it is a granary of this country -(Interjections)- milk is there, bananas are there, cotton is there, cobalt is coming from there, we have cement coming from there to this place [Hon. Members: “Oil”.] and of course, some colleagues are saying oil; it is also going to come. And with this even some of the things we are going through, like the high cost of living - that is because transportation is very expensive. 

I urge the government not even to spend money in trying to make a feasibility study. The feasibility study that they should be having is to start the railway. That money should be used to start rehabilitating the railway straight away without wasting any more money on trying to say, “Is it viable or not viable?” that question should not be asked. We should be saying, “Let us move.” Because some of the things you are talking about, for example Bonna Bagaggawale, it is two and a half years - in my constituency I have not seen it yet, others maybe have seen but with this infrastructure put in place, things will start working themselves out. I thank you.

7.22
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work done. I also want to thank the Ministry for improving Luweero-Nakasongola-Kafu road as compared to three months ago. 

When I think of the Arua-Yumbe-Moyo road, I feel like withdrawing my thanks that I have given to the ministry. (Laughter) This road is nowhere; it is not even in the report or even in the policy statement. So I want to know whether it is deliberate move to cut off that part of the country from Uganda because in the policy statement, like that of last year, at least there was a plan of connecting Gulu-Atiak then Moyo. Then on this side of the plan there was a way of connecting Arua-Koboko to Sudan. But now you wonder where Yumbe-Moyo will be; there is no plan where it is indicated. At least if the plan were there we would now have the hope that sometime to come, we will also be part of this country.

I came from Yumbe yesterday and today I have developed a lot of body pain because the road from Yumbe to Arua is now impassable. There are many crater lakes – you cannot even move and I do not know what the minister will do on that road. Imagine you have a patient in Yumbe Hospital and he is referred to Arua: how can you use the ambulance to transfer the sick person who is an emergency case?

On page 6 of the committee report it is reported that six sets of district equipment have been procured. I want to know the districts, which are going to get this equipment because they are not stated in the report. Maybe Yumbe is one of them. 

We have Kochi Bridge, which connects Yumbe to Moyo and Adjumani. The state is terrible – it is no where either in this report or the policy statement of the ministry. I want to know the plan of the ministry for that bridge and for the people of Yumbe District. 

I want to know why the Land Fund is not distributed to all the districts in Uganda -(Interruption)

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, hon. Huda, for the opportunity. This Land Fund saga has been on for a long time and the ministry is aware that there are a number of districts that need this money but it has concentrated in one district for a long time - that is Kibaale. Whenever there is a report, it is about Kibaale when some of our districts have absentee landlords and are equally suffering like Kibaale. 

I am wondering: does the government want to see people chopping each other so they know there is a problem? We can have this money distributed in other districts so that it can show that they are also catered for. And surprisingly, in the last Financial Year 2007/08, this Land Fund came up in the Policy Statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Finance is having a portion of this money. Even this financial year, when you look at page 11 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable -

MS TUBWITA: I am giving her information and she is not complaining, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MS OLERU: Thank you, my colleague, for giving me that information. I want to know the plan of the Ministry of Works in conjunction with the Ministry of Water and Environment. We have people who have been evicted especially from the forest reserves and in Yumbe we are hosting people who were evicted from Moyo. The local land owners are just assisting those people thinking that the government is soon coming to resettle them -(Member timed out)

7.29
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the very good report. On page 6 of the report, I am happy to learn that a distance of 102 kilometres of security roads has been rehabilitated and this covers the regions of Karamoja, Kapchorwa, Acholi, Lango and Teso. But I would want to know the total distance of these security roads planned to be rehabilitated. At the same time, it is also important to know what portions of these areas we are talking about that are due for rehabilitation. What time do we expect that this will be completed? 

The second point is on the delay of construction projects, that is page 20. I am also happy that the committee has strongly recommended that the government institutes punitive measures to curb the vice. However, it is not only that. I propose that the central government also ensures that the contractors who are sent down there to work on those roads co-operate with the local leaders. When you go to the districts, you find complaints that these people from the centre become stubborn and refuse to co-operate with the local leaders just because they are sent from the centre. This is my request to the central government. Thank you.

7.36
MR HENRY BAGIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank government for prioritising this sector because it is on of the sectors that have been causing problems to our constituents.

This Parliament passed a loan for upgrading of Kasese Airfield to an international airport. Now, this policy statement has Shs 1.5 billion earmarked for compensating people around the airstrip. Why did we hurriedly pass the loan when we had not paid off the people that were supposed to leave the area where the airport was supposed to be constructed?

In the policy statement and in the report, we heard that at the time MV Kabalega got an accident, it had not been insured. Who is responsible for insuring the vessel and who takes responsibility for this problem that this country underwent?

I am very happy that the ministry has come up to regulate water transport in this country. But before the regulations come in place, already there are some laws that are in place to help transport on our water bodies. Take, for example, the way these outports are over loaded; the way they move at night, and we have had many accidents in these water bodies. Some of us who represent constituencies in areas where there are these water bodies, we are confronted with these problems because almost every other time there are accidents, boats are capsizing. What is in place that can be used to enforce before these regulations that are going to be put in place are put in place?

Madam Speaker, I have a question to the minister. We have a developed pier in Jinja, but another pier was constructed in Ggaba and all the vessels that were coming from our neighbouring countries from Kenya and Tanzania ceased to dock in Jinja. They now dock in Ggaba. What was the intention? What was the reason?

When we passed the Road Fund Act, UNRA was put in place and it has many functions. One of the functions is the load control. This is one of the activities that the ministry has totally failed. It is my wish and prayer that UNRA will manage this activity because we had a road toll in Iganga but ideally you would find out that these people were just collecting money for their own souls and the corruption at that spot was just beyond. It was clear to everyone. Vehicles would park at one point, they come and negotiate their way out, then they pay off and they go. So it is our wish and prayer that UNRA works on this issue.

Some money has been earmarked for Jinja-Kamuli road, for rehabilitation, but anyone who planned that road, I think that road is beyond talking of spot improvement - actually it is for spot improvement. I think it is supposed to be rehabilitated. Jinja-Kamuli road is in a very bad situation that we cannot talk of spot improvement. I want to thank the minister-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is extremely serious. (Laughter)
 
MR ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister for the Jinja- Bugiri road - (Member timed out)

7.36
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just have two special requests to make and then one concern and I will refer you to page 53 of the ministerial statement for Works. The second last paragraph where Rukungiri-Ishaka road is, which is about 50km to be shifted to the fifth paragraph which indicates that works will continue. This is not a new road as the ministry is trying to imply and indeed when you look at page 71, under the national roads construction, 3.20 talks about Kagamba-Rukungiri and it is under ongoing projects. Kagamba-Rukungiri is not ongoing. What would be ongoing would be Kagamba-Rukungiri- Ishaka. I had raised that issue with you, honourable minister, I think about four years ago.

When you look at page 72 under (f) there is Rukungiri-Ishaka. I am requesting this hon. House, Madam Speaker, that we include this under the roads that are going to continue this year for construction because we have had delegations of leaders from Kanungu District visiting the minister and all the time he has been telling us there was no money. But now when there is money, the road is again shifted to next year. How far are we going to continue with the postponements?

And then the second request is that, I perused through the list of the roads that are going to be taken by central government. As you know, Kanungu is landlocked district, but there is a very important road that has been missed out and this is Mitano- Katojo-Kanungu road. This connects Rukungiri District to Kanungu District headquarters; it is about 25km and then Katojo-Kihihi road which is only about 10 kilometres. This has heavy traffic because it connects to DRC, it connects to Queen Elizabeth National Park, it connects to Bwindi and also where oil exploration is taking place.

Finally, honourable minister, in 2,000 you visited Kanungu and you pledged Bikomero Bridge. It is now so many years down the road. I have perused properly through the ministerial statement, I do not see it. Our people have continuously drowned trying to cross to get to Rukungiri. What is happening? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.40
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report but also make some comments and seek some clarifications. One, I would like to thank the minister for considering the tarmacking of Kagamba-Ishaka which has taken a very long time and as you are aware, this is becoming a very busy road, most especially because of the business between Uganda and the neighbouring countries of Rwanda, Burundi and DRC. But because of the nature of the business being transacted and the road being narrow, we are occasioning so many accidents especially around Rusindura. The road is now too narrow to handle the traffic that is traversing the road. May I know from the minister what plans he has in having this plan being put into effect?

I am also seeking clarification. I can see in the statement that you are initiating amendments to the Road Safety Act and you are also trying to get some updating manuals for training and testing. I think you are in other words talking about improving road safety. May I know when you are planning to have this effected? When can we have the amendments? 

May I also propose that as part of road safety, an initiative could be taken through the East African Community to harmonise road safety throughout the region so that we do not have people driving on the left, others on the right -(Interruption) 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we were discussing safety measures on our roads, I wanted to inform the minister that there are uncalled for humps that we are putting along the roads. An example that I wanted to bring to the attention of the ministry are those at Kakira, for those who use the eastern route. These humps are being used by robbers and for the last two weeks, they have been robbing people along that road. Lastly –(Member timed out)

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, hon. Muwuma, but the point I was trying to make is that there should be a process of harmonising driving in the region because you will realise that many accidents, especially those along the borders, take place because people are driving on the left and all of a sudden they swerve to the right. Isn’t it possible to harmonise our driving practices in the region so that we either drive on the left or on the right? 

On the matter of road equipment, people are struggling to get districts so that they can get road equipment and services nearer to them. May I propose that a rational way of giving out road equipment is put in place which, for example, would consider the size of the population for example the geographical area so that granting a place district status doesn’t necessarily qualify it to get road equipment. If you are many and if the place is far then you should even get more road equipment instead of getting two sub counties applying for district status to get more road equipment.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to talk about weigh bridges. I think that the purpose of weigh bridges is good; to regulate the load on the road but I would like to say that the bridges are not meeting their purpose. Instead, they are being abused to make money for the people operating them. For example, is the minister in position to tell us why a truck would pass a weigh bridge at Malaba and be found overloaded when it reaches Mbarara yet it has not changed cargo or route? Secondly, is it also possible to regulate the working of weigh bridges so that they do not become many and a barrier to the smooth running of cargo?

On the computerisation of the land registry, I think that it is important and urgent that this is done because it is a particular barrier and discouragement to people, especially those who are coming to do business. (Member timed out)

7.45
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of my colleagues who have thanked the committee for the work well done. I have a few observations that I want to make and I will refer you to page 13, vote for district urban and community access roads. The objectives of this vote is to formulate policies, overall planning, monitoring, coordination, setting standards and guidelines to local governments in implementation of their road programmes. 

I would like to know from the ministry the standard size for our roads in terms of width because when I look at our feeder roads, every time they are repaired they are narrowed. When you come to where bridges are located, two vehicles cannot by pass each other. One has to wait for the other vehicle to first pass. Furthermore, how often should we re-gravel our roads? 

This takes me to the issue of district roads, which are under central government. Do you supervise these contractors because I can give an example of a road from Kamonkoli to Pallisa. This road is being maintained by the central government but when you are travelling on that road, you find that it varies in width size. There are also cases where the contractor puts a diversion signpost. To me that signpost means that at that particular point in time, the road is being worked on and as such, you are given an alternative route. I stand to be corrected on that. 

However, you find cases where a contractor has put up such a signpost but there is no alternative route and at times the arrow points to a garden or bush. One wonders whether to pass through the bush or through people’s gardens. That makes me wonder whether we really have standards and whether the central government supervises or monitors those contractors on these roads.

I also wanted to raise concerns about the Rift Valley Railways Limited concessionaire. In the report they say that they have breached several important provisions in the concession agreement. I think that the committee was using polite or diplomatic language by saying “several” and that this could imply many more breaches. I wonder why we should keep the same concessionaires. Is it impossible to cancel the agreement and look for another person?

I would also like to re-echo what my colleague, hon. Kabanda, said concerning the Ministry of Lands. In the incident mentioned, somebody was killed and had his limbs cut off. You can imagine such a scenario; burying a person in such a state. When the Vice-President was on his programme of Upland Rice Growing in Budaka, we shared this with him and also tried to talk to our colleagues in the Cabinet that we should solve this issue but they have kept dodging us. I don’t know why -(Member timed out.) 

7.50
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. I would also like to thank the committee for bringing out pertinent issues that touch our constituencies. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Movement Government for focussing on the roads because I believe roads are a prerequisite for poverty eradication in this country. I thank them for giving them fairly adequate resources to do this work and I believe if they are put to proper use, we shall benefit as a country. 

Particularly, I want to thank the minister and the government for putting the road from Ntungamo to Mulama Hill in the budget. This has been a presidential pledge since 1986. I am happy that now the people of Ntungamo District are going to enjoy a tarmacked road from Ntungamo to Mulama Hill. Those of you who do not know this road, this is a shortcut to our neighbours in Rwanda, much shorter than the longer route via Katuna and I am sure once it is tarmacked, it is going to spark off development in this area.

However, Mr Minister, before you tarmac the road, I want to inform you that as we speak, the road is impassable. This is your road; it has been impassable during the dry season and I do not know what is going to happen to this road during the rainy season. The faster you come to our rescue, the better. 

I would also like to thank you for taking over the district roads. I think this is a very good plan considering that our local governments are no longer getting enough funding. But I am worried about the road equipment. The road equipment is welcome but if we do not work on its maintenance and give them enough money, we might have large elephants parked at the district headquarters.

Finally, I want to ask the minister how far the ministry has gone with construction of a very important airport at Rwentobo. Now that we are producing some of the best quality flowers in the world -(Interjections)– this is a fact. When are you going to construct this airport to facilitate the export of these flowers? Not only that but it will also promote tourism in the country. This will be an international airport serving Rwanda, Tanzania, Burundi and Congo. So, it is not a matter of being selfish but it is a matter of being nationalistic. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.54
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to say something. First of all, I want to thank my brothers and sisters who prayed for me when I was sick. Thank you for your prayers! I am now available. 

My problem is mostly on this national land policy and the land use plan. I was expecting the committee to come up with proposals where we can have room to start taxing these landlords who are holding land and they are free from taxation; but all taxation is done only on people who are working. But meanwhile, the land is being hoarded and people are not taxed for that land which is not used, and the youth are looking for land to develop while some few people hold land in their hands. I think it is high time we came up with a policy to start taxing the landlords and this should really be taken seriously. 

Secondly, I saw in the report the public servants housing and loan scheme. I wonder! When it was mentioned in the report that there is Shs 24 billion being held, I thought the ministry would come and build houses instead of saying that they are loaning to individuals. But there should be loans for civil servants and these houses that were sold should be replaced. Otherwise, it would be like saying that those coming from Kamuli should work in Kamuli; they should not work in Ntungamo because they cannot have a house there. This is a bad policy and I think that we should build and replace these houses which we have sold, and we should be able to transfer civil servants to work in different counties so that they feel like Ugandans. At the moment, one feels that they are only from a special area because if I am coming from Ankole, I must stay there. This is not good. I think the policy of housing should be worked upon and we should use that money for building houses for civil servants. 

Last but not least, I think that the loans scheme for civil servants should not only be for housing; it should also apply to vehicles. So, money should be available, after all, it is not free money. Instead of giving NSSF to a few people, make it available to workers because they are contributors. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Pajobo, for giving way. He is saying that we should look for money to give workers and I am just looking at Vote 013 which we are just about to pass. But I have just been doing the calculations and I found that the total which the committee is giving us on page 23 – the total budget for Vote 013 of Ministry of Works and Transport is Shs 169 billion. The recurrent is Shs 43 billion, and then development is Shs 152 billion. But when you add, the total gives you Shs 196,113,140,571 and when you do the mathematics, there is Shs 27 million that is not accounted for. I do not know whether it is an error or it is an intention. There is Shs 27 million which is not accounted for in these totals. I want a clarification on whether it is an error. 

MR NASASIRA: We discussed it with the chairperson. It was a typing error. Instead of 152, you change it to 125. The rest is okay, that is where the error is. 

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, for that information, but still I am saying that that money for loans should be there – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 21 Members have spoken so far and I have taken note of those Members who want to speak. I will give you first priority on the next report. So, I now invite the Minister of Works to respond and then the Minister for Housing. 

7.57
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the chairperson and the committee for their report. Before I respond to the questions, I wanted to clarify on one issue concerning this two-paged document that I circulated. Some hon. Members were asking where it is coming from and whether it is a genuine document or not. Now, I circulated this document because I wanted to start with it to show the challenges we have in Sub Saharan Africa and not to pose that Uganda is doing very well because 30 percent good is not a pass mark.

I wanted to show that as we address the budget we should realise the challenges Africa has, or Sub Saharan Africa for that matter, in developing its infrastructure and specifically roads. This is a presentation from the data of the African Development Bank by the Vice-President of the African Development Bank in Kigali on 28 June to the retreat on the summit for the infrastructure in East Africa. I found it very interesting. 

If you look at the East African countries, you will see that all of us are under good and that the best is 30 percent. Well, the best happens to be Uganda but as I said 30 percent is not good. In fact, when we look at the average for Sub Saharan Africa which is shown as “SS”, percentage good is 14 percent - that is South of the Sahara by then North of South Africa- 47 fair and 39 poor. The rest of the data you can see for yourself. 

So, really, the challenge for infrastructure in our region is big. But I was really surprised that people could immediately challenge the documents and think this cannot be true. Although we are all bad performers, Uganda is relatively showing better performance than the others and I thought that we as Ugandans would say, “Is this true?” So, although we are bad, we are not the worst. But I think that it is terrible and it is bad faith in the supplier of the document and lack of confidence in your country for people to say, “This must be wrong.” If you think it is wrong why don’t you go and check? After all, these figures are here; the African Development Bank is there; their websites are there and you can go and check. You are not being stopped from checking.

You know the outcry over the bad roads in the country and the bashing those who are in charge have received but even with this bashing, our country is not bad and this is a challenge for all of us in terms of budgeting. So, even when you are mentioning trillion do not think the trillion is going to bring us from 30 percent to 100 percent or even 80 percent good. We need this trillion for the next three - and I really support I think hon. Toskin who proposed it. The plan of government is that government is going to put money in the road sub sector from now for the next three or four years until we reverse this trend. If we had taken these percentages around 2,000 when we had rehabilitated the roads, this percentage of good would have been better. But we concentrated on UPE and so on and did not give enough money to road maintenance and reconstruction and that is where we have ended. But even then, and you can even go and check with the World Bank, these are the statistics of the roads. It is not good but we are trying our best given our resources.

I also want to use this opportunity to thank, first, the President, this Parliament and even the Committee of Infrastructure. For the last five years, we have been expressing our cries on under funding of the road sub sector, under funding of road maintenance and for change and this financial year, as you heard from the report, the government budget on road development is higher than that from development partners. We have shifted to support our road development more than on depending on the donors and lenders. 

For me, the future for our roads, if we continue funding this way, is bright. In fact, now the challenge is on our side to ensure that we get enough contractors, we fast-track the processing of contracts and we get on with work. So, for me, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as soon as you approve this budget we are just going to try and get on with this work so that we absorb this money and we can then justify to qualify for more money next year.

Having said that, as you heard from the Rt hon. Speaker, we have had 21 responses and all these have touched on this ministry; others also have contributed to the Ministry of Lands. The hon. Minister of Lands will want to respond also. Now, it has taken us three hours or so to get these comments and I am ready to spend three hours here responding to them but given that it is 8.00 O’clock I will try to summarise. 

I am sorry about the delay. Before I comment on what hon. Amuriat said, I want to thank my colleague the shadow minister. Although he did not give me a copy of his paper justifying lack of funding, when he talked about how much he has toured this country. I think he would have spared some few shillings and got me one photocopy of his report from his travel expenses all over the country. But I want to thank him; he has been all over the country and wherever he is he rings me and we discuss these things. Fortunately, we are both engineers and at least on that technical side we know what we are talking about. So, I want to thank him for that support. 

But, the delay of this Kampala Northern Bypass, as you have even read in the papers, is an annoyance to all of us including myself, my ministry and government. This contractor has given us problems with the arguments with the consultant. What you should appreciate is that that money for the Northern Bypass is a grant from the EU, except the money we used for compensation and the way the EU projects are done, the financier is European Union, the contracting officer is the Ministry of Finance, the supervising ministry is the Ministry of Works through road authority. 

So, it is not the ministry that can just kick the contractor off the road tomorrow. If I do so without agreeing with EU, the EU will say, “We will not fund,” and then I will have to come here together with the Ministry of Finance to look for money to finish that road. The next attack we shall get in this Parliament is that the road is not complete and there is no contractor. You recall the attacks we got here when we kicked off the contractor from the Jinja-Bugiri road because the contractor had abandoned work. We were attacked and attacked. I gave five statements here but what we did was for a noble cause for the country but it takes time to look for another one and we had to depend on the money from EU. 

So, we are trying our best to see that this road which is remaining with the last tarmac layer on top be finished with all the debates about which quality, we have hired experts, but we think that we shall eventually win. As you will see from this budget, money has been allowed to do it to a four-lane as was intended when we could not get money from the European Union. So, we are hopping that we shall tender the next phase to get the four lanes so as to make it four lanes all through.

My shadow colleague talked about the Shs 42 billion that went to CHOGM. First of all, there has been a creation that all the money that did roads for CHOGM went down the drain. I totally do not agree with that. This situation was first created by the media and it has gone that way with statements that all CHOGM roads have collapsed. Roads cannot just disappear. I am going to take the media through all roads that were done before CHOGM. I personally wrote an article in the newspaper to clarify that we had had five different interventions depending on the money we had. There were temporary interventions, permanent and the semi-permanent ones and we had to work within the money we had. 

It seems people have forgotten how Kampala roads used to look like before CHOGM. Have the roads gone back to that status? I think this is exaggerated criticism because the roads are there. As I said, I have already agreed with my team. We are organising a bus to take us around the roads that we did before CHOGM with the media people. We will also try to explain more about the interventions we have stated in public.  As I said, I personally wrote an article about what we did and for how long we expected the roads to last. We intended to move with the media people from here up to Entebbe. I hope we will all see the status of these roads. I welcome Members of the committee to join us. 

Although I accept criticism where it is due, I do not accept non-existing criticism. Have you forgotten how Kampala roads used to look like? For example, in December 2006, you could hardly drive from Wampewo roundabout to Kitgum House. Has that road collapsed except where water department has dug?

Madam Speaker, the points from the shadow minister have been noted. We for example, have discussed the swamp crossing, the specifications, and the Kabale-Kisoro road. 

Let me now make a comment on RVR in respect to the limping railway. It is important we get a very efficient railway system especially to the sea because one of our biggest challenges is the high cost our imports – 35 percent falls on transport costs and this is too high. The purpose of concessioning an investor was to control that. But this concessioning was done together with the Government of Kenya. It was not only for Uganda. It was for both Kenya and Uganda. We actually thought that this was also an opportunity to have one railway operational line from Kampala to Mombasa, which would work in our favour. So, we bided and in fact we had invited Tanzania – but now we are all disappointed with the performance of the concessionaire and I have it in my policy statement. 

But the privatisation unit did this with the privatisation unit of Kenya. So, I would like to inform you that the bid was won by the concessionaire in good faith and we all hoped that this fellow would get investment. This never came to pass. His biggest problem has been management and capital because I think somewhere along the way he could not find the capital he hoped to get. And who was supposed to provide the capital? It was IFC. Who could doubt International Finance Corporation of the World Bank? Who was the second financier? It was KFW of Germany and who could doubt? So, even when the minister came here to ask Parliament to pass the partial risk guarantee, he was doing it in good faith together with Kenya. Thank God, this involved two countries because if it were to be only Uganda, then newspapers would be all over us.

Anyway, the action that hon. Med was talking about, which Kenya is taking is the same we are taking because we are in partnership in this. The management of the company has now been changed. They were given a deadline in the last meeting of 30 August. Finances have been seen around the corner and we are watching. If capitalisation is there with changed management, then we can only monitor as a regulator and we are doing that. This is because we are supposed to regulate RVR, which is a private company operating in Uganda. I would like to tell you that there are certain parameters that they must fulfil as a concessionaire. We are doing this together with the Government of Kenya. 

Uganda and Kenya set up a railway commission, which is working and if this RVR does not now perform as per the parameters that were given as of 30 July for this month and the next one, then together with the Kenya Government, we will take the necessary action to ensure that the railways services continue. 

Let me now talk about routes to the Southern Sudan. I have no problem with this. We are fast-tracking the design of Gulu-Atiak-Nimule Road and Arua-Koboko-Oraba Road purely for that. The new approach of government although the design is with the support of the World Bank, is that we are partners with the development partners. When we want and you do not provide the money when we have designed it, then we look for it. That is the new approach and I think anybody in Uganda would support that approach. But I think there is good will from our partners that as soon as the designs are finished, the tarmac will start for both or one of them at the beginning.

On the railway to Sudan, I would like to inform the House that we will sign a memorandum of understanding with the ministers of Sudan on Tuesday. We have the final negotiations on Monday this coming week. 

On the rest about water transport and ferry landings, I will take to the utilisation of the road maintenance funds, but on performance, you will recall that we passed the Road Fund Bill here. In the Road Fund Act, there are sections 19 to 21 where the minister responsible for roads and working with the road authority will present here the performance programme, which has to be endorsed by Parliament. So, that is what we shall follow for Parliament to get to know the plans and utilisation of that money. I would like to inform the House that as soon we finish this and the road fund gets into place, I will be coming here with the maintenance programme.

About the policy shift of moving back to using labour units for the maintenance of district roads is because of what has been going on for sometime. We have had labour-based contracts at districts, but over the years we have found out that the people there tend to give these contracts to themselves. So, you find that the people who are supposed to supervise these contracts are the contractors. I am sure you have that experience from your own districts. 

Therefore, we want to go back to the old system to have people employed directly as full-time employees. In any case, this creates employment in the villages. (Applause) In my language they say that if you fail this way, you try the other way. So, since it has not worked this way let us try going back –(Interjections)– it is not gambling; we are only experimenting. (Laughter) It has worked before and so we are going to try it again. Soon we shall come out to give you guidelines on how the whole thing is going to work. Otherwise, this business of contracting people and when you go on the road you do not find them, is not going to work. So, that is our main policy shift.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister has said you can even ring him. Why don’t you pick up that on phone and you - is a Member of the committee. Other Members have talked about road equipment; I know he will also talk about it.

MR NASASIRA: We will come and inform Parliament on how the road equipment to districts is going to work. I am still, with our technical people, preparing a cabinet paper on that utilisation. We are not just going to buy road equipment and put it all over the place without proper management, utilisation, funding and maintenance. I ask Parliament to be patient on that.

On what hon. Ocula said, I think I have responded to your question on the Gulu-Nimule road. On Lira-Kamdini road as queried by hon. Ishaa Otto, I would like to say that if you look at our detailed programme, you will realise that rehabilitation of Lira-Kamdini road is under what we call maintenance backlog. So, your statement that there is no intention of doing it at all should be allayed because it is just one of those, which are still under backlog like all the others. But as I said that we shall be adding money every year, this road will eventually also join the category for full reconstruction. In any case, that road now is going to be very active because as soon we finish the Soroti-Lira road I think all the trucks that are passing through Bombo will now move to that one. Unless we do a road from Lira to Gobi as a shortcut, those trucks will still go to Gulu via Kamdini.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, you were distracted because you had started – I think hon. B’Leo’s major point was the ferry.

MR NASASIRA: Oh! The ferry, I want to apologise for not having it in this document. (Laughter) There are certain projects that were added in after this document had been printed. Actually I had asked our people to bring a corrigendum here, but I want on behalf of my staff to apologise for not doing that. Actually they instead brought the corrigendum for the 25 bridges in West Nile, which is also missing in this statement and still forgot to bring the corrigenda for many other issues, for example, the one for studying the road from Lumino to Busia and this ferry from Rwampanga to Namatabi. Otherwise, the ferry is there and I am sure you will see it in our programme. I am also sure you will be able to see it when we come back here with a schedule of the work we intend to do for approval. That ferry will be there together with the ferry landings.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Since you said it was an omission for not having that programme in your policy statement and subsequently in the committee report – there was a rumour about money being available to tarmac the Lira-Kitgum. I request you to say something on that as well because maybe it was also omission that that project did not appear.

MR NASASIRA: The immediate tarmacking might be a rumour, but when you look at our policy statement, you will realise that that road is among those roads that are supposed to be finalised for design and compensation. That road is together with the Rwekunyu-Masindi Port and Apac-Lira roads. Anyway, what we have done is to add design from Kitgum up to Madi Opei all to the border near turuturu. So, it is no longer a rumour. 

Hon. Issa Otto talked about taking over roads. I would like to say that we have been as transparent as can be on taking roads. First, from our technical analysis, we estimated about 5,000, but I later on wrote to every district chairperson and copied my letter to Members of Parliament from those respective districts asking them to make their proposals. I can say that although the proposals have come, the roads now total to 11,000, which is 6,000 far more than what we had planned for. So, we are now synchronizing and finalizing with them. As soon as we finish, I will bring that list to Parliament. 

However, I know that you are more interested in knowing the roads that have been taken over in your district. I do not think really hon. Otto would be interested in knowing which feeder roads should be taken over in Kisoro or in Kazo because even if he read the name he would not know what it means. Anyway, what I can say is that, each district chairperson will be given the final list, which will be copied to the Members of Parliament from respective districts. That final list will also be given to the sectoral committee. Otherwise, all the roads are going to be taken over throughout this financial year. Our national network will move from about 10,800 to about 20,000 kilometres and we think that should be enough. We are also working out the road densities for each district. So, there is no chin-chin business.

I have noted the taking over talked about by hon. Bakeine. I have also noted the gender concerns of hon. Kabanda and also agree with Toskin about financing roads in the next financial years. I think I have already answered hon. Medi, but I need to look into the issue of the work done on Walugogo Bridge, which he says lasted for only four months. We will have to find out why. 

You want the rural people to feel the money – defiantly, they will feel this Shs 1.0 trillion, and they will also feel the road fund because it is to be shared between the nations roads, districts roads, urban roads and even community roads. 

I noted the appreciation and other concerns of hon. Okorimoe. But if you check the policy statement – when you talk about Lira-Abim, the first tarmac to be in Karamoja region is going to be in the Sironko areas which is in the final design now; Sironko-Nakapiripirit to Soroti. 

I agree with hon. Ngabirano about enforcing the laws. But the letter of the President that people keep talking about, I said here in the House that the President queried unit cost of national road projects before – actually that was last year. But in this letter the President was querying the unit cost of district roads, the schools, dams and hospital construction. But people tend to think that we do not fix those unit costs. These contracts are tendered at the district and people bid and those were the rate. 

If you go and read the letter again, you will see that the President was asking why this work would not be done by the Ministry of Works and that of local government. So for those who mention it here with a suspicious tone that it is Ministry of Works fixing these rates, they are wrong, otherwise the letter would not propose that Ministry of Works takes them on. And one way of changing these unit costs is to get more contractors and the other way is to see whether we can establish a national construction company. 

Hon. Mate said, “The contractor you gave the contract from Fort Portal to Hima was very bad”. I wanted to correct the Hansard. The minister does not give contracts – in fact, if the minister got involved in giving contracts, he would be sacked or censured here. It is this Parliament that passed the PPDA law; the contracts are on the arms length. If there are queries, you can go to PPDA or the contracts committee and so on. 

What was interesting is that when he got to a good contractor, the SBI, he did not say that I am the one who gave it. But we had problems with this Chinese contractor; his performance was poor. We did not want to give him another contract because he already had Oluyo-Pakwach, so we knew his performance. We even wrote to the World Bank, but we could not win. He had won three contracts but we managed to take away one. He had also won Kikolongo-Kasese-Kilembe mines. We gave that to the other contactor who did better and our technical team say that work is now satisfactory. 

For security roads, we will give you the details. For the upgrading of Kasese Airport, we missed the opportunity when the SBI contractor was in Kasese because we wanted to use his rates but now the contractor has left. So when CIA has raised enough money we will tender it out and it will be tarmacked. 

MV-Kabalega sank and an inquiry was put in place and all the people involved in it were removed from work. We even sent a document to the AG’s Office to see if there is a way for them to be charged. So, all the people are no longer with URC.

Actually even Port Bell, there is a lot of private sector interest to develop the corridor to Dar- es Salaam. We are marketing both Jinja and Port Bell landing sites. In fact, Jinja has got even bigger space than Port Bell but we are targeting both. And whenever we wanted a project for developing Jinja, we also considered Port Bell. But it will also depend on how we attract traffic to Dar-se-salaam. So the government is working out strategy to see how to attract traffic towards the central corridor. We do not want to be in the situation we were in at the beginning of this year when there were disturbances in Kenya. 

I took the concerns by hon. Kyatuheire Jacqueline on taking over the roads – I have explained it. 

Hon. Tashobya, the amendments on the Transport and Road Safety Act are expected to be brought to Parliament by the end of October.

The plans for Kagamba-Hishaka will be seen when we bring them here. 

Now, hon. Kiryapawo, there are width standards for deferent sizes of roads. But at times you may find a bad grader operator who grades from one end and leaves another making the road very narrow. 

One asked how often we re-gravel the roads. They are supposed to be gravelled after every four years if there is reasonable traffic. But because of budget under funding, you find a road has taken ten years before it is gravelled again. 

Hon. Rwakimari, there is a road going to be done on Ntungamo-Mirama Hills before the tarmac comes so that it does not become totally impassable. 

The airport of Rwentebo is still way. I think the CIA went there and did what we call a pre-feasibility and they will have to balance it. Since we are interested in the whole economy, we should relate these projects in relation to the economy. Eventually, Rwentebo will have an airport – as you grow more flowers. But at the moment, you must invest highly and there must be a return on those investments. 

Let me give you, an example, of the Kisoro airport. We got funding through our friends, the EU, but you need to see how much revenue we are getting from that airport. If tourism, agriculture and so on pick up, that is when you will see how the airport – but it is on plan and it will – (Mr Ishaa Otto rose_)- I am under pressure from Madam Speaker to finish. Hon. Otto, we shall discuss.

Finally, I welcome back hon. Pajobo. I am happy that he has recovered. I think most of the things that you addressed were for housing. 

MR OLEGA: There was an issue raised on the Yumbe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the minister to take you upstairs and buy you some tea and you finish while there. (Laughter) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, he has dodged all the three issues on Kanungu.

MR OLEGA: Even the Arua-Yumbe-Moyo road.

MR NASASIRA: First of all, there is nothing I have dodged. In our document, we are going to start the process of finalising the tender for Kanungu to Ishasha. We have even added that we will have a link to Kanungu District – the spa from that road. There is a debate whether we should start from Kihihi or from another place, which we have discussed, so we shall resolve that. We do not want that project to be delayed by the spa which is not yet designed. 

The bridge that we went to is being designed. When the design is complete, we will tender when funds are available. I have not dodged any question.

Shadow minister, the airfield that you talked about, of Garuga, is near the DRC border. The CAA visited that airfield. Whenever an airfield is visited before it is licensed, there are certain conditionalities. In order to approach that airfield, sometimes you have to go into the airspace of DRC, and they are discussing with them. There are no delays or anything. Who does not want an airfield? So, as soon as the concerns of the CAA in terms of safety and approaches are addressed, the airfield will be cleared. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that question was asked and it was answered in the Defence sector. 

8.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Infrastructure and my colleagues who have raised issues here on the Floor. I will be brief because issues regarding our sector were limited. 

The first issue was raised by the Leader of the Opposition. This was to do with the Land Use Policy. It is true the Land Use Policy should emanate from the National Land Policy. Actually, the land policy was initiated much earlier, in terms of research and so on, but due to the complexities involved like legal status and ownership, this has taken a much longer period in terms of consultation compared to the land use issues like the use of land for agriculture and infrastructure. We also had to address certain issues and much as this one was started much earlier, this other one came after. We had to address those concerns; therefore we ended up having the Land Use Policy launched. However, the two are going to be harmonised as we move along, after the consultation process is completed. 

The other one was to do with the plans for the various urban centres. Yes, 46 out of 71 were approved. Why is it so? Because some could not meet the mark in terms of the standards expected from the consultants. According to the Town and Country Planning Act, the process is such that when designs are prepared, submissions are supposed to be displayed and people are supposed to make presentations. 

It is unfortunate; I do not know what happened to the Leader of the Opposition, but some of the plans in your area were not in tandem with the expectations of the people there. Strictly, the Town and Country Planning Board will only approve plans that have gone through all these processes. Should there be any shortcomings, the Town and Country Planning Board rejects, defers or approves subject to amendments. That is the standard procedure that we follow in accordance with the Town and Country Planning Act.

Issues regarding the boundaries: it is not only Budaka and perhaps Butaleja, Mbale and so on. We have had a lot of problems – even hon. Omach here also has a very big problem in his area. First and foremost, Ministry of Local Government is a stakeholder in the boundaries of districts created. Now we have decided that for us as a ministry, we do provide technical services of surveying after the Ministry of Local Government has actually had discussions and harmonised the socio-political aspects involved in the boundary negotiations or in trying to resolve the conflicts of the boundaries. That is what we are doing. 

We do not have the resources on our own to undertake all the surveys of all these new districts as well the old ones where we have not actually had the resolutions completed. So, our proposal and advice to honourable colleagues is that Ministry of Local Government is a big stakeholder; that is where we should start. For us, we will be advised on when to come in and provide the technical services of survey, and the others will follow after that. So, Ministry of Lands should not be looked at as the owner and initiator of resolving the conflicts regarding the boundaries. However, we are ready to participate and offer our services on our part. 

I appreciate hon. Tubwita’s support to ensure that physical planning is recognised as one of the most important sectors in this country. Indeed, this is our prayer and I think we will always continue pushing for the same. 

I also want to assure hon. Tubwita; of course, as you know, planning is a decentralised service whereby districts are encouraged to recruit their own planners with the help of our ministry. For us, we are ready to provide all the technical guidance in terms of recruiting these people and at the same time also offer further training. In this country now we do not have enough properly trained planners. We have been relying on outside countries. So, what we are doing now is to continue soliciting various sources or institutions that can help some of our planners, who are first of all prepared at Makerere, and then turn them into fully fledged and competent planners. We work with various stakeholders; again, here the local governments are the major stakeholders. 

Many colleagues talked about the Land Fund. Yes, the Land Fund is meant to serve the entire country but the genesis of the Land Fund was actually to try and resolve the historical imbalances to begin with. One of such areas is Kibaale but it was supposed to spread and cover other parts of the country including Mbale where we also have historical injustices but the funding is not enough. That is why we have actually done a little bit of work in Kibaale. We even still have a lot of problems in Kibaale; we need more funds in order to actually move on from there to other parts of the country. 

Hon. Pajobo raised an issue regarding land policy. Yes, I think the consultations are going on. Hon. Pajobo, if you think that we should tax the landlords, please submit your views to the Land Policy Committee and these will form part of the report which will eventually end  up here in the House for further debate. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of government houses, it was alluded in the report that the Housing Policy is being. However, as it stands now, government does not provide housing to public servants. If you think that we can have a paradigm shift from that, please the policy is coming; it is being reviewed so submit your views and at the end of the day, we will end up here to discuss that very proposal and see how we proceed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to submit that those were the responses that were raised regarding the issues enshrined in the report by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this Parliament adopts the report of the sessional committee on Physical Infrastructure.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the Prime Minister very much for his stay in power and for organising his troops today. Since morning he has been here. We are really happy to see him and the honourable ministers, the Members of Parliament, the honourable Leader of the Opposition and his cabinet, all the members, all of you the staff, and our clerks-at-table and the staff who are behind us. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to 10.30 am tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.50 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 21 August 2008 at 10.30 a.m.)




