Thursday, 23rd August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.28p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I am reminding all Members of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that you have a retreat starting on 27th to 30th August at Windsor Hotel Entebbe. So, please remember to go to that retreat. It will benefit you and us.

MR.WANDERA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, you informed this House that the Parliamentary Commission met, and among other things, considered the welfare of Members of Parliament. But upon my arrival in this House, I realised that there are Members of Parliament and members of staff of Parliament. I am interested in knowing whether the Parliamentary Commission will consider the welfare of the staff of Parliament alongside the welfare of the Members of this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When I announced the successful Members of Parliament who were elected to sit on the Parliamentary Commission, I told them that their duty was not only to look after the welfare of Members of Parliament who elected them but also to take care of the welfare of members of staff. Because if the welfare of members of staff is not well looked after, then you will not be able to enjoy what you are supposed to enjoy. So the function of the Commission is to look after you, Members of Parliament, and the staff.  We are one entity though; you are Members of Parliament and the others are helping us to carry out our work. Is it not clear?

MR.WANDERA: My understanding and expectation is that the welfare of MPs will be slightly improved. I will be interested in knowing whether there will be an improvement of equal measure with respect to the staff.  I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: But that is exactly what I have said. We will take care of their interests and we shall make sure that where there is need for improvement, that improvement comes. I know, because that is your constituency anyway.

MR.AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary to that question regarding members of staff of Parliament, we have people who work with us but they are not members of staff of Parliament, and they do not get their pay from Parliament – these are our drivers. I was wondering if there is accommodation for them in terms of sitting arrangements within the building. These people sit in the cars from the time we come here in the morning to the time we leave. Can we create some accommodation, some room somewhere in this building where they can sit and also have access to social amenities like toilets?

THE SPEAKER: We shall look into this when the Commission convenes on Tuesday.

MR.RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we settle down in our seats in this sauna-like hall, I have observed that most Members are very uncomfortable as the debate proceeds in the afternoon. I wonder whether these air conditioners will be repaired, and if not, whether we could have a provision of more fans because it is becoming increasingly uncomfortable in the afternoons.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: One of the matters we dealt with in the Commission yesterday was the air conditioning of this Chamber and the Library. So we are taking care of this.  It may not come tomorrow, but arrangements have been made to improve the situation.

MRS.MEHANGYE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We do appreciate that there is an effort to provide some drinking water for the Members in the Lobbies. However, the glasses are so few that the servants have to keep washing and bringing them back. We know you may not provide enough but the current number is so small that it quite often an inconvenience. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We know that the size of Parliament has increased and you have drawn our attention to this issue. We shall direct that a remedy be found.

DISCUSSION OF THE COMMITTEE REPORT ON UCBL AS PRESENTED BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Government has consistently assured this House that it has no interest whatsoever in resolving UCBL in a non-transparent manner. It is unfortunate that there has been some suspicion from some quarters that UCBL was about to be resolved in a non-transparent manner. 

The Government has looked at the recommendations of the Committee on Finance and I take this opportunity to thank the Members of the Committee for the concern they have taken on this very important subject. We have considered the recommendations, we have taken into account the interests of all the stakeholders and I am happy to say that in order to put everybody’s mind to rest, the Government is prepared to comply with some of the recommendations as were made by the Committee. 

To that effect, the Committee was seeking for a resolution of this House on four important aspects: that the sale of UCBL should be stayed until Parliament finalises and adopts its report on the best modalities of selling the bank. Government wishes to say that it is not in a hurry, and in the interest of everybody concerned, it has agreed to stay the sale until the 30th of September 2001, within which time it is hoped that the Committee and Parliament will have finalised whatever considerations it intends to carry out regarding the bank.  

On Resolution number two, which is to the effect that “for avoidance of doubt that UCBL is now 100 per cent owned by Government of Uganda, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should lay on the Table the share certificates of all the 100 per cent shares of UCBL for  examination by Parliament”.  

I have the pleasure to lay on the Table the two share certificates; one for 51 per cent shares owned by Government and the second one for 49 per cent shares as was transferred by Westmont which makes it to a total of 100 per cent. (Applause). 

This one is Share Certificate No. 02 and this is to certify that –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: We shall examine them. You just put them there and then proceed.

MR.RUKUTANA: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. Well these are photocopies. The originals are in safe custody.  

THE SPEAKER: This is evidence. There is a law about certified copies. If they are certified copies, it is enough evidence.  We shall examine them and a report will be made. Let us not rush.

MR.RUKUTANA: Mr. Speaker, the suspicion was on whether the 49 per cent shares, which had been transferred to Westmont had been re-transferred to Government. I take the honour also to lay on the Table a copy of the Transfer Deed together with an authorised document from Notary Public testifying that Westmont duly transferred the 49 per cent shares to the Government of Uganda. I hope that satisfies the intended Resolution No.2. 

I now go to the intended Resolution No.3, which required that terms and conditions, benchmarks and bottom lines of the sale sent to the potential buyers of UCBL should be availed to this House. 

On this matter, I wish to state that there were nothing like terms and conditions, and benchmarks and bottom lines. There was an invitation to the prospective buyers. An invitation definitely cannot stipulate terms and conditions and bench marks. In the spirit of an amicable resolution of this matter, I call upon the Committee to accept to amend this requirement. We are ready to tender to the Committee that document upon which Bank of Uganda requested their prospective buyers to put in their bids.

The Committee had also recommended that the interests of the stakeholders and the strategic development role of UCBL in the national economy of this country should be paramount in the sale process. I wish to state that it is the commitment of Government that definitely in the resolution of UCBL, Government will ensure that the interest of the national economy and the strategic development role of UCBL shall be taken into account. That one goes without saying.

We are doing all this to assure each and everybody concerned that there is nothing underhand; that there is no intention whatsoever on the part of Government or anybody or any authority involved in the resolution of Bank of Uganda to do anything that will prejudice the interests of the nation and of the stakeholders. 

In the spirit of fair play; and in order to satisfy all the curiosity that had been raised; and considering the fact that there are so many other things that were not considered in this interim report, I call upon the Committee to go back and examine the matter thoroughly, taking into account the concessions we have made today. I urge the Committee to make a thorough study and come up with a comprehensive report which will be tabled before this House and which will be discussed so that we get to a logical conclusion of this matter which does not harm or hurt the interests of any person. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, when the Minister spoke about Resolution No.1, I am not sure whether he said that the bank would be sold at the end of September or whether the process would be continuing after September. It seems he said the bank would be sold on a certain date of September.  I want a clarification on that; whether it is sale or something else.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the point to you is that as of yesterday, there was a fear that you are going to open the bids by the end of this month. When you say 30th September, is that selling or opening the bids? It is not clear what you intend to do by 30th of September.

MR. MWESIGWA RUKUTANA:  Mr. Speaker, to be more specific, no action will be taken on the bids until after the 30th of September; and we hope that between now and the 30th of September, all the stakeholders and the Committee will have had time to review the whole scenario and ensure that everything is in a proper prospective.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I do understand the anxiety on the part of the Executive, to come up with an answer on our fears or to assure us that nothing will happen.  However, I assumed that this afternoon, we would continue deliberations on the report.  Now, the hon. Minister is trying to pre-empt further discussion of the report.  We have not even come up with a resolution.   How does he know it is our last position on those issues?

THE SPEAKER:  You very well know, hon. Member, that normally when a report of this kind is made, you expect a reaction from the Executive. A report was presented by the Committee and in that report, certain recommendations were made by way of resolutions which the Committee wanted to be passed by this House. What you have received today is a reaction of the Executive on the report.  The question of pre-empting or not pre-empting does not arise. If the resolutions were directed to the Government and Government accepted the recommendation without reservation, what is the purpose of a debate? If you have achieved what you wanted in one minute, why do you spend a week dealing with the same matter?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  When the Minister was responding to resolution No.2, I got worried!  We all recall the mysterious nature in which the Co-operative Bank was disposed of; many people are still querying the circumstances in which that bank got disposed of, I would like to get the assurance that the share certificates laid on the Table by hon. Minister, are certified copies.  If not, they are too artificial to be accommodatable.

THE SPEAKER: I think the matter in the report was that, you lay on the Table the documents so that the Committee examines and reports.  Now that it has been done, the Committee will get hold of these documents from Parliament, examine them and make an appropriate report; it will not be this House to examine.

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to know under which law Bank of Uganda is planning to dispose of this Bank; because from the information gathered, Bank of Uganda statutory instruments do not allow it to liquidate a bank which is solvent, and we have been made to understand that the bank is solvent and is making profits.  So, between now and September, how are they planning to use Bank of Uganda which has no mandate, if the laws do not allow it to dispose of this bank, and how are they going to handle such an illegal process?

THE SPEAKER: If you remember the report, it said we should have independent legal interpretation and advice, because this is a legal matter, and this House cannot deal with interpretation of the law. By the Constitution, the authority entrusted to give legal advice is the Attorney General.  So if the Attorney General is here, he should advise us what position to take. If he is not here, at an appropriate time, he should come and give us the legal advice.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There is a saying that; “once beaten twice shy”. The normal practice of this House has been that a report is presented, the House debates it and the Executive reacts.   What we have here, are comments of the Committee, the House has not even adopted them.   What if some of us wanted to add on, how would that be?   Are we now setting a precedent? (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I was going to put a question. What you received was a reaction of Government, because as far as the Committee is concerned, this is a Committee’s report.  The Committee made a report and normally when a report is made, be it on a Bill or what, you get a reaction from the Government.   If you think we need a debate, then we shall debate it; but if there is no need for the debate, because there has been a concession, then it ends there; but he has made the position known.   Now you take into account the report and the position given by Government and then decide.  

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker, I am a seeing a real recurrence of what happened last time, when hon. Manzi moved an amendment on the 14th of May 1997, and the debate just came up in October.  In the meantime the Committee was being invited to State House; regional groups were being invited to Rwakitura, and this is exactly what is happening. That is why some of us are really concerned that the proper procedure should be followed.

THE SPEAKER: What is the proper procedure?  The proper procedure is that Government should not make a contribution to the debate?  What is wrong for a Minister to stand and give contribution?    If you are not satisfied with it, it is up to you to decide what you want to do.   You can have a debate, but definitely, I cannot stop a Minister to make a contribution.   As to whether people are being called to Rwakitura, that is not my concern.  My concern is here. not outside the House.     

MRS. MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like some clarification, I am aware that what was presented here was an interim report and in light of the explanation the Minister has given, it actually raises a lot of issues particularly in respect to the share certificates.  It looks like the Committee needs some more time to complete their work and submit it to this House as a final report and then we shall subject it to debate.  Is it not prudent, that we proceed like that?  Thank you.
MR. KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The interim report of the Committee of this House is a report to Parliament.  The Minister had the opportunity to appear before this Committee, and this Committee addressed whatever Government said.  Even before we address ourselves to this interim report as Parliament, we are now being asked to have it shelved.  I beg to move that we go ahead and debate this interim report as it is.

THE SPEAKER: What is the motion?  When you are debating, you don’t just debate; you debate aiming at passing a motion. What will be the end of this debate?  Will you just say; we have debated a report?  I think you will have to debate and agree with the recommendation.  What the Minister has done, as far as the Government is concerned, it has no problem with the recommendation – that is what I understand.  Now, what is the debate?

MR. KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. Minister has laid on the Table two share certificates.  I have a copy of another share certificate No.02. I don’t know whether I can be allowed to lay this copy on the Table for the Committee to look at it.   This is a certificate for Westmont Land Asia, owning 49 per cent shares of UCB. I do not know if the Minister has another certificate, which replaces this one.   This hon. House must bear in mind that there is something that was exchanged for that certificate, and we must be informed about it.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you have the original certificate?

MR. KIKUNGWE: Mr. Speaker, you did say, there is a provision to hand in a copy.

THE SPEAKER: I am asking you, answer the question.

MR. KIKUNGWE: If there is need I will present it.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the original certificate?  I am just asking you that question.

MR. KIKUNGWE: Not right now!

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have some document?
MR. KIKUNGWE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Please, put it on the Table.

MR. KIKUNGWE: Mr. Speaker, it is on record that Westmont borrowed 14 million US dollars, from the then Greenland Bank, which they never paid.  Greenland Bank sued Westmont and this case was in court by the time Bank of Uganda took over Greenland Bank.  I am wondering what happened to the case after the take over!  

There is a team that negotiated with Westmont, and let me inform this House that this team at the expense of the tax-payer, promised heaven to Westmont not to open up any legal battle with them, and that they would forget about the 14 million US dollars.  Today, they would be paying something like 40 billion Uganda shillings, that is, 14 million dollars with interest.  But what is happening is that, Westmont has attained the status whereby Uganda Government cannot demand anything as an exchange.  

Westmont had to put a signature to transfer its shares to those who wanted to sell it, and the taxpayers had to lose around 40 billion shillings.  I want the hon. Minister to clarify on this important issue.   How did he get that share certificate for 49 per cent?  What exchanged hands?  Arbitration!  When the most important person at the center of all these things was not involved in the arbitration, this was Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu.  He was the trouble causer, and you have deliberately decided to leave this man out of everything you are doing.  Thank you very much.

MR. RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr. Speaker, what I laid on the Table was the share certificate in respect of 49 shares, which were bought by Westmont.  In addition, I laid on the Table a transfer deed of 49 shares from Westmont to the Government of Uganda, and this arose as follows:

As the current Speaker pointed out, there was arbitration between the Government of Uganda and Uganda Commercial Bank on one hand, and Westmont on the other hand.  In that arbitration, a ruling was made and I wish to take this occasion to read the ruling.  The ruling was to the effect that; “The respondents’ duly authorized officers shall execute a transfer form attached hereto and within a reasonable period such other documents, as Government of Uganda may reasonably require in order to transfer the shares to the Government of Uganda”.   

I laid on the Table two documents. One was a share certificate for 49 shares and the corresponding transfer of those 49 shares to the Government of Uganda. I also laid on the Table a notarised deed from the Notary Public who witnessed the transfer. So, in effect, the document which I have not seen, which the previous speaker laid on the Table, could have been a photocopy of the one I laid. But what he does not have is the transfer, which transferred the shares that were originally held by Westmont to the Government of Uganda.  

THE SPEAKER: Let me read what I have received here; maybe it will help. 
“Notarial Certificate. 
To all to whom these presents shall come.  

I, JOHN ANG SOON HO, Notary Public, duly authorised, admitted and sworn and practising at Suites 1401 & 1409 14th Floor Johor Tower Gereja, 80100 Johor Bahru, Malaysia, DO HEREBY CERTIFY and ATTEST that I was present on the 29th day of November 2000 and did see the attached Transfer For Share Stock (herein called “the said document”) duly sealed with the Common Seal of Techno Asia Holdings Bhd.(formerly known as Westmont Land (Asia) Berhad) hereinafter called “the Company”) and signed by LIM ONG KIM holder of Malaysian Identity Card No.600307-06-5271 (5863269) and WONK TUNG HING holder of Malaysian Identity Card No. 510726-01-5341 (4114072) both Directors of the Company and that the signatures of LIM ONG KIM and WONG TUNK HING subscribed my presence to the said document are of the proper handwritings of the said LIM ONG KIM and WONG TUNK HING.

AND I ALSO CERTIFY that the seal affixed to the said document is the Common Seal of the said Company and was so affixed in due form in accordance with the Articles of Association of the Company.”  

This is the Notary Public certifying that those people signed the transfer.

MR.OGENGA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister whether the original share certificates given to Westmont were returned to the Government of Uganda, and whether the copy that was laid on the Table was made from those original certificates returned to the Government of Uganda.  

DR.NKUUHE: I would like clarification from the Minister and also from the Committee, that the company we are dealing with, that is, Westmont, was a very complicated company and they were declared bankrupt in Malaysia, and a lot of the debtors went there to claim all sorts of things. I would like you to clarify to us whether that certificate, the date that this Notary Public notarised that document, whether it was before or after the Company was declared bankrupt.

MR.ETONU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The matter has been raised on the Floor, which I feel the Minister should clarify, otherwise it will give wrong signals to the public and the country at large. The hon. Member from Kyaddondo South, if I got him correctly, said some money exchanged hands at the time of signing the certificates. Can the Minister clarify that point so as to avoid misunderstanding?

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, for the next six months, Parliamentary Committees will be discussing the Budget. On top of that, there will be no plenary sessions. May I know from the Minister how he expects the report to be read by 30th September?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think the Minister can answer that. It is up to the Committee itself to adjust its schedule, if it feels it is necessary to deal with that report, but the Minister cannot answer for the committee. And the question of Parliament not sitting, I remember when I gave you the schedule of work, I said it may be necessary to interrupt when there is an urgent matter. We can always sit; there is no caveat that we cannot sit during the month of September when Committees are dealing with the Budget.

MS.SSENTONGO NABULYA: Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. I just want to get clarification from the previous speaker of Kyaddondo South in regard to the money that was exchanged in view of UCBL sale. We would like to know the amount of money involved in this respect. Thank you.

MR.SITENDA-SEBALU: Mr. Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify whether it is also possible to lay on the Table the deed list of all the bad debtors who messed up this ‘people’s bank’. There is a school of thought that insists that financially stable Ugandans are more willing to be involved in buying this bank. Mr. Speaker, I was doing some calculation -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are not dealing with banks, we are dealing with UCBL.

MR.SITENDA-SEBALU: I am talking about UCBL. Can I continue, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR.SITENDA-SEBALU: Mr. Speaker, I was doing some calculation yesterday. I was made to understand that Westmont bought UCBL at about Shs.30 billion. If I am allowed to champion this cause, I am in a position to get a financial engineer who can raise the core capital and this becomes a general consensus of all the people in Uganda to buy this bank. I have an idea. I was saying that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you seeking clarification? Are you contributing? Hon. Members, I think let the Minister answer the queries raised so that we debate and finish this matter.

MR.RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to confirm to the hon. Members that the originals were actually returned and what I have presented here are photocopies, which were made from the originals. Should the Committee feel they need to look at the originals, they will be availed.  

As for the bankruptcy or the problems with Westmont as a company, I wish also to confirm that by the time the transfers were effected, Westmont had legal capacity to sign those deeds it signed. Otherwise, if it did not have capacity, the arbitration award would not have ordered it to effect the transfers. 

As for the assertion that there was money supposed to have changed hands together with the transfer, I have the arbitration award here and I do not see any provision of money anywhere. All it says is that Westmont was ordered to transfer 49 per cent shares –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you read it for our information please.

MR.RUKUTANA: I take the honour, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members to lay it on the Table also- (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Read it.

MR.RUKUTANA:  Well, if I may be given permission to read it entirely. 

The Government of Uganda (“GOU”) and Uganda Commercial Bank Limited (“UCBL”) (hereinafter both referred to as “the Claimants”) and Techno Asia Holdings Bhd formerly known as Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd (hereinafter referred to as “the Respondent”) hereby agree as follows:

1.	The claims and the counterclaim in these arbitration proceedings shall be discontinued with no order as to costs.

2.	 The parties hereby agree and warrant that they have no further claims whatsoever against each other arising out of or in connection with the Respondent’s investment in/or management of UCBL and/or  any of the agreements executed in relation thereto.

3.	The Respondent’s duly authorised officers shall execute a transfer form in the form attached hereto and within a reasonable period such other documents as Government of Uganda may reasonably require in order to transfer the shares to the Government of Uganda. The Respondent shall immediately fax the executed transfer form to the offices of the Claimant’s solicitors and shall deliver as soon as reasonably possible the original transfer to those solicitors. The cost of and incidental to the transfer save for the costs of delivery of the original transfer form shall be borne by the Government of Uganda. 

4.	The Claimants hereby permit the Respondent and its duly appointed representatives to use the documents and statements produced in the arbitration for the purpose of any proceedings in any jurisdiction arising out of or connected with the Respondent’s investment in and/or the management of UCBL including but not limited to the proceedings commenced by Greenland Bank Limited in Uganda being suit No. 309 of 1999.

5.	The Claimants shall forthwith consent to the setting aside of the Default Judgement entered in their favour in the High Court of Uganda in civil suit No. 476 of 1999 and to the withdrawal of the Respondent’s appeal pending in that suit and to immediately withdraw the suit on the terms that each party shall bear its own costs of the proceedings.  

6.	All other proceedings commenced by the Claimants or either of them in Uganda (including, in particular, civil suit number 19 of 1999) or any other jurisdiction against the Respondent shall be discontinued forthwith with no orders as to costs.

7.	The parties agree that any dispute arising out of or in connection with this agreement shall be referred to Mr. Stewart Boyd QC as an arbitrator, failing which a single arbitrator appointed by the International Court of Arbitration, and such arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with ICC rules.  

8.	This agreement shall be governed by the laws of England.

 The respective party affixed their signatures and that is all. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the clarifications have been made. We heard the interim report and we have received the reaction of Government to the report. If you want to make a contribution make it and then we see how we proceed.

MR.WANDERA MARTIN (Workers' Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Samia tribe of Eastern Uganda is a small tribe but has one big saying, and I would like to start my contribution on the motion with that saying. It goes thus “Yi njuha yalumaho nabona embakala aduuma”, meaning that ‘He who has ever been bitten by a snake will skip even at the mere sight of a lizard’.  

Since the Government started pursuing the policy of privatisation and divestiture, the people of Uganda have been bitten by a number of snakes and one such snake was the sale of UCBL. Fortunately, the Ugandans were bitten but somehow managed to survive because Westmont went away. So, when we tell Government that the people of Uganda must be listened to before another sale is made, I think Government should take us very, very, seriously. 

In the Minister’s contribution, he said that the sale will be stayed up to the 30th of September, and beyond that it can proceed. Ugandans are not asking Government to stay the sale on the basis of time. There are some critical issues that must be addressed before the sale proceeds. I, therefore, wonder why the Government should stay the sale basing on time. We are saying there are serious issues. For example, as a Workers’ Representative, there are serious issues touching on workers and I am not sure that within the 30 days that are being given those issues will be resolved.

The Government has insisted that the bank must be sold off because Ugandans have failed to manage this bank.  Yesterday I had a privilege to read a statement from the National Union of Clerical, Commercial and Technical Employees, the Union that represents the workers who work in the banks and it therefore articulated the voice of the bank workers. They are saying this bank is in a sound condition, it can be managed well and this country has been privileged to have good managers. The problem, according to these workers, is political interference from the Government. Unless the top politicians in this country are saying that they are not ready to stop interfering in this bank, then we should continue to sell it without listening to the people of Uganda. 

That document serialises a number of former Managing Directors of this Bank.  One of such people is Sir Richard Kaijuka, he was Managing Director, he left UCB, went into politics, became a Member of Parliament and a Committee of this House approved him as a Minister.  Now, one wonders! If someone was a ministerial material, can he really fail to manage a Bank?  And right now, he is working with the World Bank, which World Bank is telling us that we don’t have Managers.  

Another person who right now is sitting on the Front Bench is hon. Kajura Muganwa; at one time he was in the top management of this Bank.  The Appointment Committee of this house approved him as Minister; I don’t think the Committee can approve an incompetent person.  So, I want to submit that Ugandans want to manage the bank.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, the conclusion of this report is the motion, and it says: 
“I seek the indulgence of this House to support the report and to adopt the resolution therein”.  

So, the reason why I came in is to guide you so that when you are contributing, you contribute on the motion as tabled or you oppose it or you support it or you amend it.

MR. WANDERA MARTIN:  Most obliged by your guidance, Mr. Speaker, but I was just humbly preparing a premise for the same direction.  The point I am trying to make is that, this House must resolve that the sale of UCB should be stayed until this Parliament on behalf of the people of Uganda, finalises and adopts the best modalities of selling it; and I don’t think the period between now and 30th September is sufficient.  So, with that, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion.

MRS. BYAMUKA DORA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to seek guidance. First and foremost, we have an agenda; it does not mention that we will debate on this issue.  It talks about a report, but the report was not circulated to us.  The report I am talking about is from the hon. Minister of State, so I find it very difficult to debate constructively on this issue.  

My other point is that there is a court case going on.  Does it have any impact on what we are going to discuss?  We also have an interim report from the National Economy Committee.  If it is an interim report, how can we discuss it?  What if it comes up with new recommendations?  

 Finally, I feel that for purposes of having an effective discussion, we need to be given some more time, because I personally came prepared to contribute on the budget and not to this particular issue.  I seek your guidance, hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think on Tuesday on our Order Paper, there was an item for presentation of the interim report on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the chairman duly presented it, but because some Members didn’t have copies, we adjourned to enable Members have copies and internalise the report, so that they can effectively debate on the matter.  Yesterday, because of the demise of our colleague, we were not able to transact business in the normal way.  Therefore it is only today that we have been able to resume business. 
It is true, as you have said, that this is an interim report and there will be a final report, but the main purpose of presenting this report as stated by the chairperson and other Members of the Committee, was that the Committee wanted more time to make a final report and to look at other documents.  So in order not to pre-empt what could come out of the final report, the Committee wanted certain resolutions, that is, not to take action on the sale of the bank until the Committee is through with its report.  So, these are the resolutions, and therefore the debate is aimed at either passing those resolutions or refusing them. 

 When we started, the Minister dealt with resolution number one, but for him, he gave a date, whereas the report did not.  It only said we want time - it could take one week; it could take two weeks; it could take a month.   So, I think that is it, whether you accept the Minister’s date or leave it open, that is up to you to decide.  

As for sale, the Committee’s report was to the effect that in principle they support the sale, but they want transparency.  So, if you are to debate, you should debate in line with the recommendation outlined on page 11.  But your case is that you have not seen the report and therefore you are not in position to contribute.  I don’t know how I can really assist you on this, I can only say that let a report be availed to you and see how best you can use it.

MRS. KAWOYA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now that you have guided us, some Members have not yet received the report.  I would request that this report be availed to us, so that we can pronounce on these recommendations.

MR. ANANG ODUR:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank hon. Ephraim Kamuntu and his team for a job well done.  We have heard his report and I think we are contented with the content. 

The people of Kwania would like me to put on record and inform this Parliament that UCB is a people’s bank; and Government of Uganda being democratically elected by the people, it should listen to the representatives of the people’s views on this matter.  And therefore, I rise to support the recommendations and resolutions, which are contained in the Report referred to.

First of all, this bank is the only indigenous bank in this country with branches all over the country. The President is saying, we need to modernize agriculture.  My understanding is that, we must have a monetary economy.  UCBL has been able to inculcate the culture of saving with the bank.  If we now decide to sell this bank as foreigners have told us, I am sure all upcountry branches will be closed and that is not a good thing for the people. We know that all these other banks are foreign owned.  

My belief is, if we follow the recommendations and resolutions of the Interim Report, and Ugandans own 51 percent of UCBL, it will enable us make an input in the policies of this bank; for example, we shall decide on the level of interest rates to be charged on money borrowed.  We know that most of the foreign banks in Uganda have very exorbitant rates; and this has made it very difficult for our people to borrow money for development.  I think this is true. As I speak now, there are lending banks run by private people.  In fact there are rumours that some very senior officers in Government are involved.  I was even told a Minister set up a lending bank, which lends money at the rate of 30 percent per month; if you borrow two million shillings and you are paying compound interest of 30 percent per month - I have done a calculation; if you stay with that money for a period of 24 months, you need to pay back over one million shillings. No wonder, many people in Kampala and other towns have lost their valuable properties to these moneylenders.  I think this can be avoided if we had a bank of our own where our voices can be heard.  I therefore, feel that it is in the interest of Ugandans and the Government of Uganda, that this bank -(Mr Tim Lwanga rose_)

MR. TIM LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Member for giving way. The information I want to give to the hon. Member is that interest rates are not based on who owns the Bank; it is based on the economic activities and the level of efficiency of the banks, because it is the main source of income for the Bank.  Thank you very much.

MR. KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that much as interest rates are not determined by the ownership of the bank, the interest rates contribute the biggest portion to the profits of the bank; and I would like to tell you that UCB made a profit of 29.4 billion out of it - that is according to their audit report.  So, assuming it is a people’s owned bank, there is a lot that can be done to determine the interest rates.

THE SPEAKER:  I can see opinions being turned into information.

MR. ANANG ODUR: Thank you, hon. Minister for that information.  But I would like to inform you that any bank that is lending out money makes profits like our banks here do; they can decide to lower or increase the interest rates.  My point here is, if Ugandans own UCBL and it is making money, we as the owners of the bank can decide to lower the interest rate, so that people borrow from the bank.  That is my point.

Government of Uganda should be able to wait until this Parliament disposes of this matter amicably. They should respect the opinions of our people and be responsive to their suffering. If they do so, that will be very good; if they don’t, we shall be saying this is a democratic Government that doesn’t listen. l don’t think the President would like us to come to that conclusion.  Thank you very much.

DR. WILBERFORCE NABWISO  (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support this motion, but with some observations.  I note that the key stakeholders in UCB have been defined, but it is extremely important to note that the major stakeholders are the peasants.  And if we don’t have a system that enables them to save money and borrow from the banks, we shall be killing the very efforts that they are supposed to engage in.  

I remember that in 1998, I think there was a moratorium of banks in Uganda;  the World Bank forced Uganda Government to prevent creation of more banks in the country.  I remember there was some talk about creating an agricultural bank, which dream has not been realized.  If moratorium is still in operation, it means that we cannot create more banks in this country.  The argument was that Uganda was over banked, and most of these banks were operating in urban centers.  So the question remains, what system of banking is to be promoted in rural areas?  
This now brings me to my submission that, it may be necessary to look at the micro-finance institutions in this country and streamline their operations; because as of now, if you take Pride Africa, Thinker, Women Trust, and other micro-finances institutions, which have been created in recent years, against those operating in urban areas, some of them are charging very high interests. The poor women, especially who borrow money for say, 16 weeks and they have to pay interest starting with a short grace period, they are also suffering as a result of micro-finance institutions.  It is therefore my submission that if UCBL is sold, as it appears that it will be sold or privatized, we must put in place a system that will enable peasants have access to money from banks.  It may be useful that we look at the Grumman bank experience in Bangladesh, and see how it is assisting the poor. It seems the whole banking system here tends to favour the rich people or the middle class and not the poor.  So we must create a system that addresses the interest of the poor.

The new Members of Parliament will remember that when we came here, we had to borrow money to survive, and I don’t want to disclose the system we used, but the interest was very high.  So with these private lenders, you can see that there is a problem in the country; if private lenders can also make us pay through the nose, what about the ordinary peasants in Uganda?  I recently read a book called “Listening or Learning from the poor” - the poor are the peasants.  What are they saying about having no bank in their areas if UCBL ceases its operation?  What hope is there for them?  We should address these questions.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. JANE ALISEMERA  (Women Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like also to support the resolutions made by the Committee on Finance.  I talk on behalf of the Bundigibugyo people that UCBL has been a bank of the people.  If only I can give you one example of how the people of Bundibugyo have been suffering, especially the teachers who – some of the business community in the Bundibugyo have been lending money, but paying 50 percent of their salary. You can imagine how the business people have been stripping these people, and I want to inform Members of Parliament that Bundibugyo is under privileged, and hard to reach.  If small NGOs can refuse to go to Bundibugyo, how about these bankers who are coming in the name of private companies?  So, I would like to request Members to hold on the sell of UCBL, until everything has been resolved for the interest of the people of this country and Bundibugyo in particular.

MR. OTTO   (Arua Central, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had wanted to find out from you on procedural matters, whether a resolution has an impact on the law, because I remember we debated about Karamoja-Katakwi, and I don’t know if anything entered the books of records that we had a law in place?  Are we not doing the same thing, because I imagine we are fighting a diplomatic time bomb; we are fighting the element of time. When we debate this resolution of a committee, will it have a direct impact on the law that would save us from the numbers of days left to lose UCBL?  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, they say intervention on UCBL is based on insolvency, has it been proved to Parliament beyond reasonable doubt that the question at hand is now insolvency and not managerial problems?  Thank you.

MRS. MARGARET ZZIWA (Women Representative, Kampala Central):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee for the report, and add my voice that I strongly support the resolutions of the Committee.  I want to state my disappointment with Government.  I think it is time Government apologizes to the people of Uganda.  

It is imperative that we talk about this historical perspective of the sale of UCBL. In the sixth Parliament, when Government decided to move Uganda Commercial Bank from the 2nd Schedule to the 4th Schedule of the PERD Statute, many of us asked whether it was really out of Government conviction or it was donor driven. At times we also get disappointed when we don’t get genuine answers.  The way it was being pushed, it was obvious that it was donor pushed, and you remember the saga, Mr. Speaker; at that time you were a Backbencher, Members changed positions but history proved right those who remained on our side. 

Among the many questions we asked, were the truthfulness and the credibility of Westmont. At that time many sweet statements were made on this Floor; as time went by, you saw what happened.  They were telling us that it is the economy in the Far East that had become less active.  I don’t know why when the deal was being mooted they, didn’t imagine putting into account all these other conditions, which are always paramount in the economies of institutions.

I cannot leave this Floor without expressing my disappointment, since I did not have the opportunity to debate on the Budget.  My disappointment is on the fact that our Budget is donor funded to the tune of 53 percent; it is very worrying and disturbing.

His Excellency the President made a statement that our Minister of Finance is a Minister of begging this perturbed me!  It was very disturbing.  That notwithstanding, we are seeing this very situation of selling UCBL not being strategic in as far as our economy is concerned. That time when we were having arguments, we were told that banking is not a strategic sector and that was the reason why government was insisting that it should pull out.   Anyhow, still, time has told us that after messing the banking sector, you can now see that the song of money lending is endless in every quarter.  I think –(Dr Kisamba Mugerwa rose_)

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you for giving way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that at one time, we couldn’t fund anything in Uganda; and time came when almost 90 per cent of the Development Budget was donor-funded.  Now you are talking about 53 per cent! We must congratulate ourselves for two reasons; we can attract donors and we have managed to finance our Recurrent Budget. So you cannot reduce the magnitude of what the donors are contributing towards the Development Budget.  Thank you.

MRS. ZZIWA:  I would appreciate it if we were not fifteen years in government.  I think this is the time when government should come out to correct what went wrong. I think it is imperative that government listens to all these cries.  Every Member of Parliament who has come on this floor - and also the public - has come out to say, “please don’t sell UCB”.  The reason is very obvious.  I don’t know why government has kept quiet.  

The other thing I am finding very disturbing from the same quarters is the threat that UCB is going to be liquidated.  I find that very disturbing.  I don’t think it will be good.  I think that is blackmail on the part of the nationals. We have always been regarded or referred to as lukewarm economists.  Some of our theories should be respected.  

I want to conclude by saying that today, the resolutions offered by the Committee are going to act as an immediate stopgap.  Government should look at it objectively. And of course, we know very well that Bank of Uganda entered UCB on the pretext that it was insolvent, and you know very well, at least as per the Balance Sheet of December 2000, that Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd is solvent.  We want to say that as a stopgap, let Bank of Uganda pull out systematically and have an arrangement of contract management.  

The hon. Minister has assured us that this Bank is 100 per cent Uganda owned; let us look at the options that are better than what the government is saying.  As some members have mentioned, we should put these bank shares on the stock market.

I want to end by supporting the resolution and say that if government blackmails us by liquidating this bank, we shall also blackmail the government by going on the streets.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality):  Mr. Speaker, I would like first of all, to thank very much the Committee for giving us a well articulated, internalised, researched and balanced report. I would like to say this for the people of Moroto Municipality and Karamoja who are the most disadvantaged, but UCB still serves them.

According to the report, it reveals that UCB can be administered. It can be locally administered; it can be useful for the people of Uganda. Secondly, the report also reveals that there are Ugandans who are faithful and can manage this bank for the benefit of the people of Uganda.  

Also in this report, the Committee reveals that the Bank is viable to the people of Uganda because it has made profits; it is recorded there in billions. Where did this profit come from? It was from the people of Uganda! The bank is the people’s bank: From East to West, from North to South, it is the people’s Bank. If you put it to the foreign investors - if our economic policy overrides the people’s interest, then I do not know where we shall put the poor. So, the Executive should match the sale of the UCBL with the opinion of the people of Uganda. What do the people of Uganda have to say about the sale of UCBL? We should also see that when we take decisions, they reflect the views of the people of Uganda.  

The report has given us all the options that we can adopt, but we should be given time to scrutinise them so that this august House comes up with a rational decision which benefits the people of Uganda.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion moved by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

1. The Revised Revenue and EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES for the Fiscal Year 2000/2001.

2. the Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 2001/2002 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.

(Debate continued)

MR.WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I wish to congratulate the Minister of Finance for his presentation to the House regarding the budgetary proposals.

In his enthusiasm to raise revenue for the Government, the Minister of Finance appears to have forgotten the history of his Ministry, particularly in proposals to tax certain sub-sectors of the economy. It will be recalled that at one time, hon. Mayanja Nkangi also tried it. He imposed a lot of taxes on beer, soft drinks and on tobacco, and the effect was soon felt and it became clear that consumption of these goods is not infinitely elastic. What happened then appears to be happening now.

Although the Minister acknowledged that there was competition with the locally produced tobacco arising out of smuggling, he still found it necessary to impose further taxes on tobacco. The people I represent, particularly residents of Njeru, Mbiko, and Nakibizi work in Jinja. And as we speak today, B.A.T is in the process of laying off more than 100 persons. This is arising out of the reduced sales of tobacco.

Indeed, almost a similar position is obtaining with respect to beer. Nile Breweries, which is one of the biggest taxpayers, is recording a loss this time because the sales have gone down. This would mean, therefore, that the revenues the Minister of Finance had hoped to raise from such giants like B.A.T. and Nile Breweries will not be realised. By the time the Ministry realises to revise the duty downwards, we shall have already lost revenue that would have been realised through affordable duties, and therefore, making it easy for people to continue consuming at the same level as they were before the increase in the taxes.

There is the issue of power tariffs, which has been talked about. As the people who are taking care of the generation dam, we felt embarrassed that we are now being forced to return to tadobas instead of paying for power, which has become very expensive. Indeed, small manufacturers are now faced with the option of whether to close down or to pass on the high tariffs to the consumers. The power in the neighbourhood being low, ultimately they will have to run out of business. 

This is not only affecting the people of my constituency. I am aware that millers in kisenyi have threatened to put their tools down; I am aware that three milk cooling plants in Mbarara have actually closed down; and I am also aware that hon. Lukyamuzi has been in touch with people who were demonstrating against the high power tariffs. 

This is a matter of great concern to the people of my constituency. We feel that the Government should review the tariffs rather than putting blame on the power authority.  The power authority is a creation of the Executive, and I do not subscribe to the view that an authority once created ceases to be the responsibility of the Executive. I think the Minister responsible, who has the policy purview of that authority should accept responsibility and give a more plausible explanation to the people of this country. 

I wish to commend Government on the UPE policy, which has revolutionised education in this country. However, it is regrettable that in some parts of this country, some children do not yet have access to UPE, for example, children of people working in the sugarcane and tea estates. Their labour camps are usually very isolated and far away from the rest of the community. Young children cannot walk miles to the areas where the schools are. Therefore, I plead that the Ministry of Education makes special provision for the children of these workers so that they are not condemned to the same plight of their parents who fend for a living under conditions that are not of their own choice.  

I cannot end without bringing to the notice of Government the problem of unemployment, particularly among the youth.  My constituency, Nakibizi, Mbikko is full of unemployed youth. The level of unemployment can be appreciated when you go to the area and see for yourself. There is a water project that has come to Njeru. When the project was announced to the public, the youth who are now selling water to the public wondered what they would do next. That is the level of hopelessness and unemployment that is pertaining. I think the expectations that the private sector would create more jobs should be re-evaluated so that we get an explanation as to what led to the failure to realise the projected new employment. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion with a few comments. I would like to register my appreciation to the Government for its increased efforts towards the growth of GDP, especially through the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, Poverty Eradication Action Plan and the Medium Term Competitive Strategy.  As we look at this, the Government should put into consideration the prerequisites for modernising agriculture as having more to do with road network, especially in the rural areas and also sensitising people. 

The coffee wilt disease affected my constituency and many trees were destroyed. The five to twenty seedlings cannot replace the coffee trees and shambas that were destroyed, much as more is still to be done.  Government should sensitise the people on the current information about clonal coffee because I understand there are some that are not affected by the coffee wilt disease. So, much should be done about that.  

If I can quote the Minister on page 31 concerning the mobile phone airtime, he said; ‘As a revenue enhancing measure, I am proposing to introduce a 10 per cent excise duty on cellular air time, sales of which have been growing very rapidly’. My concern is ‘sales of which have been growing very rapidly’. By the time the hon. Minister proposed a 10 per cent excise duty on cellular airtime, sales were very promising. As I talk now, the sales of airtime have dropped tremendously. Government’s policy is to foster development and investment but this 10 per cent excise duty deters investment in this area.  

I thank the Government for its effort to reduce the illiteracy levels in this country, more so to do with UPE.    I am reliably informed that much more is still to be done because quite many areas still lack such facilities.  

Concerning higher institutions of learning, it is very good that the Government sponsored students increased from 2000 to 4000, but Government should this time avail these funds to these institutions so that we do not repeat what happened last academic year. Concerning the private students, they pay a lot of fees for courses like BBA or LLB yet we want to get educated. So this should also be looked into.  

I will now turn to the electoral process. The Minister said on page 3 that the overall performance of the non-wage component is due to the supplementary expenditure in key areas of the public administration sector, particularly the election process. His Excellency the President during his address to the nation said that the Electoral Commission faced logistical problems. The other day, I heard an hon. Member here actually misleading this House that the Electoral Commission does not have a central data system.  

The Electoral Commission has done much, but its failures have actually resulted from many stakeholders, if I can mention the presentation of Bills to this House and positively assenting to it and also the cut budgets. For instance during the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections, quite little was done concerning the civic education. This was due to the fact that this House passed hardly 50 per cent of their budget. I call upon Members to join the Electoral Commission, and may be the local community and local leaders, to come out this time round and support their endeavor to streamline the Register.  We have found that if this register is streamlined, the malpractice that has been going on will be stopped.  So Members, as you move down to your constituencies, you should mobilize your people or your constituencies so that they can positively respond towards this noble cause.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Now Members, don’t you really think we have exhaustively dealt with this general debate?  We are going to committees to consider it in detail. Today my intention was that we wind up all that we have, and there is a motion I have seen on Order Paper about the state of Kampala City.  I think somebody has brought a motion, which we should also deal with before we retire to our respective committees.  Don’t you think that really we should end this debate?  Should I put the question?

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Speaker, whereas we appreciate that we have the opportunity to hold minor general debates and detailed debates in committees, the debate here is touching on general principles and policies.  We are contributing towards policy development and formulation, and I would imagine that Members should be given opportunity, not only to point out the omissions concerning areas in their constituencies, but also to be able to point out the omissions on the aspects of general policies for development.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I have heard a lot of repetitions coming up, and we have had this debate for the last six days. On the list, I have a Member for Pallisa; I have Member for Yumbe, Member for Moroto and I have Mulengani.  Don’t you think we should deal with the Kampala motion? Is it not important?  I need your assistance here.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I sat here throughout the debate on the Budget, and I have observed that many people have had ample opportunity to contribute to this debate, especially the new Members.   They have been able to make their maiden speeches. And in view of the fact that next week there is a workshop, which means that we cannot proceed with this debate, and if there is some other business as you have mentioned, it looks like this is the best time to ask the Minister to wind up so that we proceed with some other business.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  I think that is the consensus.  Hon. Minister, do you have any comments to make on the general debate? If you don’t, I will put the question.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr. Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, all I wish to say is that we have captured all the points that have been raised about the Budget.  We wish to take this opportunity to thank the hon. Members for the concern and the due attention they have given to the debate, and I wish to state that all your recommendations, concerns and all that we have observed would be taken into account.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  I understand the Minister of State for Internal Affairs has a statement to make in view of what was raised a few days ago.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The last time I stood here, I had been requested to answer to the House and to the people of this nation about the whereabouts of Col. Kizza Besigye, and I promised that since I didn’t have any information at that moment, I would try to get the information and get back to this House. It is on that basis that I am standing here.  

Col. Kizza Besigye was among the Presidential candidates during the March 2001 Presidential elections.  The Police provided guards, both for his personal security and for other presidential candidates. Retired Col. Dr. Kizza Besigye lost the election, and hence ceased to be entitled to the police guards.  But on his own, he requested Government for protection. Police guards were maintained at his residence in Luzira.  

Information about the alleged disappearance of the retired Colonel was published in The Monitor Newspaper on Tuesday 21st August 2001.  The information caused concern, both in Government and in public circles, in view of the retired Colonel’s status in society.  A team of Police detectives moved to the residence of the retired Colonel, who is also the husband of hon. Winnie Byanyima, Member of Parliament Mbarara Municipality early in the morning of Tuesday 21st August 2001.  The Police team found hon. Winnie Byanyima at the residence and she allowed one officer to conduct a search of the house.  The search yielded no fruits as the retire Colonel was not found within the residence and its surroundings.  

The following persons were interviewed by the Police: hon. Winnie Byanyima, wife to Col. Kizza Besigye; Gimono Lydia, the house keeper; Sabiiti Jonathan, the shamba-boy and police constable Tugumenawe, the Police guard on duty at that time.  

Preliminary inquiries have so far established the following: According to the housekeeper - that is Gimono Lydia - Dr. Besigye last ate supper at 8.00 p.m. on Friday 17th of August, when hon. Winnie Byanyima, his wife, was not in the house.  Later in the night at about 11.00 p.m. hon. Byanyima Winnie returned home, and after her supper she went to the bedroom.  

The housekeeper further revealed that in the early hours of Saturday, 18th August, at around 5.00 a.m., hon. Byanyima, wife to the alleged missing Kiiza Besigye, woke the housekeeper and told her that she was leaving for Mbarara.  She went with one Margaret, a babysitter and the baby.  As usual, the housekeeper who knew that Colonel Besigye was in bed, prepared breakfast and put it on the dining table.  The housekeeper indicated that when lunch was ready, she went to invite Dr. Kiiza Besigye for lunch only to find that the Doctor was actually not in the room and had in fact not even eaten the breakfast, which she had set at the table. Gimono Lydia, the housekeeper then kept the facts to herself and waited for hon. Byanyima to return before informing anybody, including the guards who were at the premises.  

According to the guards, whenever visitors came and they informed this housekeeper, as is the routine, she only told them that the Doctor was sick in bed and never wanted to see any visitor.  

On Sunday the 19th, two sisters of hon. Byanyima - and these are Edith and Martha - visited the home and asked Gimono Lydia the whereabouts of Colonel Besigye and hon. Byanyima.  She informed them that hon. Byanyima had gone to Mbarara and that she did not know the whereabouts of Dr. Besigye.  

On Monday the 20th of August 2001 at night, hon. Byanyima returned and Lydia informed her about Dr. Besigye’s absence.  Lydia was then informed by hon. Byanyima that she did not find Dr. Besigye in the house on the Friday night of 17th August 2001.  According to hon. Winnie Byanyima, on Friday 17th of August, she went out with some friends leaving Dr. Besigye in the house.  When she returned, she did not find her husband at home.  The next day, Saturday 18th August, she left for Mbarara.  

In the statement that hon. Byanyima made to the Police, she stated that some time that morning, the Colonel rang her and told her that he had decided to stay away from home to watch the situation and that he was in Kampala and that he would keep in touch.  Hon. Byanyima decided to inform Monsignor Barugahare, her Parish priest and some friends, about Besigye’s situation.  Hon. Byanyima claims that she decided to wait until she returned to Kampala and establish whether her husband was not at home before she could report to the Police, and that she wanted to report to the Inspector General of Police only.  

Hon. Byanyima traveled back to Kampala on Monday, 20th August 2001. She contends that before she arrived in Kampala, the Press - and that is The Monitor - inquired from her for the whereabouts of her husband. It should be noted that hon. Byanyima did not report to the Inspector General of Police or any Police Station until she was contacted at her home on the Tuesday, 21st of August 2001.  

Sabiiti Jonathan, the shamba-boy who buys newspapers for Dr. Besigye, indicated that on Sunday at about 8.00 p.m. he was sent to buy the day’s papers, Sunday Vision and Sunday Monitor and it was Lydia who gave him the money as usual.  The shamba-boy, therefore, believed that his Master, that is Colonel Kiiza Besigye, was at home.    

The guard on duty that day, Constable Tugumenawe indicated that on Sunday, 19th August, a retired Captain Francis - and we are yet to find the other name - came to the residence with five other persons.  When the police guard came to the house to inform the housekeeper that visitors for Col. Besigye were outside, Edith Byanyima, hon. Byanyima’s sister who was already inside the house came out and after some conversation with the said retired Captain Francis, went into the house, came out with a cheque which she handed to Captain Francis who then left with his five people.  

It is important to note that the residence referred to here has a large compound with an extension outside the fence behind the main building.  There is a footpath that runs from the behind part of the residence to the outside extension.  

Police has found it strange that a husband can go missing and the wife doesn’t bother to report to any authority, more especially the Police.  Hon. Winnie Byanyima left for Mbarara well knowing, as I have already mentioned, that her husband was not at home according to her statement.  But she didn’t bother to find out where he was, and when she allegedly received a telephone call from Besigye that morning, she decided to inform only the priest and a few friends.  When hon. Byanyima returned home in the night of Monday, 20th August, she did not return with a babysitter and the baby.  She instead returned with her sister and sister-in-law with whom they sat and chatted until the early hours of the morning of Tuesday, 21st August.  

In conclusion, it should be noted that Police does not take interest in people’s whereabouts as long as no criminal complaint or complaints have been registered.  The Retired Colonel is, therefore, free to be anywhere he wishes to be.  But now that he has allegedly gone missing, the general inquiry being pursued by the Police shall continue, and any person with useful information concerning his whereabouts is encouraged to pass it over to the Police.  Police may have to consolidate inquiries to verify the truthfulness of the information so far given to the Police.  

I wish to assure all peace-loving Ugandans that the State is not involved in the alleged disappearance of Colonel Kiiza Besigye.  It is on this basis that we have come out to give this statement, so that people don’t continue to be misled.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Clarification should be restricted to the statement made.

MR. KALULE SSENGO: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs has pointed out that Government has no knowledge as to where Colonel Kiiza Besigye is.  I was reading in today’s papers that the Colonel might be in South Africa.  I wanted the hon. Minister to clarify whether Government has taken steps to follow up this information that has come up in today’s papers.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to get a clarification from the Minister, because she said that Government would not be interested in the whereabouts of anybody so long as there is no complaint registered at the Police. Assuming Government discovers that Colonel Kiiza Besigye is within the country, taking a rest somewhere or outside the country, taking his own time there, what would Government do in that respect?

MR.AACHILLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister has already stated that the Police is not interested in the whereabouts of Dr. Kiiza Besigye. Meanwhile today’s newspapers reported that the escape of the retired Colonel was prompted by the fact that there was an impending arrest a day before the SMART meeting. Can the Minister clarify that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, the question is that was there a pending arrest of Col. Besigye as reported in the newspapers.

MR.AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With due respect to the hon. Minister, these days I intend to take Government statements on matters of security with a pinch of salt, and I have reasons to say so. All along my former colleague in the presidential race had been covered by CMI every minute while he was in this country. I do not recall at any given period when the Ministry of Internal Affairs covered my former Colleague. That is why I am saying, I have reasons to disbelieve what the hon. Minister is telling unless it is hearsay. 

The hon. Minister through the Intelligence or special branch, whatever arm of security, must have known  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you very well know - In fact, you are the one who put this question last time and you very well know that this is a statement under rule 37. Do you have an elucidatory question you want to put to the Minister?

MR.AWORI: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I was building my case; it was a preamble. For me to go to the conclusion without building the case, the hon. Minister might miss the gist of my question and concern. I am only asking the hon. Minister, ‘have you been liasing with the CMI?’ We have reason to believe that there is a gap in operations between these two arms of the state concerning our security both individual and national. We are also in the process of investigating that probably there were two or more vehicles whose number-plates keep changing and yet are within the parameters of CMI. This is still an allegation and by the end of the week, we would like to challenge the statements of the Minister on the Floor. 

All I am saying is that the Government is filibustering our request to know the whereabouts of our colleague.  

I would like to put to the hon. Minister, they have good working relations with all the neighbouring countries, by now –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, the rule is very clear that if you have a question relating to the statement made, make it instead of making a contribution. Your question was that, ‘have you been liasing with CMI?’ I think that is the question.

MR.AWORI: Not only that, but her statement is inaccurate.
MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I have two elucidatory questions to put to the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs. The first one is, the Minister has told the House that the Government is not interested in matters of Kiiza Besigye unless there is a complaint formerly launched to the State, namely, to the Police. Would the Minister clarify if the family or those who are next of kin to Kiiza Besigye have not launched a formal complaint, and therefore, presumption of a missing person? 

If the other two things could have possibly happened, namely, that he has gone into hiding by his free will, and secondly, that he has fled into exile. If Kiiza Besigye, wherever he is now, were to notify Uganda and the world that he is safely hiding somewhere or he has fled into exile and comes out publicly in a press conference, would the state still be interested to follow him?

Following these issues which have caused Kiiza Besigye to be restricted in a way, he wanted to go out of the country, he was stopped at the Airport by none other than the Military Intelligence twice. He wanted to go to his home area through Mbarara and even visit his in-laws, but he was stopped. It is clear that Kiiza Besigye was a restricted person. Defacto it may not be de jure legally but it was defacto; he was a restricted person. 

Therefore, could the Minister clarify to us because a person who contested presidential election is not anyone to just to brush aside. Security is a concern to people because of the issues, which preceded and followed immediately after the election. His going out of the country was stopped, and by none other than an institution called Military Intelligence, which should be stopping military people. Could the Minister clarify to this House that because of those things which happened to Kiiza Besigye, the State therefore, was interested to harm him and therefore he had a right to flee.

MS.OKOT SANTA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to get a clarification from the Minister. Did the Colonel have his own bodyguards or he was given? If not, what was the distance given to the Police who were at his residence or were the Police only to keep the gate and not the human beings inside? Because this has really shown a weakness in the security personnel, because how could this person have escaped without passing through the gate, and even if he passed over the wall, this has shown that they were doing nothing; they were only keeping the gates.  Thank you very much.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, according to the way the Minister explained the circumstances of the apparent disappearance of the retired Colonel Kiiza Besigye, nobody made a report to the Police, not even his wife. What caused the Police to go and search the house of Col. Kiiza Besigye? Thank you.

MRS.MASIKO KOMUHANGI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. As a representative of the people of Rukungiri, we have a big concern about our son. It is a concern because we are not sure of his whereabouts. One of the things that we have observed, and what I have gathered from the speech of the Minister, is that, even when our son had disappeared, the wife was with us here in the House. We did not see any concern on her face, she was chatting away and we thought that maybe she knew his whereabouts. And in the Minister’s statement, it is very clear that on the night she returned from Mbarara, she was with her sisters -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, the statement is about the disappearance of Rt. Col. Kiiza Besigye not -(Interruption)

MRS.MASIKO KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  That is what I am coming up to. Therefore, the disappearance is worrying us. Certainly, we imagine if a husband disappears from the house, usually it should be the wife who must know the whereabouts, before even the state and the neighbours come to know where the husband has disappeared. Therefore, I would like to know -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Masiko, the problem I am seeing in this is that you will be inviting hon. Byanyima to be on the defensive while this statement is about the disappearance of Kiiza Besigye. But now I see exchanges are going to come up as a result of this kind of question. The kind of question I envisage under this rule is that, if something is not clear in the statement that was made, do not try to import in other things. Once you do so, then you broaden the matter. I think let us stop here because we are widening this and it is going to result into a debate, and there should not be a debate about this statement. I am now not allowing other questions. If there is another matter arising, I shall definitely entertain it on another occasion under another item. But let the Minister answer – (Interruption)

MS.BYANYIMA WINNIE: Mr. Speaker, I kindly beg your indulgence to clarify on some matters that were said about myself in the Minister’s speech.

THE SPEAKER: This is the problem I envisaged. People will rise up to defend themselves -(Interjection). But since actually you have mentioned that you did not report, maybe you - but we are widening.  This is the danger. If it is a question, hon. Byanyima, it should be in a form of a question because you are tied up with the rules. If it is a statement, then that will be a different matter, because I think it appears you may want to make a personal statement. But let us actually dispose of the statement, the questions asked, otherwise we are widening this debate. I will entertain the hon. Minister to answer.  So, would you like to make a personal statement?

MS.BYANYIMA WINNIE: Mr. Speaker, I would not like to make the issue of the disappearance of Col. Kiiza Besigye an issue for me to make a personal statement about. But, inasmuch as my name appears in a statement by the Minister, I would like to give explanation on those facts that have arisen from her statement. I do not seek to make a personal explanation about my husband.
  
THE SPEAKER: Yes, precisely this is the problem, because the statement made was under a rule, and the rule says there is no debate, but one can ask questions for clarification. But now you want to make a statement, and it may be just to refute the imputations, and as I see it, the problem is going to develop. Somebody will say, ‘how do you keep quiet?’ Then that will actually entail you making a statement. So, I think that if you want really to make a clarification, you will make it after she has answered. Let her finalise then you make your statement.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first question was, ‘suppose Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye was in South Africa, would the state be interested?’ I have already said that the State is not interested in Col. Kiiza Besigye much more than it is interested in you or me or anybody else. Col. Kiiza Besigye is free to go anywhere he wants, he is free –(Interjections)- If I may be allowed -(Interruption)

MR.WACHA: Is the hon. Minister in order to lie to this House that Kiiza Besigye is or was free to move anywhere?

THE SPEAKER: I am not going to rule on that order, I want the Minister to finish her statement. If you do not believe it, you do not believe it.

MR.WACHA: But it is a fact that he has been restricted.

THE SPEAKER: Please, make your statement.

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I request hon. Members to allow me to finish my statement before they make their statements.  

The military spokesperson gave out a press release, which I think Members here probably had opportunity to read. One of the things that statement said was that since for earlier two specific occasions mentioned, that is, when the Colonel was stopped from moving, Besigye’s movements within the country have not been a subject of UPDF concern. Then he also mentioned that UPDF, therefore, wishes to categorically state that it is not holding Col. Besigye, and has since the earlier two incidents had no reason to concern itself with his whereabouts. 

Then as far as Police is concerned, I said we have not been interested in the whereabouts of Col. Kiiza Besigye, apart from the person that he asked to be given as a guard at his gate. That was at his request. It is on that basis that I am saying that the State has not been interested, is no longer interested in the whereabouts of Col. Kiiza Besigye as long as he is not breaking the law.  

The other incidents were sorted out as far as the army is concerned, and that is given in the details of the statement given by the spokesperson of the army. Mr. Speaker, I now move on to the next question.  

Hon. Reagan says that, suppose the Colonel is resting somewhere?  Well, we wish him well, if he is resting.  If he is resting, why should we disturb a person who is resting?  

Hon. Aggrey Awori said that CMI was doing surveillance, and this is what I said that. At some point when the army felt that actually the man was not connected to the rebels, they lost interest in the surveillance and it was stopped.  Otherwise, if hon. Aggrey Awori has information that he would wish to pass on to us - and we have already given a call that any Member who has information as to the whereabouts of hon. Col. Kiiza Besigye - the Police will entertain it –(Applause). I said that Government is not interested in the whereabouts of Col. Kiiza Besigye, but now that it was – (Interjection) - yes, in my statement I said that, but now that he is allegedly missing, if anybody has information, the Nation would want to know, we would gladly collect that information and pass it on to Ugandans.  But as the State, we are not interested in the whereabouts of Col. Kiiza Besigye more than anyone of you.  The State would be interested to ensure that everybody is safe.  If Col. Kiiza Besigye decides to walk out of his house and go to some place, he is free to do so.

Hon. Omara Atubo noted that I said we are not interested in the whereabouts of Col. Kiiza Besigye, but he doesn’t say that I have also added that his wife hon. Winnie Byanyima in the statement that she made to us, said that the Colonel rang her and told her that: “he had decided to stay away from home to watch the situation, and that he was in Kampala, and that he would keep in touch.” That is why we think that he is okay, otherwise, the wife did not inform the Police!  

She told a few friends and went away and did her business, came back on Monday night and got her sisters into the house. They chatted away till morning and nothing was mentioned to the Police that the Colonel was missing, until the news came out in the papers.  Surely, why would we have thought that the Colonel was missing if the wife did not think he was missing? When it came up in the newspapers, that is when the Police visited her home.  

The Police visited the house because the guard was sure that the Colonel was in the house and he had not seen him go out; the driver had come and gone away.  He did not drive the Colonel but they were constantly kept in the knowledge or in the belief that the Colonel was in the house resting.

Now, regarding hon. Okot’s question about what the guard was doing? -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the question that was asked by hon. Mwandha is, if a report was not made to you about the missing of the retired Colonel, why did you go there?  Did the guard make a report to you? 

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker for that clarification.  Yes, Police went there - in the newspaper, the allegation pointed at the State as knowing where Kiiza Besigye is.  We agree, Kiiza Besigye was a presidential candidate and the first suspect is Government and Police is an instrument of Government and it had to take interest.  If the paper mentioned that somebody is missing of that status, certainly the Police would take interest.  The Police went to inquire from the guards at the residence.  The guard said well, as far as they are concerned, the Colonel was in the house.  Now somebody asked why – (Interruption) - Mr. Speaker, if I maybe allowed to continue.  

THE SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Hon. Okot asked, “how could the guard not have known?”  Mr. Speaker, guards at the premises are not bodyguards.  They are guards at the premises and their job is to keep out intruders.  They operate on the assumption that everybody in that house is a friendly force, and they should not be disturbed if they do not want to be disturbed. I am sure the occupants of the house knew that very well, that is why they kept telling the guard that the Colonel was in the house and he did not want to be disturbed.  

Again, as I said, this issue of Colonel Kiiza Besigye has nothing to do with the State - his disappearance. We are still going to interview more people who are related, because this is a matter of concern to Ugandans and there are people who are trying to use it to mislead others into the belief that the State has something to do with this man’s disappearance.  Thank you.
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima you can say what you want to say.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I notice, first of all, that this item was smuggled onto the Order Paper, it was not there in the beginning.  I wonder why?  I wish to make some clarification.  

Since the 12th of March when the Presidential Election was over, Col. Kiiza Besigye has not been able to return to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon. Byanyima, maybe let me explain.  This issue of the missing retired Col. Kiiza Besigye came up when you were not here.  It was raised by hon. Aggrey Awori and this was in the absence of the Minister.  Our Prime Minister was not here and there was no other Minister. And I said well, we couldn’t assist in this matter because we didn’t have the relevant Minister to answer the question.  So we continued with the business of the House, then the Minister of State for Internal Affairs came in. We were prompted by hon. Aggrey Awori that the geography or the structure of the House had changed, namely that the Minister of State for Internal Affairs had come, therefore the question should be answered.  The Minister obliged, but she was not helpful because she did not have the information and she promised to provide us with information at a later date.  

So when we started today, I had not indicated that she had the information to give the House but as we were proceeding, she came in and I received a note reading;  “Mr. Speaker, I am ready with a statement on Col. Kiiza Besigye.”  Since the matter was so important, I had to adjust the Order Paper to let the statement be made.  It was not smuggled in.  I think the Minister was trying to carry out her duty.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker.  I have said that Col. Besigye has not been able to return to his normal life since March until Friday when I last saw him. He has been restricted, as everybody in this House knows from travelling, not only abroad but also within the country.

You will recall that a few days after the Parliamentary Elections, Col. Besigye attempted to travel to Mbarara to visit me and he was stopped in Lukaya by military personnel. They tried to drag him into a vehicle with doubtful number plates and he had to resist physically, and some people who came from Kampala helped him to escape from the claws of those military men. 

He has continued to be monitored wherever he goes. Whenever he has moved in his car, at least three or four other cars have moved behind him in a threatening manner. Several military intelligence personnel with their vehicles pack at his residence, monitoring throughout the day and night whoever arrives and leaves the house, snooping on his privacy.  

Then there have been threats by very senior people in the Government, such as Col. Mayombo, at various seminars accusing him of being a rebel collaborator, of mobilising veterans and other people against the state - people like Ofwono Opondo and others. 

He took his complaints to the Human Rights Commission but it failed to resolve this problem of the violation of his human rights. It remained outstanding, but Col. Besigye was still determined to stay in the country and play his part as a citizen. To demonstrate this, he spent many, many hours and days preparing a document on democratic reforms, which I believe all Members of Parliament received and which he presented to the Constitutional Review Commission.  He engaged in many other democratic activities to fill his time. He was unable to earn a living like other people, because he was restricted in his travels, but he tried to remain in the country and play his part as a citizen.

In the last week before Friday, his complaints about the threats to his life increased. Every evening, he shared information with me, which he was obtaining from sympathetic elements within the military. He even showed me copies of communication by military personnel to their seniors accusing him of very, very serious crimes against the state and recommending his immediate arrest.  

So Col. Besigye’s fears heightened last week. He told me of a meeting that had been held within the security agencies, where a decision had been taken to arrest him and several others of his political colleagues but that the decision was stayed until the SMART Partnership would be over.  

He told me that he may need to go into hiding to watch the situation because, he was not prepared to sit in his house and wait for an arrest. So on Friday, the day I last saw him, we had tea together at 6.00 O’clock. After tea, I was going to have dinner with a friend from the Ford Foundation. I invited him to join us but he said he had another engagement out, but he did again tell me that he may need to go away and hide somewhere. I believe he meant somewhere in Kampala, because I asked him where, and he said, ‘I have found a quiet suburb somewhere where I will lie low’. I thought that this was going to happen in a day or two. So I said good-bye to him and went for dinner, believing that I would find him back home. 

When I came home at 11.00p.m, he was not at there. I noticed that his car was at home and thought that may be he went with friends, because he was getting tired of the security that was always trailing him. So I thought that he had preferred to travel in a car with other friends. I waited for him but he did not return -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sorry to interrupt you but this question of mobile telephones, please, demobilise them - (Interruptions) Proceed.

MS.WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I had a commitment in Mbarara Municipality at 9.30a.m in the morning, I needed to depart at 6.00a.m. At 6.00 in the morning, he had not returned. It is not a habit of Col. Kiiza Besigye to stay away from home without informing me. So I was indeed worried about his whereabouts, but I had to travel home. So I thought that, ‘let me give myself a day and see. Has he gone to hide or is he caught up somewhere’.  

Fortunately, before midday, he called me from somewhere he did not tell me. But he told me that, ‘I know you are worried that I have not been at home but I am safe. I want you to know that I am safe. I am hiding until I am sure of the situation’. That is the last time that I spoke with Col. Besigye.  

To answer some of the issues raised by the Minister, after he told me that he was safe on Saturday morning, there was no need for me to go to report him to the Police, sincerely! I went about my business in the constituency, but when by Sunday morning I had not heard from him again, after church, I confided in my parish priest. I told him I was worried about the whereabouts of my husband but I was going to first come back to Kampala and see whether he had returned. But I told him that he was under a lot of pressure from the security, and he could bear me out. 

By Sunday evening,I was extremely worried. I called my sisters in Kampala and asked them to go to the house to check if he was there. I did that, but Members should know that it is not normal for a wife to rush to the Police every time her husband has not reported for 24 hours –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: You are giving them a license.

MS.WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, it is true that I went to the constituency with my baby. This is also normal; I usually travel with the baby when I am going away for two or more days. By Monday morning, I felt so concerned that he had not rung me. I was worried. I wanted to get back home quickly to establish whether he had either switched off the phone and he was in the house or find out from his friends in Kampala where he could be hiding. I travelled to Kampala, but by the time I reached, I had got many calls from the press, but most importantly, I got a call from my sister telling me that the Operations Commander, Military Intelligence, wanted to see me. This was worrying!  

So when I arrived in Kampala, I was scared of going home, because I knew that these are the people who had been surrounding our house, now they were looking for me, how could I enter this house on my own late in the evening?  So I decided to pass by my sister’s house and ask them to escort me to my house, since I was worried about the Military Intelligence and their need to see me.  

This is what they are calling having a good time, because I went and collected my sisters who even advised me to leave my baby at their home, because they had heard a rumour that the Military Intelligence wanted to storm the house at night.  So I was worried for my baby.  I came home with friends; they sat in the house, gave me company and left late, because I was worried about sleeping there alone.  

Well, he was not there.  Indeed by morning I was going to go to the Police to make a report, but the Police did not give me a chance, because before 7.00a.m they were at my house.  So I made the report to them inside my house.  How could I have left them in the house and gone to the Police Station?  They were at my house by dawn.  

So I made a statement to them; I gave them the whole story and I did everything I could to help them. They did not come with a search warrant.  I asked them to get it and they came with a search warrant in the afternoon.  They searched the house; they looked at every document, under every bed, in the cupboards, absolutely everywhere.  

I want to point out that the Press has also fuelled some of these suspicions, because The New Vision newspaper reported that, “while they were searching the house Winnie was jolly”.  Meanwhile The Monitor newspaper reported that “there was a weary looking Byanyima.”  So clearly, this is the same person being described on the same day in extremely different ways.  It is a matter of interpretation.  I hear people saying that I am sitting here, laughing.   If I cry, will it bring him back?

The fact is, Col. Besigye is missing, and the reason he is missing is that he was hounded out of his home.  He did not pack a bag and take a plane out of the airport.  The security personnel of this country hounded him out of his home.  He complained many times and his complaints were not listened to.  Right now, I do not know exactly where he is and I think that the State is irresponsible to say that it is not interested or it does not mind where Col. Besigye is.  They should mind and they should bring him here, because they took it upon themselves to surveil him and look after his security. 

I am asking Col. Mayombo and his establishment to produce him, because they said in public that they are not going to leave him for a minute; that they will look for him and they will take care of his security; that they will not let him step out of the country.  Now let them bring him.    

I would like to conclude like this. If Col. Besigye is in hiding, then there is a reason for us to examine why a former Presidential Candidate should be in hiding.  What crime did he commit to hide three or four or five months after the elections?  Is this a free country?  Is it really possible to contest the Presidency against the Candidate Museveni and come back and live normally? (Mr. Awori rose_).Well he can tell us – (Laughter)

MR. AWORI:  Point of information

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Byanyima, proceed with your statement.

MR. AWORI:  Mine is equally different.  My house is surrounded all the time except that I scare them off with firepower - (Laughter)

MS. BYANYIMA:  Mr. Speaker, I want to state that it is not only the household of Col. Kiiza Besigye that has been living in fear since the last Presidential elections.  I want to put it on record that there are very many people who did not support President Museveni, whose lives have become miserable; who have separated from their wives; who are in hiding simply because they made the their choice.  As I am talking now, yesterday there was panic in the city because there was a strong rumour – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, I want you to restrict yourself to the statement.

MS. BYANYIMA: I am concluding Mr. Speaker.  Thank you for your guidance.  Yesterday, there was a strong rumour in town that Mr. James Musinguzi, a strong supporter of Col. Besigye was about to be arrested.  I don’t believe this is a happy and peaceful household.  So I am calling upon the Minister who made the statement, and all the other Ministers responsible for security in this country that please, make life possible for those who don’t support President Museveni.  We are there, and we are not going to support him and we will not be forced to, but we want to stay in this country and live peacefully because it is our right.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Well that ends that issue.  Now hon. Members, as I told you, we had a motion about Kampala City. For the next two weeks or so - we may interrupt this arrangement - Committees will be dealing with their respective Ministry estimates so that we can deal with the Budget and complete it within the stipulated period.  The House is therefore adjourned until after two weeks.   

(The House rose at 5.24 p.m and adjourned for two weeks)

