Tuesday 21st August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.41p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is with great sadness that I officially announce that our colleague, hon. Esther Opoti Dhugira, Woman Representative for Nebbi district, passed away on Saturday night at Mulago Hospital. Arrangements have been made to bring her body to Parliament for viewing and for Members to sign the condolence book tomorrow starting at 10.00 o’çlock. In the afternoon, the House will start business with paying tribute to our departed colleague before the body leaves the precincts of Parliament. 

I am informed that from Parliament, the body will be taken to Mbuya church for a funeral service and then back to the home of the deceased also located in Mbuya for a night. The body will leave for Arua on Thursday morning and burial will take place on Friday in Nyapeya in Nebbi district. Hon. Members who wish to travel to attend the burial are requested to register at the reception outside the Chambers; and those who want to contribute something towards the funeral expenses are requested to pass over their contribution or to hand their pledges to hon. Jessica Eriyo, Woman Representative, Adjumani.  

Hon. Members, it is also with great sadness that I officially announce that our colleague, hon. Kiwalabye of Kiboga East County, lost his dear daughter Nantege on 13th August 2001. She was 22 years and was buried in Lwamata on 15th August 2001. Hon. Kiwalabye, please accept our condolences.

Hon. Members, in the distinguished Visitors’ Gallery this afternoon are three Members of Parliament from the National Assembly of Mozambique. The Mozambique Members of Parliament arrived yesterday for a one-week visit, the purpose of which is to share experience with you hon. Members in the process of fighting AIDS in Uganda. They are also in Uganda to foster active working relationship with our Committee on Social Services as well as Non Government Organisations working in the field of AIDS.  I met them this morning before they interacted with the Committee. The leader of the delegation is hon. Luis Boavida Mudivela, and other Members of the delegation are hon. Felicidade Maedia and hon. Raquel Carlos Damia. You are most welcome.  

Hon. Members, this morning I hosted, on your behalf, the Acholi Religious Leaders Peaceful Initiative group comprising the Anglican Bishop Onono of Gulu who is the chairperson, Catholic Bishop Andama of Gulu, Anglican Bishop Ochola II of Kitgum, Sheikh Musa Kariri, the district Khadhi for Acholi, Anglican Bishop elect Ojwanga of Kitgum and several religious leaders from the region. They were accompanied by the area Members of Parliament.  

The group briefed me about the combined efforts they are making with similar leaders in Sudan to bring peace in the area and to end the conflict which has caused untold suffering to the thousands of people in the area for so many years. They requested me to convey their appreciation to you, for the positive attitude you have taken over the conflicts in the North as your concern, and the effort you are making to see that the problem is solved so that peace returns to the area. They promised to pray for you and your efforts. Thank you very much.      

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity once again. Notwithstanding the conspicuous absence of the Ministers in the House at the moment, especially, the Prime Minister, I am seeking information pertaining to my former colleague who was a candidate for the race to the State house. As a former candidate and somebody who often holds views contrary to the Government, I would like to know from the Government whether they actually know where my former colleague is. Is he safe? I am talking about. Retired Col. Dr Kizza Besigye. 

I saw an alarming report in today’s newspapers that the whereabouts of this gentleman cannot be established. As somebody who has views very close to his and not too close to the Government, am I safe? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Member for Samia Bugwe North.  You have expressed concern about this Ugandan, but you have said that the Prime Minister is not here. I do not know in the circumstances who is supposed to answer this question.  Is it the Prime Minister as Leader of Government Business in the House; is it the Minister for Internal Affairs who is not here? Is it the Minister of State for Security who is not here?  

So, while I appreciate the concern and the validity of your inquiry, since it is on record, when the proper Minister appears, either today or some other day, he can assist in this matter. I think an answer will be given. Meanwhile we proceed.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mine is partially related to the Order Paper of today, Mr. Speaker. When you look at the Order Paper, item number four is one of the most crucial points, which any responsible Ugandan would have liked to discuss in the presence of the Members of the Front Bench.  As I look now, apart from the Minister of Finance, the rest are State Ministers.  Is it prudent that we proceed in that situation?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see why you jump the order.  We shall reach the item and when it is necessary to make such observation, it will be made.  I am equally concerned that they are not here.  I would have liked the Front Bench to be full; it is not.  I do not know the reason why, but let us proceed and see what happens.  

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House that His Excellency, the President and the Members of the Front Bench are concluding a major Conference, the SMART Partnership of which Government of Uganda is hosting a number of Heads of State.  May I take this opportunity to say that, Members of Cabinet will be joining us as soon the Conference is concluded.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MAJOR KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from hon. Mukula; from the information he has just given this House, him sitting very near to where the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister usually sits, and with that kind of confidence, can we take it that he is the acting leader of Government business -(Laughter)- so that we keep addressing him, Sir?

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity to inform my colleague and my good Friend, hon. Kazoora, that the Front Bench is open for everybody to sit, and there is no specific place that has been properly designated for any Member of the Front Bench.  But may I say that as a Member of the Executive, I have taken the honour in the position of collective responsibility to provide the House with that information.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of disrupting the order of events on the Order Paper.   But I think it is proper for us, before we proceed, to seek clarification in regard to why we are yet to discuss the presentation of the Committee on UCBL, much as we had been informed earlier on that hon. Aggrey Awori was to present a motion possibly alongside that of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  

THE SPEAKER: You are entitled to make an inquiry, but since hon. Aggrey Awori is here and he knows the situation, if he has any query, I would have expected it to come from him.  But let us see how we proceed.  Should it be necessary that we deal with this motion as you say, we shall deal with it.

PRESENTATION OF COMMITTEE REPORT ON UCBL

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Kamuntu Ephraim): Mr. Speaker, you will recall you stayed debate on the motion for privatizing UCBL for only three weeks.  The Committee started working and due to the constraint of time, the Committee was not able to complete its report and distribute it to Members for them to digest it.  It is only this morning that this report was finally distributed and the report is therefore interim.   The final report will be submitted to this House as soon as possible, after further consultations with all the stakeholders -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_).

THE SPEAKER: But what clarification, hon. Lukyamuzi?  The hon. Chairperson is just opening his introduction.  Why don’t you wait for him to finish his sentence?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Why shouldn’t I say what I want to say? 

THE SPEAKER: But you see, he is developing a point and then you come in.  Okay, make it.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  You have spoken greatly.  The clarification I am seeking is, when the Chairperson of the Committee begins presenting an Interim Report on a matter of great importance like UCBL, when at the same time he is referring us to yet another report to come, my eyebrows get raised.  So, the clarification I am seeking is, after presenting the Interim Report, what will happen?  Do we discuss the Interim Report or we just listen and then discuss the final report?  Are we serious when we begin discussing interim reports?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member of Lubaga South, precisely this is what I told you.  The hon. Member was starting a sentence, without making a conclusion you sought clarification; maybe if he completes the sentence, you will understand what he is saying and then if it is not clear, that is when you should seek for clarification.  So, why don’t you allow him to say what he wants to say?

Prof. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Naturally, frequent interventions disrupt the flow of logic in presentation.   But I appreciate your ruling.  I was really saying that, because of the constraint of time and the magnitude and sensitivity of the subject under discussion, it was not possible to consult as many of the stakeholders as we possibly would have wanted, to review all the documents and make a final report to this House; and therefore, since the Speaker stayed debate only for three weeks, and the three weeks were ending today, we felt compelled to make an interim report to the House, and ask the House that, we would produce a final report and submit it to the House as soon as possible, and clearly not in months.  

Therefore, because this report was distributed this morning, I was going to ask the indulgence of the Speaker, to allow me to go through the report with the Members in order to ease the internalization of the report itself. I would then ask the indulgence of the Speaker, that further debate could be done when the final report has been produced. 

Mr. Speaker, you will appreciate that following the motion in Parliament, urging Government to reserve at least 51 percent of UCBL shares for Ugandans, the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, under rule 143(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, initiated a consultative process to evaluate the UCBL privatization exercise. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am sorry to interrupt.  Since you said that you want to read this report, and you also said that copies have been given to the Members - is it today – in fact, I received my copy this afternoon.  If you intend to read it, there is no problem; but why do you not read it in a summary form – you will summarize tomorrow when the Members have read the report for themselves. 

Since we are not debating it, you just summarize your report; and then we wait for a final report. Summarize this tomorrow rather than today, so that you give opportunity  to Members to study the report overnight. Then tomorrow you will just make a summary, because they would have read the report.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee, and we thought that, this report should actually be debated after the Chairman has gone through it. It is a short report even if Members have not read it, if we read it through with the Chairman, I think Members will be in a position to debate this report.

At the end of the report, we are requesting the House to pass a resolution allowing us to do further work on UCBL. And without debating, it is going to be very difficult for the House to pass what we are requesting for, in order for us to proceed.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, is there a need for a resolution to allow you to perform your work?  If you said you took the assignment to scrutinize matters affecting the bank, but because of time you have not completed what you are supposed to do, why should we make a resolution for you to complete what you have started on? (Interjection)– hold on, why should we tell you that?

What the Chairperson has said, because of the time, and they want to beat the deadline - they have come to make a report, but so far, they have not completed this work. But they have to report; because Parliament said this week something has to be said. I see us debating twice; we debate the interim report and then the final report when it comes. Where do we get that time, to make duplicate contribution on the same subject matter?  

Therefore, I think you can read it, so that people can internalize it. But then you go back, nobody should prevent you to complete what you have not completed, because we are not interested in incomplete work; we are interested in complete work. The only worry was, now three weeks have expired, is the status quo going to be changed? If the status quo is not going to be changed, therefore, we continue with the pledge that was made before. Why do we not allow you to complete, so that we really deal with the full report, where all stakeholders have been consulted, and it is a well-informed report.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, you will recall we had a meeting in your office; and subsequent to our meeting in your office, with half of the Cabinet, the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a pledge to this House that not until this House pronounced itself on a matter of UCBL, can the Governor and the Government proceed to do anything. I presume that pledge is still valid.

THE SPEAKER: Is it valid, hon. Minister?

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendaula): Mr. Speaker, indeed, we had the debate here and in order to handle the motion as tabled by hon. Aggrey Awori, Samia Bugwe, it was agreed and I stated clearly that there are fundamentals. The bank is under statutory management of the Bank of Uganda. But as the Bank of Uganda does not come to Parliament, and it is represented in Parliament by the Minister of Finance; I am going to prevail over them to stay the action of selling the bank, until Parliament has pronounced itself. 

Mr. Speaker, let me request that we develop a level of trust within ourselves –(Interjections)- if I could be allowed to continue, that we should allow some level of trust among ourselves, the Executive and the Legislature. Because the Executive indeed has gone through what I could consider a difficult time, in as far as the divesting of UCBL is concerned. I would even be very doubtful, if the Executive can continue to be party to anything that is not transparent in the exercise of divesting UCBL.  


So, if they could develop a level of trust, that while the bank is under the statutory management of Bank of Uganda, and I was given a mission to go and intervene with the Bank of Uganda, I still continue to undertake that arrangement that whatever they are doing, they are not going to dispose of the bank, unless this House has pronounced itself on this matter.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But I am baffled as to what we are up to. You see, we are dealing with an interim report. The Chairperson of the Committee has stated what he has stated; now Members of his Committee are coming up with different solutions. Why should we waste time - and this was raised by hon. Lukyamuzi, in his earlier observation - are we going to deal with the interim report; are we going to have true debates on this matter; is what we are going to do an interim decision?  Because if the problem was that the Committee cannot function without a resolution, I am asking, what is the basis of saying that the Committee should not go ahead to complete what it has started; what is the basis –(Mr Bakkabulindi rose_)- information to who?

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  From a Member of the Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, make it.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect, I wish if you had given the Chairperson of this Committee to continue presenting his report, and at the end of the day, I think the Members would have got a clear picture of what we are driving at. 

We are not seeking the mandate of extra days per se; we know that the Committee would have sat, and continued even for another two weeks, but Mr. Speaker, when the hon. Minister stood, he talked about developing the spirit of trusting each other. The same Minister who faced our Committee with the Governor continued referring us to the FIS Statute, which is empowering him to do whatever he is doing now without the consent of Parliament, and he categorically told us that the bids will be opened by the end of this month. This shows you that they are already in business without respecting the words he has just told us here.  

The same Minister told us that they are in full control of 100% of the shares of UCBL; we are hearing rumours. We went ahead and asked him to present the certificates, which can prove that he has the 49% shares, which Mr. Kiggundu is claiming to be possessing.  He promised to give us those certificates, but up to now we have not seen them.  Now, what we are asking is that, if the Minister is honest with his words, let us pass a resolution of about four points.  Let the exercise -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  You see hon. Members; let us understand the situation.  We have the law in the statute that was made and has not been amended, but in spite of that statute we can agree that, even if Bank of Uganda has the powers under a Finance Act to do what they want to do, our resolution will not amend a statute.  If we take those rigid positions without compromise, this resolution will definitely be nothing in as far as the law passed by the Parliament is concerned.   Somebody can go and say, “that is the law which you passed, and I am operating under that law”.  So, what will you say?  Will you say we passed a resolution? 

I think let us agree that even if the law is there, a pledge was given to Parliament by the Minister who is answerable for the Governor of Bank of Uganda; and that pledge should continue to operate in spite of the -(Interruption)- I am saying, we take the pledge, and trust the Minister who is standing in for Bank of Uganda -(Interruption)- no, we should not act emotionally, hon. Members, let us -(Hon Members rose_)- hon. Members, when the Speaker is speaking you do not stand  -(Laughter)-  When we handle this matter emotionally, even the resolution we pass will be emotional.  As far as I am concerned, I am a witness and a pledge was made.  I will be the first one to swear that a pledge was made on behalf of the Governor of Bank of Uganda who is operating under a financial law; nothing will be done to change the status quo; and the Minister has repeated it here. I have no reason to doubt this.  

If people really stick to their position, they will be defeated, because somebody will ask, “but when did you change this law?  I have operated under this law, I did not pass the law, and it is the law which you passed that empowered me to do what I did, now where is the blame?”  Are you going to say we passed a resolution, if you want make an amendment, and then they will not act.  But I think let us accept the pledge - because it is loud and clear that the pledge still stands.  That is my observation.  I think let the Members internalise this report, and tomorrow you will summarise it.  If they want to debate it, then they will debate it.  Instead of saying, you read it, we have not internalised it; how would you start a debate?  Let us be sincere to ourselves, we cannot debate something we have not internalised.  We are reading it here, you cannot internalise it; what is there? 

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the pledge from the hon. Minister, through you, I am seeking his commitment to his words.  Can the hon. Minister tell us what Mr. Leon and Mr. Campbell was doing here? Does he know those two individuals?  

THE SPEAKER: I think we have really said that the pledge still stands.  Somebody was talking about a motion, hon. Aggrey Awori -(Interruption)- hon. Aggrey Awori has been to my office, and you have seen he has published another motion, which is different from the original motion.  The motion that I had before was to authorise Government to sell, but provided 51% is given to the public.  Now, the motion that was published is different from the one l have on my file.  So, when you talk about another motion existing, maybe hon. Aggrey should tell us whether his earlier motion is standing or he intends to pursue another motion, so that these matters are clarified.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I still stand by my old motion for the sake of the pledge made by the hon. Minister.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay then. 

MR. AWORI:  So, it is still valid; mine is valid, if you break it, Mr. Minister -

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Procedure.

THE SPEAKER:  But hon. Members, are we not really wasting time?  Should we not proceed on another matter?  Okay, you finalise what you wanted to say.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Mr. Speaker, I was suggesting to the House that this report is a very short report; it is an interim report, and I was begging your indulgence that I quickly -(Interruption)
THE SPEAKER:  Okay, go ahead if that is what you want.

MR. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, the gist of this –(Interruption)

MR. BYABAGAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like the hon. Member on the Floor to tell us how we are going to proceed with the report, when we don’t have the copies?

THE SPEAKER:  This is what I told you.  I have told you -(Interruption)- hon. Member, I have said, I received my copy 10 minutes before I came here.  This is the position.  So, you may have a copy, but others may not have the copy. That is why I particularly had suggested that he summarises his report tomorrow. You have heard what I have said; decide what you want to do with your report.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I will be more than rude to go against the ruling of the Speaker if the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  I am advising you; it is not a ruling.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much.  Mr. speaker, if I understand you correctly, it is true that the interim report was distributed this morning.  It is very true, yes; I am being very candid on these matters. It is also true that I consulted the Speaker on this matter, because the Committee was under pressure to meet the deadlines of three weeks. It is also true that this report is an interim Report. The report has captured nearly all the essential issues involved in the privatisation.

THE SPEAKER: Read the report.

PROF.KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance.

MR.BAKKABULINDI: Order, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order against who?

MR.BAKKABULINDI: Against the whole process, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Against what?
MR.BAKKABULINDI: Against the chairman continuing to read the report.

THE SPEAKER: Under what Rule? 

MR.BAKKABULINDI: It is a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, you raise a point of order because somebody has contravened the rules of this House. And even then, you are a Member of his Committee.  Now really –(Interruption)

MR.BAKKABULINDI:  No, Mr. Speaker, I have got a point.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you raise your point of Order; I will rule on it.

MR.BAKKABULINDI: Thanks you Mr. Speaker. A few minutes ago, you clearly told us that what was going to be debated or passed as a resolution from the Committee’s report was almost a wastage of time, simply because the Financial Institutions Statute empowers the Ministers to do whatever he wants unless we have changed the law. Now, is it in order to waste our time to continue with the report, when we know that we have not got any single power to make any recommendation or amendment?

THE SPEAKER: I think I said, when we are dealing with this issue, let us not be emotional. What I said was in respect to the observation made by the Member for Ruhama, hon. Augustine Ruzindana. He said that the reason why they wanted this report to be debated was to pass a resolution that would empower the Committee to continue to make a final report. I said it was not necessary for this House to tell a Committee to continue with work, which they have not completed when the Committee is exercising its functions. 

On the other matter you are referring to, I think I said the Minister said that we should trust each other. I said it in respect of the pledge that was given by the Minister speaking for the Governor who said the status quo would be maintained. I said that pledge is still holding, and therefore, there is no reason for making another resolution. I added that if you stick to resolutions and a resolution is contrary to a provision of a Statute, somebody holding the Statute may tell you, ‘but has this resolution amended the Statute?’ I think that is how I explained it. 

So, I did not say it is a waste of time to make a resolution. I only said, let us have confidence in the pledges that are being made. They are not law, but they are made by those concerned so that we also trust such pledges in spite of the fact that we know there is a law.  Otherwise, if we do not have confidence in each other over this matter, supposing the Governor says, “I am exercising the powers given to me by law.”  You are not going to say, “we passed a resolution”. I am a lawyer and I have told you a law cannot be changed by a resolution. The Constitution cannot be changed by a resolution, but at the same time there can be an understanding between parties to act in spite of certain provisions of the law. I think that is what I said, and I think it clears your concern.

MR.KATUNTU: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: We should have accomplished a lot if these points were not coming, because I had authorised him to read the report.

MR.KATUNTU: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am having difficulties in appreciating this reference to the Financial Institutions Statute. To the best of my knowledge, that Statute just gives the Governor, Bank of Uganda statutory powers to manage a financial institution. There is no section in that Statute which requires him to sell a bank.  It is not there. It just gives him administrative powers to manage a bank, and then he takes an administrative decision in the best interest. So the clarification I am seeking is, is it that the Financial Institutions Statute gives the Governor - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Katuntu, the issue here is not to interpret the provisions of this Financial Institutions Statute. What we are saying, how did the Governor get hold of this bank? The Governor is saying he got hold of this bank because of those powers. And I said if he is properly acting under those provisions, Parliament cannot amend the law by simply passing a resolution. That is the position, and I think you agree with me that a resolution of the House, for instance, cannot amend the Constitution. A resolution of the House cannot amend a Statute, unless the resolution is by amendment of the law, which is by a Bill being brought, and you amend the law. 

I said, in spite of all these provisions, let us trust each other. Let us rely on the pledge made by the Minister and get assured that the status quo of this bank will not be changed, so that the Committee helping us in this issue can complete its work, bring it and then we consider the next step (Interruption). 

MR.RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you want to be clarified? Honestly, Members, you can see, we should have even finished the Report.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr.Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to give two clarifications. It seems hon. Katuntu is not fully aware of the provisions of the Financial Institutions Statute. Let me read the Statute as it is. Section 32(1) says, “The Central Bank shall, upon possessing a financial institution under section 31 of this Statute, be vested with exclusive powers of management and control of the affairs of the financial institution.”  

32(2) says, “The powers referred to in subsection 1 of this section, shall include powers to -(Interruption)

MR.AWORI: Order.

THE SPEAKER: Please allow the Minister to read the law.

MR.AWORI: He is contradicting your instructions, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aggrey Awori, he is reading “bwino”. He is reading ink. So let him do so. (Laughter).

MR.RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. For the information of the hon. Member, “The powers referred to in sub section (1) of this section shall include powers to- (f) Re-organise or liquidate the Financial Institution in accordance with this Statute”. “Re-organise or liquidate” and I imagine hon. Members know what ‘liquidate’ means.

MR. ERESU: Clarification, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the Chairperson of the Committee read the report. Order! Order! Let the chairperson read the report.    

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr. Speaker,  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us save time. Let the report be read, then we proceed on another matter. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr. Speaker, I was observing that if you find it so controversial, even to present a report under a skilled Speaker, you can imagine how hot it must have been as a chairman; even to come to this report. This matter is so sensitive, but I will read the report under your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

When we looked at the divestiture and privatization policy, Government’s policy and privatization was revealed, and there was consensus among Members that, the policy was sound. And taking it to its entirety, privatization is part and parcel of the economic reform policies adopted by the majority of the developing countries. It is focusing on micro economic stability; relieving the state from producing goods and services that can best to be provided more efficiently by the private sector; and creating a market oriented, and competitive environment.

The privatization of the UCBL therefore, is in line and consistent with the broad policy of the Economic Reform programmes started in 1987.  However – and this is the most crucial point – the concern of Members is the manner, the procedure, propriety and modalities of implementation of the policy.  

The central consideration of transparency and accountability, and taking it into account the interest of the main stakeholders of UCBL, the strategic interest of the national economy, and to get value for the bank; this was the crucial concern of the Members as we debated.  There was no controversy on policy, but there was controversy on implementation.

The background is given. Uganda Commercial Bank was established by an Act of Parliament; the Uganda Commercial Bank Act 1965. It was to carry out and transact bank businesses, and to spearhead the development of the country.  

By the time of the reform policy in 1992, UCB had 187 branches across the country, and had handled more than 40 percent of Uganda’s total market deposits. In terms of lending, UCB was dominant in providing significant resources for agriculture, especially crop financing.  In fact, UCB was providing more than 75 percent of crop financing.  

UCB was initially privatized in 1998, when a core investor in the names of Westmont bought 49 percent of the shares. In order to make the privatization legally possible for the shares to be sold to Westmont, a PERD Statute 1993 was amended. At that time, Uganda Commercial Bank was moved from schedule 1 of the Statute to schedule 2. A Company in the names of UCBL was formed, with Government as the major shareholder, and Westmont with 49 percent shareholding.

The company did not last long, as it was mismanaged with the bank, and the bank became insolvent. The Bank of Uganda took over the management under the Financial Institutions Statute 1993.  There was, as you know, arbitration in which the arbiter reverted the 49 shares of the bank, back to Government.  Therefore, UCBL should now be 100 percent owned by Government. 

We made a number of observations. A sound and efficient banking system, is central to sustain the economic growth. It is central for the investment, and eventually Poverty Eradication. Poverty Eradication being the main focus for Government Programmes, and as the country embarks on decentralization and Modernization of Agriculture, it is imperative, hon. Members, to have a financial institution that can link the Micro Finance Institutions, and the village banks. And it can transform Uganda from a cash economy to a monetary one.

The key functions which the Finance Institutions perform include: mobilization of deposits, domestic deposits, domestic savings, allocating resources, credit finance to productive investments, operating the payment system for the country, and offering the means of diversifying and transferring risks to those willing and able to bear them.  The reason why UCBL is so strategic to development of the national economy is basically due to performing the above functions.

The bank’s total deposits by 30th June 2001, stood at 400 billion Uganda Shillings. This is a testimony, Mr. Speaker, that depositors have confidence in the bank. 

Functions: UCBL has extended loans and advances to the tune of Shs.40 billion, as on 31st December, the year 2000. The Committee was also informed that, this would have been even more had it not been for the Bank of Uganda, which prevents banks from lending when they are under statutory management.

The wide network of UCBL has made it possible for the moneys collected from all corners of the country, to be remitted in the banking system. The bank has also played a major role in collection accounts, the payment of salaries, in transfers, remittances, and other financial payment services.

UCBL is strategically important. It is delivering financial services throughout the country. The extensive branch network of UCBL, which has been in existence for more than three decades, constitutes an invaluable experience that must not be allowed to dissipate.

The bank made a net profit of shillings more than 25.6 billion shillings by December 2000. It is in their audited accounts.  The un-audited profits of the bank as on 30th June, was 18.8 billion shillings.  

The bank net worth was more than shillings 12.4 billion as by December 31st, 2000. And if we took into account the 18 billion shillings that we under their un-audited account, the net worth would exceed 31.2 billion shillings.  This is a solid bank.  

When we come to the privatization that failed, there are a number of things observed.  One, the House is aware that Government of Uganda privatized UCBL by selling 49 percent of its shares to Westmont, as a strategic investor. The Westmont ownership and management lasted for about 7 months, and caused financial losses of more than 35 billion shillings - almost half of Shs.72 billion restructuring bonds issued to the bank by Government of Uganda. And if the cost of arbitration is added, the total loss to the economy will add up to about 69 billion shillings. 

This explains why the bank’s capital was wiped out, and the bank became insolvent.  It became insolvent because of the ownership and management of Westmont.  In April 1999, the Bank of Uganda seized the management of UCBL in accordance with the provisions of Section 31 and Section 32 of the Financial Institutions Statute 1993.  It removed Westmont from ownership and from management of the bank. Subsequently, Government sued Westmont for breach of shareholding and management agreements. The arbitration proceedings determined that the 49 per cent shares held by Westmont reverted back to Government.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, assured the Committee that he has the share certificates for the returned shares and can confirm to this House by laying the same on the Table.  The important lesson that we should learn from the failed privatisation of UCBL in order to do a better job in the second attempt is as follows:

1.	The public interest and the concerns of Parliament were completely ignored.

2.	There was lack of transparency in the decision-making process and in the sale as depicted by lack of open competitive bidding.

3.	There was insufficient consultation of the main stakeholders on the modalities and manner or propriety of privatising such a strategic financial institution; stakeholders of the bank and not only the owners, but also depositors, borrowers, regulators and indeed the public in case of Uganda Commercial Bank.  

It should be emphasised that the failed privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank in 1998 was a disaster in both financial and political terms.  The lesson we learnt should guide us as we try to re-privatise Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd.  

The contentious and continued possession of UCBL by the Bank of Uganda:  The Committee noted that since April 1999, UCBL has been under Statutory Management by the Central Bank, which is mandated to do so by the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993 on account of insolvency and conducting business in a manner contrary to Financial Institutions Statute. These are specific circumstances which have changed.  The profitability of the bank as on 31st December 2000 audited accounts, is standing at more than Shs.25.8 billion and on the basis of available information, which was given to us, and the bank’s traditional (CAMEL) rating framework of capital, asset quality, management, earnings and liquidity as well as capital adequacy requirement, UCBL has of now fully recovered from its empowered position under Westmont Management.  

The Committee therefore, observed that since UCBL meets all the capital adequacy requirements for the financial institutions, the continued Statutory Management by the Bank of Uganda is uncalled for, and raises questions about conflict of interest of Bank of Uganda as a regulator to continue to manage UCB. 

Furthermore, the Committee observed that the deliberate stay in the Bank could be a move intended to sell Uganda Commercial Bank under the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993, and to exclude any opportunity for stakeholders to participate in its privatisation. (Applause).

The Committee felt that to resolve this matter, an independent legal opinion should be sought to determine whether a solvent bank should continue to be managed by Bank of Uganda, when conditions and circumstances that prevailed before its seizure have changed.  And also it should be determined whether privatisation of a solvent bank should not be done under PERD Statute 1993.  

When we look at the efforts to privatise UCBL, the Committee’s concern is to avoid the reoccurrence of the Westmont fiasco.    The Committee was informed that in February 2001, the Governor Bank of Uganda carried out a market test. Members did not agree with the private placement as a method of testing the market, particularly when you are dealing with UCBL which is a public institution. Testing the privatisation of UCBL in the market could only be done by partial sale of its shares and not through private placement, if you want to know its value.  

The Committee noted further that the manner of appointment of a Consultant, Wendi Peter who carried out their diagnostic evaluation study of UCBL, was not appropriate for several reasons: she was solo sourced in her recruitment.  There was no competition with her. The recruitment was done by the then Permanent Secretary/Secretary for Treasury who was a member of the board of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd, when it was being privatised and he was a member of DRIC. He is now the Governor of the Central Bank and is set to privatise Uganda Commercial Bank once again.

Furthermore, the Consultant is the same person now sourcing prospective buyers of the Bank without advertising through competitive bidding.   The Committee questioned the manner of her appointment and expressed fears of conflict of interest; and the consultant is implementing the recommendations of her own study.  This undermines transparency in the whole exercise.  

The Committee, therefore, requested for the terms of sale. It was informed that the terms of sale had been sent out to selected buyers, and since these are terms, there is no confidentiality lost.  The Committee requested that the terms of sale sent to prospective buyers of the UCBL should be made available.   But when this was passed on to the Bank of Uganda, there was no response.

The Committee was also concerned about some banks that have been invited to buy Uganda Commercial Bank and local banks, which have been borrowing through Inter-bank co-operation from Uganda Commercial Bank, and have been competing with Uganda Commercial Bank in the local market. 

Hon. Members, when the internal and confidential statements of UCBL are made available to its competitors, do regard this is as unfortunate and reckless, because in the event that these banks do not buy Uganda Commercial Bank, this will have exposed its attractive customers to its competitors and the competitors will attract these customers to themselves. We felt this is commercial injustice to Uganda Commercial Bank.

We looked at the role of foreign banks, and Members appreciated that they have a different and useful role to play. The foreign owned banks have limited branch networks. Their branches are mainly located in Kampala city and the major towns of Jinja, Mbarara, Mbale, and Masaka. And typically, these foreign owned banks provide short-term trade finance mainly to corporate customers and these customers are largely foreigners. These banks hardly provide the type of financing judged necessary to develop critical economical activities of the country such as small-scale agriculture, mobilising domestic savings and taking loans to the rural economy.  

Foreign banks, not only repatriate their profits, but they can also externalise loanable funds mobilised locally and invest them abroad instead of national economy. This is true, and foreign banks can do this by way of what they call, “inter-group lending”, and if you wanted, Bank of Uganda can be asked to provide the existence of the inter-bank lending to this House. But the point is made; there are no precautionary measures under the current financial liberalisation to prevent the purchaser of Uganda Commercial Bank from externalising UCBL’s huge deposits for investing abroad at the expense of the development of the national economy.

We looked at the privatising modalities and options. We were informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has looked at a number of options, but two seem to be central.

Option one is to invite a reputable international bank or banks and promptly sell under Uganda Commercial Bank limited as it is after direct negotiations. No further restructuring would be necessary in this case. But the Committee noted that this option lacks transparency and competitive bidding since it is through private placement.

Another option, which the Ministry seems to have considered, is to split the bank into two constituting the following:

·	To categorise the money-making branches of Uganda Commercial Bank basically in Kampala and major towns of Jinja, Mbale, Masaka and Mbarara and sell them to a single or a consortium of banks.  

·	The remaining branches of the Bank would then be served by setting up the rural payments bank to maintain the rural payment network and serve rural communities.

The Committee observed that this would be disastrous because it would destroy the infrastructure UCBL has built over the years.  

Secondly, the Government would face the need to continue providing banking services across the country, and this time it would have to do it through a weakened infrastructure. It would destroy the sygnagy that already exists between the branches and the main. 

The approach on rural payment bank is not also feasible due to a number of reasons:

1.	The linkages would be very weak between the main and the micro-financial institution.
2.	There would also be a problem. If you set up a rural payments bank, who is going to set it? Who is going to finance it? How sustainable is it and how better is it from the previous Uganda Commercial Bank network.
3.	We felt there is no logic in destroying the existing UCBL branch network, which is making profits, and then creating new banks whose viability is not even tested.  

The Committee further considered some other options which were generated. We looked at a phased and sequenced privatisation option by public offering of, for example, 20 per cent initially and a further 31 per cent to Ugandans and finally leaving it to the strategic investor to complete the privatisation exercise.  

Privatization of UCBL through a sale of shares to the public over time was felt safer and could signal proper value for the bank since its shares would have been floated. It would also provide the clearest signal about the value of UCBL in the market.

The other option we considered was the management performance contract. These two could be combined. You could have a management performance contract with a memorandum of understanding with the Bank of Uganda to protect Uganda Commercial Bank from political interference in lending, staffing and branch expansion. This came up in the discussion with the Minister.  It was felt that part of the major reason why loans by Uganda Commercial Bank became non-performing was because of political interference, and therefore, that memorandum of understanding would guard the bank. One can say that while the task of phased privatisation is being implemented, clearly you could couple it with the management contract.

The Committee made the following observations:  

1.	 There is no doubt about the general anxiety in the public about the proposed sale of Uganda Commercial Bank limited, and any democratic Government would heed public opinion.

2.	There is an unexplained hurry - we do not understand it - to sell UCBL without transparency and precautionary measures to minimise financial manipulation by foreign buyers such as Westmont.

3.	We observed that most districts up country are served by UCBL and no other banks are willing to open up-country branches even under the liberalised environment.  

4.	UCBL is the largest bank in Uganda controlling more than 28 per cent of the total market share deposits and its customers are spread across the country. Some of these are Ugandans, the majority of them with small deposits.  UCBL is an indigenous bank that allows lowest minimum deposit requirement and it also has the lowest banking charges.

5.	The foreign banks are useful indeed, but they hardly engage in domestic mobilisation of resources and are mostly engaged in corporate banking and international trade.

UCBL has been playing a major role in accepting payments on behalf of Government, and URA is an example. A collection accepting payments theory has now been opened, and I am sure the Minister can confirm that the competitors are likely to charge him a higher fee than UCBL has been charging him. 

The selling of branches in option two would be disastrous since rural savings for instance, mobilisation and linkages with micro finance institutions, would be lost, and service rates would be higher. 

Bank of Uganda seized UCBL in 1998, under the Financial Institutions Statute 1993. Despite the fact that UCBL has now complied with the provisions of the Financial Institution Statute, Bank of Uganda is stuck to the bank without justification. The argument that UCBL is making profits, mainly due to dealing in the Treasury Bills is inaccurate, as it ignores to mention that other banks are also doing the same. Therefore, if UCBL’s treasury income is not sustainable in the long term, it is equally not sustainable for the other banks.

The extended audit report reveals that UCBL has actually competent and qualified management. This shows that Ugandans can manage the bank, and indeed, it has been shown. To turn the bank from loss under Westmont, to profits within one year is a commendable achievement by this management who are mainly Ugandans, with one guy from Bank of Uganda.

The contention that UCBL will once again – this is crucial, Mr. Speaker, this argument has been said and repeated - the contention that UCBL will once again revert to losses, once Bank of Uganda leaves, is unscientific. It is unscientific because the Bank made losses under Westmont management, and the circumstances have changed.  

The last observation was that, the establishment of Rural Payments Banks to replace UCBL could not be a viable option, because the Payments Bank would lack capitalisation, which they would have to get from the Consolidated Fund. And Payments Bank would not be lending as we have been told, and hence to be sustainable, they would have to be subsidised.  

In light of this, we made a number of resolutions – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let him complete the Report.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am about to finish, Mr. Speaker, if you could permit me.

THE SPEAKER: Please complete.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you so much for the protection. The Committee would like the House to revolve as follows: One; the sale of UCBL should be stayed until Parliament finalises, and adopts its report, on the best modality of selling the bank. (Applause).  Mr. Speaker, for avoidance of doubt that UCBL is now owned 100 percent by Government, the Minister of Finance, Planning & Economic Development should lay on the Table the share certificates, all 100 percent of the shares of UCBL, for the House to examine.

Two; that the terms and conditions, bench marks and bottom line of the sale, the terms which were sent to the potential buyers of UCBL, should be availed to this House to know under what conditions the bank is being sold. 

Finally, the interest of the stakeholders, and the strategic development role of UCBL in the national economy of this country should be paramount in any option of the sale process.  We are all accountable.

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, Uganda Commercial Bank is a sensitive issue. I want to thank Members for their commitment, and the interest they showed in the discussions, and in the meetings. I want to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning & Economic Development, and his officials for responding to our invitation and interviews.  

More importantly, I want to thank the public for the response.  The public has not hidden its preferred option for responding to the invitation of the Committee, and for discussing with the Committee the privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank.  

We have recommended, Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence, that the House supports this Report and adopts it; and we would do the final work and bring it to the House. But I want to thank you for your skilful and effective manner of guiding the House, in debating a very controversial matter of this kind.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Now, he has read the Report and I think the Members need time to go and internalise it, so that they can effectively debate it, and see how we can utilise it for our good.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, once again I beg your indulgence.  At the beginning of this session this afternoon, I requested for certain information, which you said could only be available from certain Ministers. I note with great pleasure that one of the principle Ministers has now come.   She is in this House with us, and I am sure she is planning to leave very soon. I hope she can answer the questions I put through you to her.  

If she could tell us whether she has got any information on my former colleague, retired Col. Kizza Besigye, whether he is in their custody; and if he is missing, what they are doing about it. And finally, whether some of us are secure, especially those who do not agree with the Government?

THE SPEAKER:Is it directed to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs?

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, very much so.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, are you in position to help us on that? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I would want for the record to inform you and the House that I am not going anywhere as hon. Aggrey Awori has said; unless he has a planned journey that I am not aware of. I am certainly not going anywhere. I have come to this House.   However regarding the matter HE is talking about, I am sorry, I don’t have any information right now, because I have been in meetings since morning and I literally jumped out of one meeting to come here.   So, I don’t want to start speculating.  But as soon as the information is available, I am sure it will be communicated to the House.  Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Am I secure?

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Speaker, may I inform hon. Aggrey Awori that like any Ugandan, he is secure and his life is not in danger unless he intends to break the law. (Laughter) But even then, I think hon. Aggrey Awori should know that he will be handled as per the law.   So he has no reason to be insecure, because if he goes to prison he will still be secure.  Thank you -(Laughter) 

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what I was alluding to.  How do I know my former colleague, Kizza Besigye, is not in jail or in a safe house?

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2000/2001.
(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, this report, which the chairman has just read ended requesting Parliament to pass a resolution; and now the House is quiet on the request of the chairman and the Committee.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, you see hon. Member; this is a recommendation in the report, whether the House accepts it that is a different matter, and the House can deal with this after the debate.  But as I have told you before, I am still hanging on the pledge, which the minister has made; and when this is overtaken by the resolution of the House, then we shall see.  But the resolution will be dealt with later.  

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, the reason why one part of the resolution is there, is because we were informed in the committee by the Governor of Bank of Uganda that bids will be opened on 28th this month and the rest of the information will come when the bank is sold. (Interjection).  Yes, we were informed in the committee and that is why we are requesting this House- (Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER:  But hon. Member, I have said that the report has been read and tomorrow, the Members will debate this report and whatever resolution they will pass will be deemed appropriate.

MR. JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Even if I don’t thank you for particularly choosing me today, the people of Jie are happy to see that I have become the first person to speak on this motion.  The budget presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides resources for implementing the President’s manifesto.  Hopefully, this motion is meant to work on the objectives and directives contained in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which directs that the manifesto of the President and budget operates to see that the development of this country is implemented, and that there shall be consideration to the disadvantaged areas like Jie county.  

Basing on that background, I would like to highlight on the performance of the economy pointed out in the budget speech.  It is reported that the volume of hides and skins has doubled, and there is a value increase of about 21 million United States dollars.  This is good news for the people of Jie County, who at least have livestock population that is seemingly good.  You know through livestock, we get hides and skins; and I would like to call upon Government to provide alternative jobs for the people of Karamoja and Jie in particular.  That is by creating employment to reduce the crime rates that Karamoja is identified with.  This is due to the fact that most of the youth, we call them ‘karacunas’ are unemployed, and if government through this budget could direct resources to attract investors to put up industries to manufacture hides and products of hides and skins, then we can create employment for the people of that region.  

In this very motion, there is this issue of electricity.   It is in the report that, there is increased production of electricity by 80 megawatts, that is about 40 per cent increase.  I would like to mention here clearly that, the towns in my district, more so Kotido District, Kabongo and Kotido town are the darkest in the whole of Uganda.  We don’t have lights; we do not have any provision that is short term to light this part of the country, and meanwhile, we feel that we should modernize the area.  We are least developed in terms of communication.  We don’t have any power station, we do not have any radio station and even the crumbling voice of Karamoja does not reach my district, and the people of Jie are cut off from the system of modernization.  

In the same context, if electricity could be stretched to those areas as promised by the President through his manifesto, that there will be an electricity line from Corner Kilak to Kotido, we should make sure that this element of communication is improved and the potential minerals that are in Karamoja are put to use.  We have 14 mineral deposits in Karamoja; l would like this matter to be explained by the Minister responsible for minerals - what has Government put in place?    This budget does not provide for the exploitation of these minerals, except for the dubious involvement that government had with the Branch Energy of South Africa which has left Lopedo and most of the grazing lands of Karamoja open and prone to the destruction of life and livestock in that place.  

In view of the time that is available to me, I would like also to look at the point of education that is mentioned in the budget speech.  As much as we appreciate that there is free compulsory primary education, we the people of Karamoja, and mostly Jie County, are requesting for boarding facilities in the schools.  Government goes for primary day schools, but we are saying, if we can have boarding schools, this will help us to stop parents who prevent their children from concentrating on formal school work. It could also help us to create a very good environment for the children in schools to read; it will also help us to monitor and solve the problems of children in schools.  As you know, most of the time our children are forced by circumstances to change the course of progressing in school.  You might find that a child will be called to look after the goats, or a child will be called to attend to domestic work, if it is a girl-child.  So, if we would concentrate, and say let us have these children restricted into boarding schools, we can uplift this situation in Karamoja.  

There is the other element of water.  This has been a contentious issue; it is what has caused us problems with our neighbours.  Government has completely no comprehensive plan to look at the water issue in Karamoja.  I want to specifically look at water for consumption.  As much as we drill many boreholes in that place, there is an element of maintenance.  I would like the Ministry concerned to look into this budget and ensure that there is more provision of funds to look at the repairs and maintenance of water in that region.  

I don’t want to concentrate on the issue of water for production; that is for animal consumption and modernization of agriculture, say in terms of irrigation.  There was a long debate in the Sixth Parliament and it is also debated here, and the major problem we have there is corruption.  No wonder the other day we were in a closed meeting, discussing issues of Karamoja and we did not look at the element of corruption, which has become a disease to the people of Jie and people of Karamoja.  

Most people eat from our dams; most people enjoy from the backwardness of Karamoja. I would like to point this out clearly that through thick and thin; through grief and impatience, we the people of Jie County have vowed to declare war against corruption, especially on Members of the Front Bench who don’t want to support the call of the President, to ensure that Karamoja is saved from the wrath of suffering.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I support the motion.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I also want to thank the Government and the Minister of Finance for ensuring that there is some growth.  I want also to thank planners for some good fiscal discipline and sound monetary policies of maintaining inflation in single digit levels.  But I want to point out that, Third World economies are like a patient who is in a clinic and on a drip and needs very close monitoring.  I want also to say that an economy has got interdependent sectors.  A deficiency in one of the sectors causes problems in the entire system.  It is like a body which has blood circulation, digestive system or nervous system; a deficiency in one of them will make the body be at a standstill.  In other words, the sectors in an economy must act in an interdependent manner.  There is no way you will improve efficiency in one, and leave the other to go to the dogs. 
 I have read all the papers called Background to the Budget and Budget Speeches since 1993/94 to-date, and I have no doubt in my mind that there is a looming big trouble for the economy.  Gross Domestic Product by 1994/95 was 8.1 per cent and it hit a peak of 10.5 in 1995/96.  But from there, we see a systematic decline, and I wish hon. Ssendaula was here.  I can see his junior Minister, hon. Rukutana, in  aproblem.  It hit a systematic and consistent decline to 4.7 and five per cent for 1999/2000, 2000/2001 respectively.  When you analyze every document that is made available by the finance officials, three factors are identified to be the reason for this decline: deteriorating terms of trade, drought and El Nino.  

In his Executive Summary of 2001/2002 of the Background to the Budget, the blame is put on the downward trend in the global agricultural commodity prices vis-à-vis the prices of the oil products, which basically are the same terms of trade.  He is not making any other point apart from terms of trade.  It is interesting that when you read, you will find that hon. Ssendaula and his team do not make a case for diversification of the economy to address the deterioration of terms of trade.  I have read them and I have looked for a case for diversification of the economy to address the dependency on coffee - I am not seeing a single point.  Coffee still continues to dominate; it is being killed by the coffee wilt as if the Ministry of Finance officials, including the Minister, depend on one income.  

There is the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA); I have also read through it.  But the picture does not seem to be any better.  On page 47, I pray and request that you give me some more time, because I consider that a discussion on Government Budget is the central point of our politics.  On page 47 of the Background to the Budget, the Minister realizes that prolonged drought has been one of the factors responsible for the decreased income to our poor peasants and it has got a direct impact on the reduced industrial growth.  But the same PMA does not put a case for irrigation. This is very interesting. Someone says that real GDP rate has been declining because of drought among other factors (Ms Tiperu rose_). I have limited time, Madam –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Get it since you are even beyond your time. If you want it, get it.

MS.TIPERU: Thank you very much. I just want to give information to add on to what my colleague is saying about prolonged drought. I would like to inform this House that in my constituency, Yumbe, nine people died last week in the parish of Kooki due to drought and famine. Thank you very much.

MR.ARUMADRI: Mr. Speaker, I was in Madi-Okollo last weekend, and I got very sad news that six people died due to hunger emanating from long drought in the parishes of Akino and Ajibu. This is only to add to what my hon. colleague on the Floor is talking about irrigation. Thank you.

CAPT.GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Hon. Member from Madi-Okolo, thank you very much. Discussion of the presentation of the Budget by the Minister is an important thing, and therefore, it should be given all the necessary focus, energy and attention.  In fact, PMA - you can hear what is happening in Yumbe -PMA has identified irrigation as being an expensive scheme. I am sure professors with PHDs have written that it is an expensive scheme. Therefore, there seems to be no case for irrigation in the event that drought strikes. So, what next? If drought is cited every fiscal year in all the documents from the Ministry of Finance, what are the plans then? How will you convince me that PMA will be a success?  

It should be noted that the GDP rate has been going down, while the growth of the population has been rising. I do not know how we are going to come out of that quagmire of population increasing and development going down. The 1995 Uganda Demographic Health Survey put the fertility rate in this country at 6.9 children for every woman. This has been responsible for the population growth and it undermines every effort and gains made in economic growth. Therefore, planners had better wake up. Population increases, fertility rises, no plan for drought but they simply come out with documents! 

When you internalise the 2001/2002 Budget Speech and the Background to the Budget, the central piece for Government seems to be Poverty Eradication Action Project (PEAP), PMA and Medium Term Competitive Strategy which is supposed to remove certain rigidities within the Government Departments responsible for inadequate investment. They are talking of expanding infrastructure and utilities; I do not know whether that will be answered by the increased tariffs of electricity. They are talking of improving access to financial services; I do not know whether that one will be answered by the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank.  (Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you have gone beyond your time; could you now conclude.

CAPT.GUMA GUMISIRIZA: I thought it was your assurance, Mr. Speaker. Let me wind up by saying that we still have corruption in the Government Departments and it makes it very difficult for private investors to cope with our local situation, and that is why you notice unfailingly that the rate of investment is really decimal. So, since time is against me, I want to invite - probably I will visit the Ministry of Finance officials to explain to me because with the skeleton professional knowledge I have, I am at a total loss as far as our economy is concerned. The growth of the industrial sector is not even talked about in the background to the Budget of hon. Ssendaula. I had more to say, but since I must give way, I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker.

REV.DR SSEMPANGI KEFA (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to start by saying that I am sad that we have lost an hon. Member of this House.  

On page 7 of the Budget Speech there is a sub heading; “Bringing the benefits of growth and structural transformation to the poor”.  First, I appreciate Government efforts in coming to the plight of the poor with cross cutting programmes like this PMA, Poverty Eradication Action Plan, Universal Primary Education. These show that Government has an intention to improve the status of the poor of this country. 

In the same Budget, it is said that 35 per cent of Uganda’s population is under the category of the absolute poor.  These are the people who are described as the lazy lot and as people who do not know what they want. They are totally ignored and at the same time they are told to work hard. They are judged in terms of what they possess; they do more to get less; they are not judged in terms of what they do.  These people, who are called the lazy lot, spend more time digging and working to get almost nothing from their labour. These are the people who are fed up with our political rhetoric; they want to see something on the ground being done. They need economic emancipation from this scourge of poverty. 

Human needs are described as food, shelter, clothing, education and so on and so forth, but as much as these are human needs, they are human rights. Therefore, Government has an obligation to improve the welfare of its people.  

We hear of the research being done and the Ministry of Agriculture has established research centres in various parts of the country, but there is a disparity between the money that they spend on research and that for the implementation. What goes to the ground, the people I am talking about in Ntenjeru South wonder how much of this money spent on research is profitable. Take the case of the cassava mossaic and coffee wilt. Other than that lots of money is spent on research, and little of it really goes to the common man or the common woman. The majority of the absolute poor are illiterate. This idea of research and spending so much money on research, workshops, sensitisation and so on and so forth is really a foreign idea.  

I have been working with some NGOs and there are stipulations and so much money is spent on workshops. These illiterate people will not be found in those workshops.  This is really an elite problem.

The people in Nazigo sub-county in Ntenjeru South have been growing passion fruits for the last 15 years, but the middleman is exploiting them. A basket of passion fruits in my area costs Shs.500 yet in Kampala maybe 5 or 10 passion fruits cost Shs.1000. Who is exploiting the other, the middleman; and these people do not need research but work should be done at their level.

Then we have the literacy programmes I feel should be packaged and integrated with the poverty eradication programme in a wholistic manner. In my constituency, we are the best growers of pineapples, but how much is a farmer paid? Peanuts! We see the pineapples coming to Kampala. In my area, there is electricity, so we are asking for agro-processing so that value is added to the farmer to realise the effort of his labour.  

Again in the same constituency, we have a tourist centre at Kalangala. We need investors.  

There is also a road from Kayunga to Kawongo, to Nakasongola; this area will need to be tarmacked so that there is development in the area. We do not have a bank in Kangulumira. I know this is a very sensitive issue. Despite what happened to the UCB, we still need a bank in the area so that the farmers can deposit their money there. Kayunga is now a district, and Mukono is very far from my home area.     

The people of Ntenjeru South will appreciate if PMA, PEAP are implemented. There is also need for horizontal planning. Most of these programmes are vertical. The man at the bottom is not approached. Therefore, his knowledge is regarded as nothing. These pineapples I am talking about, they are grown using highly technical indigenous knowledge. They will appreciate if this research will also include this knowledge. Thank you.

MR.KIWANDA GODFREY (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like also to add my voice to those appreciating the budget speech, but my concern is on page 8 where the Minister was talking about decentralisation. The Minister noted that there is need to ensure that Local Government strengthens their tax administration to mobilise as much revenue as possible and become less reliant on the transfer from the Central Government.  

This has raised the concern of the people of Mityana North in that, the process of strengthening tax administration and mobilisation of revenue has turned into exploitation of our people through high rates of permits and some other local taxes like the graduated tax. So, the people of my constituency need the guidance of the Ministry concerned in implementation of this, especially as far as the graduated tax is concerned. 

I remember I raised this when I was contributing on the President’s Speech, but it is unfortunate that the Minister of State is not here today. I raised this when I saw the circular which was passed by the Ministry of Local Government, which was unclear. He said that he called it off, but since then, he has never sent a new circular. The year has begun, this is the third month of the financial year, and the circular is not yet out on graduated tax. I do not know. I think I need some guidance from the Minister himself.    

Another issue is about the ghost teachers in our primary schools. When the Minister was presenting the Budget, he indicated that there is a need to recruit more teachers in addition to those in primary schools to ensure quality education so as to meet the target ratio of 50 pupils to one teacher from 58 to one. But when we move to our primary schools today, we still have the so-called ghost teachers. You go to a school, the payroll indicates eight teachers, but you see four of them on the ground. When you ask the headmaster, he tells you about the transfer which was done some years back, yet the name has not been transferred from that payroll. So, this needs some supervision from the Ministry. It is unfortunate that the Minister is not available for comment.

I would also like to thank the Government for the school facilitation grant, especially for construction of classrooms, but when I look at the batch given to my district, it too alarming. I would like to be clarified which criterion was used as far as giving these SFG funds is concerned. Because some districts are given a lot of money, while others are given peanuts, especially Mubende.

Another issue is absorption of P.7 leavers. The Minister indicated that there is need to absorb this; but when I look at the Government aided secondary schools we have, they are very few. For example, in my constituency, there are only two Government-aided secondary schools and about 10 private secondary schools. So, I urge the Government and the Ministry concerned to support these private schools. They should be helped instead of being given high rates of taxes because they are partners as far as absorbing UPE graduates is concerned.

I would also like to comment on the temporary bridge on Mayanja River on Hoima Road. Members will recall the tragedy which befell us last year but one, when about six doctors drowned in Mayanja River on Hoima Road before Busunjju. The structure which was built there is temporarily, but it may cause another danger any time. I am not seeing any response from the Ministry of Works. The thing is collapsing anytime, and anything can happen from now. So, I would like the Ministry to take care of this.

I would also like to have clarification on this.  When we were beginning this debate, some Members raised the concern that, the Members of the Front Bench were not here; and when they came in, something like 20 minutes ago most of them went out, and some were here only for 10 minutes. So, we want to be clarified. I do not know whether what we are discussing is so irrelevant to them. Thank you very much.

MR. KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Since I am making my maiden speech, allow me to use this opportunity to thank the people of Gomba Constituency, for having renewed their trust in me after a recess of five years. 

Since we are limited by time, I want to concentrate on the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, this is a ground plan, it is a very beautiful plan, and we all support it. We welcome it especially those of us who represent farmers.  But we want to request that this plan is not bogged down like previous projects.  

In Uganda, one way of telling that there is a project in the country is by seeing very big vehicles moving around. Even when the project is supposed to be upcountry, you will always see these vehicles moving around in Kampala.  It is our hope that this PMA program does not become a victim of our weaknesses. 

I remember very well that this Plan for Modernization of Agriculture started way back in 1998, when seminars were held at district level. First of all, we had seminars for all districts; then we had regional seminars on the same program; and then officers came back to hold more seminars in the districts. But up to now, nothing has taken off.  So it is my appeal, Mr. Speaker, that this program does not get money wasted in workshops, in seminars, and in all such programs.  

I really wonder whether our officers take time to evaluate the results of the seminars they hold.  It seems much of our money is spent in seminars, which seminars normally come to nothing.  Since this is a program that is meant to benefit the man in the village, let it go directly to the village. Let the farmers be trained, and let them be helped to produce more, so that they can get out of the poverty syndrome.  

In proper management of the economy, I think Government should put more emphasis into those areas where we have economic advantage or comparative advantage. I see that a lot of emphasis is being put on coffee.  Every time we are told more seedlings are coming out, we are going to get free seedlings. That is a good idea; but then the question is, if the prices of coffee are ever going down on the world market, is it really reasonable or is it wise at this stage to pump more money into coffee?  Why do we not divert this money to those areas which pay more? For example, as we talk now, vanilla is fetching a lot of money. Fermented vanilla fetches 100 dollars for a kilo; green beans of vanilla fetch Shs. 15,000/- for a kilo. Why does Government not pump more money into vanilla, so that the farmers can get out of the poverty syndrome?  

We are also told, Mr. Speaker, that these ‘Kinyankole’ cattle have got very little cholesterol, and their meat is very safe for human bodies. Why do they not pump more money into research on these ‘kinyankole’ cattle, so that their meat is promoted; so that we can export it and then earn more money for the country?

I am also interested in the area of fish.  We are told that Uganda fish is very popular, it has very little cholesterol, and the people outside are very interested in it.  So, I am appealing to Government to pump more money into this field.  (Interruption) I can be informed, Mr. Speaker, if I will be allowed more time.

MR. BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Member for giving way. I want to inform the hon. Member that the research on the Ankole beef, which has got less cholesterol, is going on, and the headquarters are on Kiira Road which is now, called Yusuf Kironde Road.  I can take you there. Research is going on and is being done by Americans. Thank you very much.

MR. KALULE SSENGO: That is very welcome information, Mr. Speaker. I would urge Government to pump even more money into it, because I am sure it will be able to help our farmers out of the poverty syndrome.  

I would like to comment on the export of fruits.  As His Excellency pointed out in his Address to the Nation, countries outside are very much interested in the fruits from Uganda. But then, the fruit exporters have one problem; the airfreight of the fruits is too high. By the time our fruits get to the markets in Europe and elsewhere, the freight charges are so prohibitive that the prices at which they land are too high and cannot compete with the fruits from elsewhere. So, I want to appeal to Government to find ways of subsidizing the exporters of fruits. 

It is a pity that our national airline was run down. I am talking of the Uganda Airlines.  Because, if it was still vibrant as it was in the past, Government would be able to put in a bit of money, and subsidize our fruit exporters. This would enable us to sell more fruits outside, and the farmers would be able to grow more.

With those few remarks Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much, and I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us balance the debate - the gender factor.

MRS. MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of other Members, who have stood up to support the motion. Presenting some salient issues that have been presented to me by the people of Busia district. Mr. Speaker, I pray that you will not get tired of hearing issues concerning markets for agricultural commodities.  The people of Busia District also have this concern.  Busia is a border District, and as you maybe aware, the people participate mainly in agriculture; and maize is one of the major commodities that are cultivated in that area. 

The prices of this commodity are actually alarming. This commodity is just given away to Kenyans at prices that are unbelievable. So, for that matter, if the issue of working on Agro Processing industries was actually worked upon, then this would assist people to be able to process their commodities, so that they don’t receive it across the border after it has been processed by Kenyans in form of posho, animal and poultry products.

I would also like to talk about the issue of the State University that has been put forward by the people of Busia District.  You are aware that Universities have been set up in all regions of this country except Eastern Region. Busia District has an area that would actually be utilized as a University.  Busitema –(Interruption)

MR. BASALIZA:  I wish to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to inform her that in mid Western Region, that is, Masindi, Kibaale, Hoima, Kasese, Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kamwenge, there is no single University.

MRS. MUNYIRA WABWIRE: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Member from Fort portal for that information, but for this matter, I actually had in mind the traditional four Regions, at least for the beginning, in which Eastern Region would also qualify.  You are aware that two Universities have been set up in the Central Region; Kyambogo University is one of them in the pipeline and it will be fully-fledged in the coming Financial Year.  The University in the Northern Region is also going to be opened. For the Eastern Region, there is really nothing, and I was saying, Busitema National College of Agricultural Mechanization has been in existence for a long time.  It was opened in 1971; it has all the facilities; it has the land; it has the buildings, and sincerely if this College was upgraded, it would serve as a beginning point for a University.  According to what I read about the University in the North – it is not that I am against it, they are just looking around for some buildings to start it, but in Eastern Region the buildings are there.  The people in that region have always heard rumors about a University being brought in that area  -(Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, because of time –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: You want information from Arua?
MRS. MUNYIRA WABWIRE: Mr. Speaker, I would rather finish my point before the information is given.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed.

MRS. MUNYIRA WABWIRE:  So the people of this area have been hopeful for a long time, especially through the promise of hon. Member of Parliament, Aggrey Awori; he has tried to lobby for this University, but I think it needs some kind of pushing.  So we pray that this is put into consideration, because I was going through the Policy Statement for the Minister of Education, and Busitema College of Agricultural Mechanization is hardly mentioned. Considering the fact that this is an agricultural institution, we should really have an upper hand, especially with a lot of cries about implementation of the PMA and the like.

I just pray that one more minute is given to me, so that I can say something about Presidential Pledges in Busia District. During the time of Presidential campaigns, there was installation of electricity going on and the rate at which this project was being implemented was actually high; but to the surprise of the people in that area, the electricity poles now just lie as if nobody has ever touched them.  So the people are really concerned. They gave the President the votes, so we really pray that this electricity is extended to the lake area so that the beach that is in process at the Lake Majanji is completed.  So that is what I had to contribute.  I welcome any information. Thank you.

MR. MIGEREKO:  I would like to thank the Member from Busia for raising that point.  The power line to Busia area and Majanji in particular, yes, it is true that project was started on before the elections, and work was progressing very well, but it is also true that there was a problem with disbursement of funds from the Donors during that time.  We have been holding consultations with CIDA who are responsible for funding that project, and I am sure very soon, they will be releasing the funds so that all the projects, not only the Busia project, all the rural electrification projects being funded under CIDA will resume and work will be completed.  Thank you.

MR. MALINGA J. (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and I have a few remarks to make in relation to my county.  In education, the people of Kapelebyong have welcomed the idea of UPE very much.  However, they have asked me to inform the Government and this House that there are some crafty people who are disorganizing the UPE programme.  Some people came in uniform, wearing sheets around their waists and started de-roofing one of the schools put up for the UPE programme, and the part of the school that was not de-roofed, they burnt it.  So the people of Kapelebyong pray that the Government of Uganda will protect the UPE programme.

In this county of Kapelebyong there is only one secondary school and two others started by the parents.  No laboratory, no library for any of the schools and no A-level; we pray that in this Budget they will throw something to the people of Kapelebyong.

In higher institutions, we do not have any single technical school or T.T.C. or Medical School in Kapelebyong.  I hope Government will give priority when it starts the technical schools. Poverty –(Ms.Kiyingi Namusoke rose_)

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor.  He talked about people who de-roofed schools. For purposes of assisting Police to investigate this theft, what kind of sheets were these?  Were they skirts or medical like kind of wear, or what is the relevancy of the sheets they were wearing?  Thank you.

MR. MALINGA JOHN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am glad the Minister who is asking has just been to one of these schools I am talking about. She is very much aware that people are camped in Kapelebyong, because of the massive raids by the Karimojong. I hope in her Ministry, she is putting in place measures to secure the people of Kapelebyong from these raids. This is what I was talking about. The people who wear sheets, and uniforms were Karimojong (Laughter).  

When people talk about some Ugandans living above the poverty line, for us in Kapelebyong, none of us is near the poverty line.  We pray that the Government of Uganda will hear us. Our President was wise to create the Ministry of Entandikwa, but for the last season, we were told there were no funds. We were trying to look at these things, we are looking at the Budget, and the Ministry is there.  We do not know if the funds will be there this time. We pray that the Minister will have funds to supervise, and also help us, the people of Kapelebyong.

We have heard of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. We hope it will reach us, like the UPE has reached us.  UPE has been the only meaningful programme we have received in Kapelebyong.  We hope the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture will also reach us.

Land Issues: I read from the Budget that there was going to be an amendment of the Land Act, and we were scared that being so poor, because of insecurity that has been forced on us, the Land Act amendment may be unfavourable to the poor. We pray this Land amendment will pass through this House. And the prayer of the people in Kapelebyong is that, the decentralisation of Land Registry is effected, so that we do not have to travel to Entebbe.  

MS. BYANYIMA WINNIE: Thank you very much, Member for Kapelebyong for giving way.  I am seeking clarification. I am sorry to take you back on the issue of Entandikwa, which you raised. You see we have often argued in this House about the number of the Ministers that are appropriate for a poor country like Uganda. Some people have taken the view that we need many Ministers, so that every district can have a Minister, so that there is national unity.  

I am wondering that there should be a complaint from Katakwi about Entandikwa, when the Minister for Entandikwa has been a Minister from Katakwi!  Could you clarify to me whether you subscribe to this view of a Minister for each district, and whether this has served the people of Katakwi?  Thank you.

MR. MALINGA JOHN: Well, I was one of the few members who did not subscribe to the expansion of the number of Ministers (Applause). However, national unity can only be got if the Government of Uganda spreads the services to the people of Uganda equally, not by appointment of Ministers.  
I was talking about the land issues, and I was appealing to Government to decentralise Land Registry.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I read from the Budget an area where the Minister of Finance is intending to charge excise duty on mobile phones’ airtime.  In Kapelebyong, we thought this would be the only chance for us also to get connected with the rest of the world – (Laughter).  With the introduction of excise duty of 10 per cent, I am sure we shall not even receive MTN.  I do not know what we shall do! It is our prayer that the Government revisits their thinking on the taxation of mobile phones’ airtime, and probably reduce it to 5 per cent instead of 10 per cent, so that we can also get the service of mobile phones.  Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also stand to support the motion on the Floor, though the district where I come from is really surviving within the economy of the NGOs.  Without the NGOs and other international agencies, we people who continuously survive on handouts and relief food would really not be in existence. 

I will specifically talk strongly on three Ministries.  Ministry of Defence: I think the Ministry of Defence, despite the fact that year in, year out, they have asked for more money to protect the people of Uganda, they have failed to protect many people, and they have subjected them to a difficult life in the protected camps.  

As if that is not enough, they have also turned our own home guards, and our poor people in the protected camps into a cheap labor reserve. Home guards are recruited indirectly, absorbed into the Army without increasing their pay; and are quietly transferred to go and fight foreign wars, and when they return home are subjected to the same conditions.  

These are very serious things. On top of that, the Ministry of Defence has actually not done enough to help us, in the process of compensating people who lost their animals.  The Ministry of Defence has always frustrated our people who travel from the protected villages, in Gulu to the Army Headquarters, to get their compensation cleared for payment. But in all cases, they have been frustrated, and to this effect, the people of Gulu and Aswa County for that matter, are disappointed that the Ministry which takes the biggest share of the Budget in the name of protecting the people of Uganda, is failing in its responsibility either by design or something else.

Secondly, is the Ministry of Agriculture. For us to hear about Modernisation is a dream. You cannot modernise people who are camped in protected villages. Not really protected villages, but concentration camps, because they are not protected. We have lost people who have been raided by rebels in these so called protected villages, because the people who are supposed to protect them actually live inside the camps, and the rest of the population live outside to protect them.

I am wondering how the Ministry of Agriculture will modernise agriculture! We have the land, the climate is okay, we do not need irrigation. Sometime back the Acholi Parliamentary Group was asked by the President to draw up a programme for agriculture in the protected villages. Unfortunately, that programme was hijacked by the Vice President claiming that she had a programme on agriculture. She toured the country, but she never reached the most disadvantaged part of the country, that is, the North, Gulu in particular. Our programmes were frustrated; our vision was hijacked and the people we represent remain very helpless in these camps. I wonder what the Ministry of Agriculture has for the people who are concentrated in these camps.

They have given us a Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, but that Minister is not facilitated and this is very frustrating. If the Government really thinks about the people of the North; if the Government of Uganda wants to help in the Poverty Alleviation Project, then the Minister of State resident in the North should be facilitated, because the biggest problem with that portfolio is that there is no money. The Minister cannot even travel to his field office twice a month because money for fuel will not be there. We think this is some kind of window dressing that is really useless. It is useless window dressing to show the people of Northern Uganda that we do also care. Government should become serious and facilitate that Ministry to perform its duty.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (NORTHERN UGANDA RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME) (Mr. Didi Agard): Thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank hon Okumu Reagan for giving way. As for that Minister he is talking about, part of what he is saying may be true for historical reasons because NURP I is finished.   We are now in the process of organising NURP II, which is called, “Northern Uganda Social Election Fund”. Very soon, a Bill will be brought here for you to approve those things, which I really lack. Thank you.

MR.OKUMU REAGAN: We hope, Mr. Minister, that what will be brought for approval here will be useful for your Ministry and also useful in facilitating your programmes.  

MRS.KULANY GERTRUDE: Mr. Speaker, this issue of displaced people is becoming very wide spread in this country. At the same time, this country takes a lot of care of refugees who are from outside this country. But it is very disturbing that our own people who are displaced do not get proper care. Is there a way we can institute a law here to cater or protect these people of ours? I seek that clarification.

MRS.BAKOKO BAKORU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Partly the Ministry of Gender is supposed to liase with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to handle the issue of refugees and internally displaced people. I do also know that the Refugee Bill has not come to Parliament and I think it is in the pipeline. The issues related to displacement for the time being, I think have been handled as they arise. Maybe I will be able to consult with my colleague, hon. Moses Ali, and see how we can develop the disaster preparedness policy on this issue. It is very important for us to have a plan to enable us to respond adequately to a disaster which will arise in any part of this country since disasters are unplanned. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.DIDI AGARD: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since this is a general debate, it would be more useful if we gather the information so that at the time of reaction, we brief either the Leader of Government Business or the relevant Ministers. I think that way, many issues raised will be covered. Since Members represent various constituencies, I think it is good to give them the widest scope and not be seen to be stopping them by Ministers reacting immediately. I seek your guidance on that, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think it depends on the matter. The Minister may not have the information to give in respect of a query, and therefore, he can say, “At a later date, I will give the information”. But sometimes, an issue may require an immediate answer so that further contributions are not geared to the same misinformation. But the query from the Member for Kapchorwa was the apparent discrimination in the treatment of refugees and internally displaced persons of Uganda. I think her question was, ‘why do you get more concerned with refugees than your own people?’ I think that requires some explanation.

MR.WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. colleague from Kapchorwa that the apparent preferential treatment given to refugees is as a result of the support from the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, which helps host countries to look after refugees in the spirit of burden sharing. This is a cardinal principle in the management of refugee problems the world over. Thank you.

MR.MALINGA: Mr. Speaker, I get confused. When the issue of insecurity comes up in this House, and especially in some parts of the country, it is apparent that there is only one location disturbing a wide part of the country. Kapchorwa, part of Mbale, Kumi, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Lira, Kitgum, probably Apac. Are these served by one group of people? I looked through the Budget of last year and I did not see any budgetary provision for taking of troops to Congo to secure whatever was being secured in Congo. But when the issue of disarmament of Karimojong was passed in this House, I am reliably informed that it did not take place because there were no funds. I am now puzzled, where is the priority in Uganda? Is it to defend the refugees or to defend the people of Uganda? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do you not think this is a policy matter that requires an elaborate explanation? 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Rukutana): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is not true that on the issue of the disarmament of Karamoja, there are no funds in the Budget.  The other day, we had a whole day meeting at the Prime Minister’s office, discussing ways and means of carrying out the process of disarming the Karimonjong, and pacifying the area. I know as a fact that there is 2.1 billion shillings meant for the disarmament exercise. We found out in that meeting that money was not enough, and we would need 3.7 billion shillings.  

We in the Ministry of Finance are busy scratching our heads to see where we get that money and indeed, we shall get it.  So, Mr. Speaker, the disarmament of Karimojong and the handling of the internal displaced persons, are taken as serious matters by Government, and nobody really should think that we prefer to deal with refugees. We give preference to internally displaced persons.  Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think for us, we have urged the Government; we cry to Government, and I think we shall only be left with two options if Government cannot help us. One would be to tell our people to vacate the camps by all means, and go back home. If they are going to be killed in their villages, let them perish in the villages.  Two, we shall be taking the option of dragging our Government to the Court of Law, because Government must protect the lives and properties of all Ugandans equally.

I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for what they have done, especially in the North. I am very grateful for the fight the Ministry put up against Ebola which started in my constituency last year. Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health did a commendable job, and my people are very grateful.  

However, the ebola epidemic also brought a lot of support to the Uganda Government.  There are now scholarships being offered at postgraduate level to the people of Uganda, which is very positive.  There is some support being given to the Ministry of Health. I will also urge the Ministry of Health to support my people of Lwotoviro, where ebola killed very many people, to build at least a memorial dispensary for them. And I would urge the Ministry of Health, to support our people in the protected camps, because they are in very bad state at the moment.

Finally, I want to urge the Entandikwa and the Disability Ministries, also to know that we have disabled people in the protected camps, whose conditions of living are actually more desperate than in the other places.

In conclusion, we would like to ask the Minister responsible for Information that, we too need to watch Uganda Television in Gulu.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division, West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to congratulate you, and your Deputy, for having been confirmed in that place where you are sitting at the moment as our Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, I was present when the budgetary speech was made. I listened and listened, but it was unfortunate that, the things I thought would be coming did not come up.  And one of those was the question of LC’s payment. These people have been running the country for the last 15 years. They subsist on bribes. This is really alarming. For example, somebody who wants to sell a plot of land for say 3 million, they will ask him to pay 10 percent. A sum which even lawyers never demand. So that’s how they make their living.  

I just cannot understand how we can manage to run the country on voluntary services. I wish the hon. Minister of Finance goes back and thinks about this matter seriously, together with the matter – (Mr Migereko rose_) – you have made your speech. What do you want to tell me at this juncture?  

MR. MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the Member from Makindye that during our last NEC, the matter of facilitation of district local councils, and sub county local councils and lower councils, featured prominently. The executive was requested to look into this matter; and this has been catered for in the Secretariat Budget. I hope when the Budget is presented here, hon. Nsambu will support the proposal for facilitating lower LCs.  I thank you.
MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister, when he refers to NEC and then he talks about the local councils. If I remember properly, it was the Movement committees, not local councils, because local councils especially the sub counties he refers to are local Governments.  They are not in the Movement structure. So I am seeking clarification, so that the records are corrected.  Is it the local council committees or the Movement committees, which are catered for in the NRM Secretariat Budget?

MR. MIGEREKO: I thank you for the clarification you are seeking. During the National Executive Committee, the Budgets for the Movement Committees at the lower level, and also the local councils came up as an issue for discussion, and a decision was taken by the National Executive Committee and National Conference of the Movement that, facilitation of the lower organs be undertaken in order to permit them to serve the people. This is why I am strongly appealing to my brother, hon. Nsambu, that he supports the Movement Budget when it comes here for consideration.  Thank you.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much for the information. I was talking about the Budget, but not the proposals you considered. 

Secondly, we have the burden of the LDUs. These people have had their legs sort of amputated.  When we come to Kampala City Council, it says it is not responsible; when we go to the police, they will say they are not responsible; when you write to the Minister of Internal Affairs, he says he is not responsible. So, you find that these voluntary services are not catered for in the Budget, and now people fear to start carrying out those duties. What we have seen are the LC executives coming round to collect money for security services.  Some people refuse to pay this money, because they say they are taxpayers and those people who are keeping them, should be provided for by the Government. 

My complaint is that, I did not see this written or addressed to the Members in the Budget. I hope- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsambu, you remember last week, we got very good information from hon. Maj. Gen. Tinyefuza about the status of LDUs, and what they call the home guards. The impression we had in the 6th Parliament - because these issues were raised - was that, they had been catered for in the army. It was revealed that this was not legally there, but maybe informally.  An appeal, as you have rightly said, was made to the Government to bring legislation, so that this lacuna is removed; and we get to know where to go and also the LDUs get to know where to go, in case they have a claim.  

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Thirdly, is the question of graduated tax. When I heard the President saying that the lowest money to be paid was 3,000 shillings, I thought that was a good gesture. But I was surprised when this small thing came out - the Statutory Instrument No.23.  It made it so ridiculous, when they said that, a person who would be paying 3,000 shillings would be somebody earning 60,000 shillings a year. To me, that would mean somebody earning about 5,000 shillings a month.

Surely, do we have a person here in Kampala or elsewhere who earns 5,000 shillings a month?  And how is he going to collect the 60,000 shillings to be able to pay off 3,000 shillings? To me this was really eluding what the President had more or less donated to the poor man. This type of man is not in Uganda, because if you consider him getting 5,000 shillings a month, how much is he paying for his accommodation, his meals and everything?  

When you talk about it, Movementists will say ‘it is not our business to consider what he eats, how he sleeps’ and so forth.  All they need is money.

MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. Nsambu.  I want to inform hon. Nsambu that the Ministry of Finance has gone ahead to tax all the allowances: housing, medical, travel, of many of the civil servants, and others who are in the formal sector like the teachers, some of whom are earning as little as 150,000 shillings. When you add maybe the package of their allowances, it could go to about 350,000/= or 400,000/= and the tax now which has been computed, is as high as 220,000/= which is far above what they actually earn. 
I think hon. Nsambu and others are so concerned that the Ministry is not really consistent in its policy of taxation.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much. But there are classes. I am calling upon the Minister for Finance to consider this; I would call it a lacuna also, because such a poor man does not actually exist in Uganda. And that is an indirect way of undermining what the President had more or less donated to the poor people.

Fourthly, my complaint and that of my constituency is that, the Minister did not say anything about fuel. People are in a very big dilemma. Tariffs have increased, fuel prices have increased, and even charcoal; and transport is now very difficult. Actually the Minister did a very bad thing not to talk about fuel. He saw that he was about to give his speech and increased the petrol prices, and it was not included in the Budget speech. In other words, trying to elude away from the criticisms he would have received openly here. I am still calling upon him to go back and ponder about the question of fuel.  More and more forests will be cut down. 

My people in the area, you know that they are black smiths - these door makers - they say they do not know how much they are going to sell a door, because electricity has been increased, and yet the purchasers are not there. I would have thought that, the increment would have depended on how much these people really earn. But this was not disclosed to us, and as a result, you find the poor men suffering with high prices of electricity. The Minister would have first thought that even the price of kerosene is too high for a poor man. 

In the villages, there are people who are really going without kerosene, and yet we are talking about taking electricity to the villages. If they cannot buy kerosene, how do you expect them to wire the house and start getting electricity? I do not know whether it was because the Minister was not expecting to come back or what, but thank God he has come back, and he will have to answer.  

In a nutshell, I want to say that the Budget itself as it stood or as it is still standing - I would not like to use the word ‘poor’, but it deserves a lot, so that it can be examined by some experts in this House. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MS.NANSUBUGA SARAH (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the Floor, and I would like to raise an issue under the Ministry of Works related to construction of roads. On page 19 of the Budget Speech under ‘Main Roads Improvement,’ it says, “Construction of about six main roads will commence.” I would like to cry out to the Ministry of Works that when the construction of these main roads is taking place, there should be very good planning before they are constructed.  

I stay on Entebbe Road, and this is a newly constructed road, but about a month or two after it was completed, some people connecting water came and dug it up. A month later, people from UEB came and dug it up to put up poles. Was that really co-ordinated or planned?  

It says, “Transport infrastructure is vital to a modern economy.” That is true, but when we keep on digging up when we are not co-ordinated, then I think it loses meaning. We should be co-ordinated when constructing the six main roads we are talking about. When it is started, provisions should be -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRANSPORT) (Mr. Andruale Awuzu): Thank you Mr. Speaker and the hon. Member from Ntenjeru for giving way. The Ministry of Works definitely plans the construction of its roads properly. On Entebbe Road, we actually planned to put these services. If you notice the new lighting we have put there, the supply of power from the transformers into the lines of power, you will not be able to see where it is because it is actually coming from underground. We had planned that long before. But then a lot of the cutting of roads in places is not done by us. It is by individuals, because we have the problem that where we have water pipes, which you have mentioned, the water mains are on one side of the road and a developer is on the other side of the road; and these are developments which are not planned before. So, you cannot deny a developer access to water. And when they cut the road, we expect them to repair it properly, and actually if it is properly done, it should not affect the strength of the road.  Thank you very much.

MS.NANSUBUGA: Thank you, hon. Minister, but whatever you said, I cried out saying provisions should be made. I did not say that developers should be denied whatever chance, but provisions should be made. Put in place at least a provision of a pipe that when a developer wants to cross water to the other side of the road, the provision is there. 

I will now turn to the voters’ registration, which is going on now. I was in my constituency over the weekend and I was surprised. I had to supply lunch and to get people to take batteries for recharging. Whoever is responsible should talk to the Electoral Commission to provide for the people taking the photographs. It seems like very few people are going to be registered for voting in 2006, and maybe we might lose votes and we will not come back to this House because very few people will be there to vote. I suggest that all the cameras we have in the country, because this is a process -(Interruption).

MR.MULENGANI: In Bukooli Central, the cameras are not functioning. I also urge the Electoral Commission to come in because the Kenyans, who were refused to be registered, are complaining that they have been voting in the past, and now they are refusing them to get their voters’ cards. It is some information I think you should consider as well in your speech. Thank you.

MS.NANSUBUGA: Thank you.  

MR.OGOLA: Hon. Member, thank you for giving way. You will recall that I raised this point before and my view was that this exercise is premature. The exercise actually precedes the provisions of the Constitution because Article 16(2) provides that the National and Citizens Board should first register citizens and then the citizens can be registered as voters. But now the Electoral Commission is registering people and is therefore providing open space for non-citizens to come and be registered voters. When the time comes to prove whether these people are actually citizens, the country shall have a lot of problems because then those people will be voting as non-citizens in reality. Therefore this matter should be revisited. This exercise should be stopped until the registration of citizens has been accomplished. Thank you very much.
THE SPEAKER: The Attorney General is not here, but I think we dealt with this issue. The National Citizens Board is a creature of this Constitution. The Electoral Commission is a creature of this Constitution.  The functions, powers of the Electoral Commission are set here. If we have to agree with you that the National Citizens Board and Immigration would first register, it would tantamount to saying that all that has been done since 1995 is unconstitutional. I think what is happening now is that the Electoral Commission is carrying out its function for its own purposes. Therefore, the onus in on you to point out whoever you think is not a citizen. 

Many times you have heard people complaining about the Electoral Commission, about the Chairman, Kasujja. But I think the function of Kasujja cannot actually be perfected unless we participate. It is us who know that so and so is not a Ugandan, therefore, he should not register. But for this purpose, I think what is being carried out is valid under the Constitution because the Constitution empowers the Electoral Commission to register those people who are deemed to be citizens. If they can be proved not to be citizens, then that is a different matter. 

In any case, I think we shall one day ask the Attorney General to assist us to resolve that doubt of yours, which you hinge on Article 16 of the Constitution.  

MRS.ZZIWA: In the event that the Central Data Memory is not in place, then why would we go ahead to take these pictures? I am thinking aloud, but I think we are going to waste a lot of resources taking these pictures and people are still going to take multiple pictures. One will register here, Makindye, Kawempe and so on and so forth. In the event that it is within the mandate of this House to dictate which priority should come back –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It will not be possible, because if your picture was taken at one time and you send it again, the system will detect that it was received and it will be rejected. So, we cannot say you will go to Kawempe, take your picture, then to Masaka, Bukoto Central, get your picture taken. Their system, unless it has failed, will be able to detect this and the second picture will be rejected.  But, anyway, I am not here to explain; I am only trying to – (Interruption)
MRS.ZZIWA: Yes, I am drawing this from the speech of the President where he said it is a limitation we still have. I thought that since this House has the mandate, it can actually go ahead to recommend that the registration of the citizenry should be the first exercise, then the registration of voters comes next. I think this is still wastage of time. If there is no central data system, even what you are proposing, Mr. Speaker, may not be possible.

THE SPEAKER: Then it means we shall not have Governments; because if there are no registered voters, how shall we have Local Governments, how shall we have Parliaments because this has never been done. It would mean that since 1995 we should not have Parliament, we should not have a President, what anarchy would you cause with this kind of thing? And why did you give the Electoral Commission powers to register voters? Does the Electoral Commission depend on another body? It is an independent body carrying out its functions under the Constitution and under the law. 

But anyway, I think let us leave this matter since there is an appropriate Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I think during the consideration of the Budget, they will be able to call the Electoral Commission for further explanation and then they will report and then we debate the report.(An hon Member rose_)

MRS.NANSUBUGA SARAH: No more information, my time is running out, hon. Member. I am sorry, but I think I have been generous. Regarding voters’ registration, I think I leave it at that as the Speaker has clarified.  

My next point regards a bank. I am from Kayunga district and I am very grateful we have a new district, but unfortunately we do not have a bank in the whole district. We have to travel all the way to Mukono or Jinja to bank our money. Kayuga Town Council is in my constituency where most of the civil servants are. You can imagine the risk we have when time comes for paying civil servants. The risk of carrying cash from either Mukono or Jinja to pay our civil servants in Kayunga district. 

I therefore, request Government - I know the issue of UCB is sensitive and very hot at the moment, but we should retain it and at least have a branch in Kayunga district for the purposes of paying our Civil Servants and serving the local people of Kayunga district. I hope we will have the bank within these five years 2001/2006 –(Interjection)- I am looking for the vote for 2006; do not worry, that is why I am referring to it so much at this time.  

Another issue is about electricity. Kayunga district and my constituency in particular, does not have enough electricity. Our area has not been electrified to the satisfaction of Ntenjeru North people, but at the moment the high tariffs are causing trouble. I beg the Minister - unfortunately she is not here - Hon. Saida Bbumba explained that these high tariffs are here to stay, but I wish they were brought in gradually, because most people in my Constituency have not really grasped why there are high tariffs. They are still crying to get electricity and at the same time those few who have got the electricity are now crying about the high tariffs. So, something should be done to help our people enjoy electricity at a fair cost.

THE SPEAKER: It is time hon. Member.

MRS.NANSUBUGA NYOMBI: Let me wind up Mr. Speaker. This is an issue about coffee. The coffee wilt disease has finished all the coffee –(Interjection)- Let me wind up then you will get clarification, please. The coffee wilt disease in my constituency has finished all our coffee, and it also affects the clonal coffee.

I wish to add on the voice of hon. Kefa Ssempagi because we are from the same district. We grow a lot of pineapples, and as he mentioned, we need an investor to come and put up an industry to process the pineapples so that we can export them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga Divison South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have read the Background to the Budget and the Budget Speech. Much as the jargon is seemingly impressing, I failed to spot the ingredients capable of allaying my fear that I am not swimming in the waters of poverty.  

Why am I saying that the economy in Uganda needs restructuring? 

Since 1986 to-date, the common man is becoming poorer. The internal wars are on the increase, the taxation base is becoming narrower and narrower, the peasants have no access to credit –(Interruption)

AN.HON. MEMBER: Clarification, Mr. Speaker.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: No.

AN.HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Speaker, I need to be clarified on a point.

THE SPEAKER: He has said no, you know he is entitled to say so.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, the point I want to make is that we are in real trouble and something must be done. In Uganda we all know that the farmer constitutes 90 per cent of the population. As I speak now, we have got rid of the Produce Marketing Board, the Coffee Marketing Board, the Lint Marketing Board. In fact, very soon I am going to move a motion that we change our Court of Arms. It used to be gloriously decorated with coffee and cotton, have we quantified that image of coffee and cotton; we feel like changing the Court of Arms so that it reflects what is on the ground.  

How can we improve the economy of our country? I propose that Government reduces expenditure, the Cabinet is too big to be sustainable; Parliament is a liability to the taxpayer and I want to give you a picture here. We should not look at Uganda as if it is an Island in isolation. United States of America with a population of 268 million people has 535 MPs. India –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I am just raising on a point of clarification where my colleague, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi has said that the tax base is getting narrower, and narrower. My colleague continues to say that the economy seems to be reducing and shrinking. Whereas I am aware that from the time Uganda adopted the Structural Adjustment Programme, focused towards macro -economic stability, the tax base of this country by the year 1996 and the year 1997 May, when we adopted the Structural Adjustment Programme, our revenue inflows per annum were 44 billion. In the last financial year, we earned 980 billion.  This financial year, the projection is much higher. The tax base has increased.  

The relevance I am trying to focus on is that, he is saying that the economy is reducing. The economic performance of this country in the last 10 years has had 6 percent average growth per annum.  Uganda is reckoned to be one of the best performing economies within the Sub-Saharan region. 

I am seeking clarification from my colleague here who was in the 6th Parliament that passed policy statements, which are focused on the positive economic growth of this country.  Where are we?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: The point I wanted to make in serious terms is that, much as you may have a wide taxation base in Uganda today, -(Interruption)

MRS. BAKOKO:  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking further clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  But you see they are eating your time. I am not going to give you -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: No, I am not entertaining that. The point I wanted to make even if I do not labour on replying hon. Mukula who is too new to understand the complexities of the economy in Government -(Laughter)- is that -(Interruption)
  
CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. In the last Parliament - the 6th Parliament - I was the Vice Chairman of the Committee on the National Economy. I have been a businessman in this country and I have been a member, and I am still a member of the Uganda Manufacturers Association. I have been a Member of the Presidential Economic Council, a Committee chaired by the President. Mr. Speaker, is it in order, for hon. Lukyamuzi to mislead the House that I am still too new to focus on the economy and to discuss on matters of macro-stability?  Is he in order Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, would you like to substantiate what you meant by the hon. Member being new?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Mr. Speaker. It is one thing to be an active Back Bencher while you are participating, and it is another to shoulder policy administration. The two cannot be confused.  That is what exactly I meant.

THE SPEAKER: Then I rule you out of order in the sense that this debate is among Parliamentarians. It is true he has a double capacity, but he is participating in this debate as a Member of Parliament. And I believe you started being Members of Parliament at the same time.  So, how do you tell that one is new and one is - so you are out of order.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. I do honour your ruling. I was briefly giving you data about global representation of Parliaments. India which has a population of nearly a billion people has 795 MPs; the ratio there is 1.7 million people per one MP. Nigeria with a population of 108 million people is represented by 468 MPs; the ratio is 230,000 people for one MP.  Kenya has a population of 30 million people, it has 200 MPs; the ratio there is 150,000 people represented by one MP.  Uganda 22 million people, MPs 300; the ratio, work out the ratio.  

So, I propose that those with points of information do excuse me, because my points are burning and I have very little time. The point I wanted to make is that the type of Government we are putting in place seems a liability to the taxpayer, and we must change our ways and means.

Recently, President Museveni was talking in Mukono and he said, “you people in Buganda, why are you demanding Federo?  You can collect your taxes at the district…” Lukyamuzi would react in this regard that, if we have power at the district, why are we still keeping 66 Ministers at the centre, if power is at the local level?  

In similar manner, if we are proud of the institutions we are establishing, why are we segmenting the districts from time to time?  My proposal is that we should change our ways of management of our affairs.  Otherwise, if we do not, we are in trouble.  

I want to make one very, very strong point before I end.  For 15 years now, Uganda has been at war internally. I strongly propose that, we must re-adjust our expenditure.  The Ministry of Defence this year will be spending about Shs.214 billion, and the Ministry of Education will be spending Shs. 10 billion. Shs.10 billion excluding capital development funds - about that.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure.  The procedural matter I am raising on is focused on the matter on which my hon. colleague is making a presentation.  Whereas it is true that the Ministry of Defence this financial year will be spending 213.7 billion Shillings - that is close to Shs. 214 billion, and its capital development Budget is Shs. 9.5 billion.  It is not true that the Ministry of Education is spending 10 billion only.  

The correct position is that, education is taking 36 percent of our total recurrent Budget; and out of that, Universal Primary Education is taking a total of 66 percent of the 36 percent. It is not correct as a matter of procedure, when a matter has already been read in the Budget for our hon. colleague to mislead the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so you are saying procedurally, an hon. Member is suppressing information which is available for the public?  Well, I think you have given information - the information, hon. Lukyamuzi, which the hon. Member has given is that education, takes about 36 percent of the Budget. So, your figures are a bit inaccurate.  Proceed.     

MR. LUKYAMUZI: And you see, Mr. Speaker, there are many segments within the Education sector, so he may have wanted me to generalize the trend, which I did not want to.  

Finally, the point I wanted to make is that for 15 years we have been fighting in Uganda.  I want to propose that if we are going to uplift our economy, time is now for us to create an internal reconciliation desk to enable Ugandans talk to one another about how we can stop Kony and ADF.  Kony has collaborators locally positioned in Uganda and they cannot go to Prof. Sempebwa’s Committee on the Constitutional Review.  They need a more accessible trend to discuss factors that can reduce or even finish the war.

Secondly, there is need for President Museveni to unconditionally accept to talk to the rebels outside Uganda.  This is a serious matter and I am not going to compromise on this, and the people of Lubaga South have asked me to tell you so that you understand. 

THE SPEAKER: No.  Please wind up.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  I am winding up. In conclusion, the time is now for President Museveni to lead the round table talks outside Uganda.  At one time, he was also a rebel and those who were leading Uganda accepted to talk to him in Nairobi.  Why can’t he equally talk to them outside Uganda?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, but I want to find out whether really we should end?  So after Margaret, I will indicate how we shall proceed.

MRS. BABA DIRI  (Representative of persons with Disabilities, Northern Region): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion, but I would like to make some comments on some few sectors.  I am going to comment on the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health in respect to allocation of funds within the Ministries.  The Ministry of Education has one of the greatest allocation of funds from the Government Treasury.  The major problem I have seen regarding the distribution is that, all this money allocated does not benefit persons with disability.  I commend the construction of classrooms; l think that is the greatest achievement for the Ministry of Education as regards UPE.  It is true in the rural areas, there are structures of UPE, but when you go close, you will find that these structures don’t cater for the needs of persons with disability.  All of them are inaccessible except in a few districts, maybe one school in Wani sub-county.  

You will find that in the classrooms, we don’t have ramps; we don’t have boardrooms for teaching braille and also for the interpretation services.  You know very well that accessibility is very important.  I would like to give you one example. In this Parliament we were quarrelling about accessibility.  It took four years to install these ramps, but today most Members of Parliament and visitors use those ramps.  That means, whatever we put in place is serving everybody, not only persons with disability.  And the argument is that, money is not given for the ramps; we do not need extra cement to make steps and ramps; we use the same materials.  So actually it is a matter of attitude and mainly it is from the Local Government.  

When you come to secondary education, I am happy that, the Government is ensuring that we have at least one secondary school for each sub-county.  But at the moment, if you look carefully, there is no secondary school to cater for children with hearing impairment.  The blind persons may attend as long as they learn some braille, if they have the braille instructions.  But for the deaf, there is no school for the deaf.  The President made a pledge that he would ensure to have at least one special school for each region.  

In the phase of decentralization and inclusive education, actually we have found it very difficult to see the type of school the President is talking about.  Are we going to have one school in a region having people with all kinds of disability, the blind, the deaf, the physically handicapped, and the mentally handicapped? Or are we going to have one school for the deaf, one school for the blind, one school for the physically handicapped and one school for the mentally retarded?  It is a big dilemma.  However, we are coming up with some tentative plan.  And according to the Budget here, there is no mention about it; this is a special school.  How do we expect these schools to be established within this Financial Year?  

I would like to comment about the rehabilitation centers which are serving a number of districts.  As I speak now, these regional rehabilitation centers are inactive; they are not well facilitated.  The Local Governments would like to own these centers, but the Central Government is holding them.  And at the same time, we have already given out these training institutions: Agriculture, Health and Education, but the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is still holding the rehabilitation centers without any funding, and people with disability are not being rehabilitated.  Please, can I find out from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development what she is doing to these centers?  When will they be decentralized or when will they be given to a Ministry, which would possibly support it like Ministry of Education?  
I would like to talk about the allocation of resources in the Ministry of Health.  Wisely enough, they have identified priority areas, which they think should be funded like service delivery, like Aids, malaria and so on.  And they have included orthopedic workshops. Let us have devices like wheel chairs in the priority areas.  Alas, what has happened?  In this Budget, this priority area has not been funded at all.  They are put together with areas which are not really priority, because they don’t want to fund this very important sector for persons with disability.  We have not requested for much money.

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform my colleague that, yes, whereas we do appreciate the difficulties that she has been able to clearly articulate in her presentation, particularly on the disabilities, one of the difficulties that we have as a Government, particularly the health sector is resource allocation. This resource allocation is affecting many areas within the health sector and strategic development plan. You will appreciate that there is a focus approach to deal with the areas that she has been able to articulate; but may I add here, to inform the House that the health sector is definitely grossly under funded.  The point here is that the average contribution by Government in the health sector is about four and half-dollars per capita.  Now the average for this region, a country like Uganda needs about 19 to 20 dollars per capita.  When you combine the other sectors, the private sector and so on and so forth, the average expenditure per capita is about 9 to 10 dollars.  So this shortfall is being addressed as revenue continues to improve.  

Within the health sector Strategic Development Plan, the areas my Colleague has very clearly articulated, particularly dealing with the disabled, is being addressed and in the Policy Statement that the Minister will be able to have with the sectoral committee on social services, most of these areas will be discussed. I am very sure that hon. Members will support the request from the Ministry to lobby for more funding to help the health sector.

MRS. BABA DIRI:  Thank you very much for that information.  What you have just mentioned has confirmed what your predecessor had said earlier, that disability is not death threatening, therefore it can wait. -(Interjection)- yes, because definitely, orthopedics appliances are very important for a person of disability.  If you do not have crutches and wheelchairs, how do you expect to perform your duties?  For example, if I don’t have my white cane and am not provided with a guide, how can I perform?  So that is really a priority area.  There is no reason of saying, we shall see, we shall see and we have been seeing right from the beginning -(Laughter) 

People have approached me from the Ministry and they are saying; “Please, Margret, instead of giving us 500 million shillings, let them give us at least 1 million shillings, which they have not given”.  For the orthopedics department I am talking about, we are asking for only 100 million shillings, but they have not provided it, and yet if you see other sectors, they are in billions shillings. Where is the fairness here?  There is no fairness and I know that these people of disability are not considered as priority.  I am urging the Government and all the Ministries to consider that disability is a human right issue, it is not a charity issue, and we need to be the same and work like others when we are facilitated. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment about the taxation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Oh. You are thanking me. (Laughter) I wanted to say something about taxation. Okay, thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are tired. This brings us to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until 2.00p.m.tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 22nd Wednesday 2001.)

