Tuesday, 26 August 2008

Parliament met at 10.59 a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you back from the weekend and I wish you a successful and active week. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008

II.	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

11.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2008/09.

The scope of the report

This report covers policy statements and budgetary proposals for the following institutions: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Electoral Commission; Uganda Law Reform Commission; Judicial Service Commission; Law Development Centre; Uganda Human Rights Commission; Judiciary; Directorate of Public Prosecutions; Parliamentary Commission; and Inspectorate of Government.

Methodology

In fulfilment of its mandate, the committee:

a)	Held meetings with representatives of the above institutions
b)	Studied previous policy statements and parliamentary reports on the institutions; and
c)	Considered the current policy statements.

During consideration of the policy statements, Madam Speaker, the committee made the following general observations:

1.	The Budget Act provides that policy statements be submitted by 30th June. However, some institutions submitted them as late as 16th of July;
2.	Inappropriate levels of funding for wage, non-wage and development funds that are not based on stakeholders strategic plans;
3.	Failure by government to undertake sufficient construction of both residential and offices which would minimize the escalating colossal costs in rent;
4.	All government commissions in the JLOS in Uganda have different salary scales, which affects the morale of the staff;
5.	The creation of districts impacts on the budgets of various institutions in the JLOS, which have to provide services in the newly created districts. However, these institutions do not get an increment to provide the services to the people. 

General Recommendations

The committee recommends that:

1.	The wage budget should be funded fully to avoid transfer of non-wage funds to pay salaries.
2.	A salary structure should be established for all government commissions in the JLOS sector.
3.	The government considers an option of Build, Own, Operate and Transfer (BOOT) for office accommodation, so that money paid in rent is used as part payment for purchase.  
4.	The government should always provide funds to the institutions like the Electoral Commission, Judiciary and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions.

Achievements for the Ministry during the Financial Year 2007/08

1.	A regional office was constructed and commissioned in Gulu.
2.	Effected payments to individuals and organisations in respect of court awards and compensation as hereunder:

·	Court awards (current) Shs2,080,000,000 to 151 beneficiaries 
·	Compensation (current) Shs1,256,602,000 for two beneficiaries 
·	Court awards (arrears) to 90 beneficiaries 
·	Compensation (arrears) Shs11,650,000,000 to 56 beneficiaries

1.	Won 35 cases worth Shs 329,945,132,308 and lost 26 cases amounting to Shs 679,002,619 between July, 2007 and May, 2008. 
2.	Drafted and published 20 Bills, 10 Acts, 106 statutory instruments, 18 legal notices and 1 ordinance.
3.	The Administrator-General defended and concluded 205 cases, collected a total of Shs 12,452,108,699 and paid out Shs 10,023,255,875 to beneficiaries and inspected a total of 48 estates.
4.	A total of 6,419 newly registered companies were entered onto the computerised data index.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

The budget performance for 2007/08 is indicated in the table in the report. 

Planned programmes and activities for the Financial Year 2008/09

1.	Drafting and publishing of Bills and statutory instruments.
2.	Construction and operationalisation of the regional office in Arua.
3.	Increase government departments’ compliance with the law.
4.	Establish a complaints system at the Registrar-General and Administrator General’s office.
5.	Ensure more rationalised physical access and availability of institutions and services countrywide.

 Un-funded priorities

a)	Omission of Shs 3,074,887,044 for the Uganda Registration Services Bureau in the National Budget Framework Paper 2008/09 to 2010/11.
b)	A deficit of Shs 1,244,581,941 to operationalise the activities of the Centre for Dispute Resolution (CADER). 

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that:

i)	The Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) is not yet operational. A board has not yet been appointed and no adequate provision has been included in the national budget for the Financial Year 2008/2009. 

	The committee recommends that the government should provide funds of Shs 3,074,887,044 to operationalise the URSB. The money is required for printing and distributing of vital documents like birth, death and marriage certificates. The board for the bureau should be appointed before the end of this financial year.

ii)	There is a high turnover of staff especially state attorneys. This is partly due to poor terms and conditions of service. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had undertaken to provide Shs 2 billion every financial year for salary enhancement of the professional staff. However, this money has not been provided. The committee recommends that government provides the Shs 2 billion to enhance salaries of professional staff in the ministry to enable them perform their duties effectively, efficiently; and retain staff.

iii)	 The Public Service Commission takes long to handle disciplinary matters. It has taken four years handling the disciplinary case of the commissioners of civil litigation, line ministries, institutions and local governments. This period is long and unconstitutional, contrary to Article 28(1) since it is not a fast and speedy trial. 

	The committee recommends that the government amends the Public Service Commission Regulations by the end of the Financial Year 2008/2009 to include the timeframe within which disciplinary matters are handled and disposed of.

iv)	The Ministry of Justice has continued to operate in rented premises. Over the past financial years, the ministry has registered a shortfall of Shs 850 million due to fluctuations between the shilling and the dollar, as a result of rent being quoted in dollar terms and also due to non-payment of VAT. In addition there is a cumulative funding gap of Shs 4 billion due to the reallocation of the URSB and the Administrator-General’s department to Amamu House. Of the Shs 4 billion, Shs 3 billion is to offset the outstanding rent commitments for 2004/2005, 2005/2006, 2006/ 2007 and the remaining Shs 1 billion, is to sustain future obligations. The committee recommends that the outstanding obligations be settled and the status of VAT imposed on rent paid by government be reconsidered. The government should finalise acquisition of land at Luzira and start construction of the JLOS House, which will also house the ministry headquarters to save Shs 990,469,920 which is being spent in rent. 

v)	There is an increase in reported crime by 50 percent in 2000 to 57 percent in 2007 and yet the increase of reported cases into the justice system by approximately 5 percent in 2007 has not been proportionally matched with the staffing levels of the JLOS. 
	
	The committee recommends that the government increases the staff levels of judicial officers, investigators, state attorneys and state prosecutors to be able to handle the increasing number of cases.

vi)	The Administration of Justice Bill has not been drafted despite several assurances from the Ministry of Justice that the Bill is about to be tabled. Madam speaker, the committee recommends that the Minister of Justice tables the Bill to Parliament for discussion during this financial year, which should inter alia specify the terms and conditions of service, the judicial code of conduct and the mode of assessment of performance of judges in Uganda.

vii)	There is delayed restructuring of some departments, like the Law Council and Administrator-General. This has greatly curtailed the effective and efficient service delivery to the public. The ministry has been waiting for finalisation of the restructuring process of the two departments since 2004. The committee recommends that the Public Service Commission considers the new structures of the two departments before the end of the Financial Year 2008/2009 to enable the Minister of Justice recruit enough staff to handle their activities.

viii)	CADER has a funding gap of Shs 1,244,581,941 to operationalise its activities. CADER is a statutory centre tasked with steering and guiding the growth of alternative dispute resolution in Uganda. At the time of its inception CADER was funded by USAID and the Government of Uganda was expected to take over effective Financial Year 2005/2006. This has not happened and hence the operations of CADER have stopped. The committee recommends that government funds CADER activities within this Financial Year of 2008/2009.

ix)	The ministry has continued to operate without a budget line for facilitating government witnesses. That has either caused government to lose cases or to seek for adjournments, which take a lot of time. The committee recommends that the government opens the budget line to facilitate government witnesses with an initial amount of Shs 48 million to help the ministry cater for witnesses.

x)	The committee recommends that the budget for Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be approved as follows: wage, Shs 3,226,746,000; non-wage, Shs 5,879,484,000; court awards, Shs 1,347,324,000; court awards (arrears), Shs 29,754,455,000; compensation, Shs 9,000,000,000; development, Shs 34,563,860,000; and the total is Shs 83,771,869,000.

The Electoral Commission

On-going activities:

i)	Voter registration.
ii)	Production of voters’ cards.

Achievements are under 3.3, which takes us to planned activities under 3.5, on page 10. 

Planned activities

1.	 Implementation of the 2007-2011 strategic plan,
2.	Conduct continuous voter registration and education,
3.	Demarcation and mapping of electoral areas,
4.	Re-organisation of polling stations,
5.	Audit of the court education programmes,
6.	Production of voter education and training materials,
7.	Processing of the re-organisation registers,
8.	Issuance of voters’ cards.
9.	Conduct elections at administrative units’ level,
10.	Handle election petitions,
11.	Acquire land and develop architectural plans for headquarters and regional offices; and
12.	Construct regional offices.

The under-funded activities are in 3.6:

1.	Elections for filling of vacancies at various local government levels.
2.	Elections at administrative unit levels, which require Shs 15,038,465,000. 
3.	By-elections to fill vacancies.
4.	The first phase of the general elections project, that is, re-organisation of polling stations, procurement of specialised equipment, update of the national voters register, continuous voter education and operationalisation of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which would require a total of Shs 46,951,470,000.

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that: 

a)	Government has allocated land to the Commission to build its headquarters and the committee recommends that the processing of the title be expedited and the new structure constructed.

b)	Funds for elections are always released in the election year and this does not give opportunity to the Commission to plan adequately and execute its mandate in an organised manner. The committee very strongly recommends that special consideration be given to the Electoral Commission so that its programmes for the 2010–2011 general elections are treated as a project and funds be released by government as budgeted for, that is, Shs 46,952,700,000. This will enable the Commission to conduct continuous voter education, registration and begin purchases of equipment in a phased manner. This will also enable the Commission to organise smooth elections devoid of unnecessary and avoidable complaints and litigation. The committee invites the House to note that most electoral disputes and court petitions in the past have been mainly a result of late passing of electoral laws and late funding of the electoral process.

c)	The Electoral Commission has a funding gap of Shs 6,612,000,000, if the ceiling is not raised to Shs 18,432,000,000 on the non-wage. The funds are required for filling vacancies in the new districts, payment of retirement benefits, and the added operational costs because of the new administrative structures. The committee recommends that government provides these funds to enable the Commission fill vacancies in the new districts, settle legal costs and pay retirement benefits.

d)	No funds have been provided for the conduct of elections for administrative units, youth and women and the elderly councils. A budget was submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but no funds have been provided in the budget. The committee regards this as a very serious matter considering that the current leaders’ mandate has expired. The committee, therefore, recommends that government provides Shs 15,038,465,000 this financial year to conduct elections for administrative units, youths, women and the elderly councils to fill the vacuum due to lack of leadership at the grassroots. 

e)	The Electoral Commission is faced with a problem of identification, recruitment and training of election officials whenever there are elections. This has led to election officials committing mistakes, which can be avoided if they are well trained. The committee recommends that the government provides adequate funding to pay election officials on time and enact and amend the enabling laws early enough to avoid hurried implementation and hence mistakes.

f)	The committee recommends that the budget that is Vote 102 - Electoral Commission, be approved as follows: wage, Shs 6,286,162,000; non-wage, Shs 9,565,395,000; arrears, Shs 273,190,000; development, Shs 449,875,000, and the total is Shs 16,574,621,000.

Uganda Law Reform Commission

The activities for 2007/08 are in 4.1, achievements are in 4.2, ongoing activities are in 4.3 and the budget performance for Financial Year 2007/08 is in the table under 4.4. The planned activities are in 4.5 and they include:

·	Undertaking extensive consultations on proposals for law reform that is on excise tariff, succession and witness protection, and victims of crime and advocate for quick passage of pending Bills.
·	Enhancing ability to undertake civic education on the law making process and the law in action through media and other publications.
·	Support the revision, consolidation and publication of laws and start the process of preparing the reprint of the seventh edition of the laws of Uganda.
·	Enhance ability to publish simplified and translated laws, educate and consult the people on proposed laws and implement the community law reform programme. 
·	Publish annotation of statutes and laws in action series. 

Under 4.6 we have under-funded priorities and they are:

·	The cost of public consultations amounting to Shs 267,000,000.
·	Resources for printing of revised laws amounting to Shs 532,000,000. 
·	Pension arrears for staff appointed by the Attorney-General amounting to Shs 106,000,000.
·	The cost of rent for offices and storage of printed material, which amounts to 23 percent that is Shs 276,828,000 per year of the Commission’s recurrent budget.

Under 4.7, we have the committee’s observations and recommendations. Madam Speaker, the committee observed that:

a)	The staff structure of Uganda Law Reform Commission is narrow, with limited provisions at the top to take care of promotions of staff who gain experience and higher qualifications. Four staff at the rank of commissioner left the institution in the last financial year.

	The committee recommends that a new organisational structure of the commission be put in place with a position of a director to allow promotion at the higher levels and help to retain employees.

b)	Staff appointed by the Attorney-General are not covered under the government pension scheme. The commission has, since being declared “other public service” started a contributory scheme with the National Social Security Fund. The funds accumulated between 1995 and 2006; that is 11 years. The committee recommends that the government provides Shs 106 million to clear the accumulated pension arrears.

c)	There is delay in tabling and passing of Bills into law and this greatly hampers the attainment of outcomes for the commission’s work. The committee recommends that a legislative tracking system be developed to enhance monitoring of the Bill process.  Committees of Parliament should also consider the Bills in accordance with rule 113(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

d)	The commission constantly receives urgent and unplanned for assignments and requests from government agencies in the course of the year. These impact on the activity plan of the commission and leads to diversion of resources from planned activities. The committee recommends that government provides funds to cater for urgent and unplanned for assignments and requests, which impact heavily on the budget of the Commission.

e)	There is a high cost of rent for offices and storage of printed matter, which consumes 23 percent per year of the Commission’s recurrent budget and greatly affects the attainment of set goals. The committee recommends that government allocates land to the Uganda Law Reform Commission through the Uganda Land Commission or provides Shs 3.6 billion to buy a plot and construct the premises over the medium term.

f)	The Commission has a funding gap of Shs 128 million on the wage bill, which is mandatory payment. This is in spite of the submissions for wage requirements of the Ministry of Public Service. The committee recommends that government provides these funds to enable the commission pay wages for staff without constraining other activities since wage is a mandatory payment.

g)	The Commission collects non-tax revenue from the sale of books and other publications, which is sent to government. The committee recommends that government permits the Commission to retain the non-tax revenue and use it for printing and publishing laws since government has not provided Shs 637 million for this activity.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the budget for Vote 105 - Uganda Law Reform Commission be approved as follows; wage, Shs 560,901,000; non-wage, Shs 1,586,636,000; development, Shs 119,292,000; making a total of Shs 2,266,829,000.

Judicial Service Commission

Planned activities for last year are in 5.1 and major achievements are in 5.2 which take us to page 18; pending or on-going activities. These include: 

·	Civic education campaigns conducted through workshops, print and electronic media. 
·	Installation of suggestion/complaints boxes at district and urban centres. 
·	Opening, collection and investigation of public complaints. 
·	Inspection of courts. 
·	Hearing complaints brought by and against judicial officers. 
·	Equipping staff with the necessary tools and knowledge to ably deliver the required services.  

Madam Speaker, the budget performance for 2007/2008 is in the table on page 18.

The major, planned and proposed activities are in 5.4, which takes us to 5.5; under-funded priorities. Under the under-funded priorities we have:

i)	The purchase of vehicles for the chairperson of the commission, secretary and the Department of Finance and Administration, which would require Shs 180 million.
ii)	Staff training, which would require Shs 30 million.  
iii)	Installation of suggestion and complaints boxes at urban centres and sub-counties, which would require Shs 300 million.  

These were the observations and recommendations of the committee:  

(a)	The number of High Court judges, that is 50, is still low. Fifty judges for the High Court are not enough compared to the current population of over 30 million people. The committee recommends that government fills all the positions for judges in the Judiciary as per the current establishment to enable them carry out their activities effectively and efficiently.

(b)	The retirement age of 65 years for High Court judges is low compared to other courts. This also affects other tribunals, which require chairpersons to be persons qualified to be appointed as High Court judges. The committee recommends that the Constitution be amended to increase the retirement age for High Court judges from 65 to 70 years so that persons above 65 years, who are still able to serve in the Judiciary and in tribunals can be appointed.  

(c)	There is no mechanism in the Judiciary to assess the performance of judges. For example, there are no appraisal forms for judges and thus, it is difficult to assess their performance. The committee recommends that in the Administration of Justice Bill, an assessment system be proposed to assess the performance of the judges.

(d)	The budget for wage and non-wage for the Judicial Service Commission is not enough, leaving a funding gap of Shs 23.4 million and Shs 41 million respectively. The committee recommends that government provides the above required funds, especially wage, since it is a mandatory payment to enable the commission perform its activities.

(e)	Lack of vehicles to entitled officers that is the chairperson and the secretary and also the department of finance and administration is a challenge to the commission. This has led to encroachment on project vehicles in order for the officials to carry out field work. The committee recommends that government provides funds of Shs 180 million to purchase vehicles for officers entitled to official transport.  This will enable them to conduct their duties effectively and efficiently.

The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda does not specify the terms and conditions of service of the Judicial Service Commission for the deputy chairperson and the commissioners like other commissions. The committee recommends that government implements the recommendations in the Constitution (Amendment No.2) Bill, which specify the terms and conditions of the deputy chairperson and commissioners to enable the Judicial Service Commission fulfil its mandate. 

The committee recommends that budget Vote 148 for the Judicial Service Commission be approved as follows: wage, Shs 547,441,000; non wage, Shs 970,729,000; development, Shs 103,799,000; and the total is Shs 1,621,969,000.

The Law Development Centre

Madam Speaker, the planned activities for the year 2007/2008 are in 6.1. The major achievements for the previous year, including the trained students, the Bar Course and the diploma students and others are under 6.2, which takes us to page 23 of the pending and on-going activities, which are under 6.3, and the budget performance for 2007/2008 is in the table under 6.4. 

The major, planned activities for Financial Year 2008/2009 include: 

1.	Review of the curriculum. 
2.	Training staff in global emerging legal trends and crimes.
3.	Construction of a perimeter wall around LDC premises.
4.	Construction of the second phase of the new building. 
5.	Procurement of 100 computers for staff and students.
6.	Publish all the backlog of Uganda law reports from 1957-1987.
7.	Roll out legal aid services outside Kampala, especially to Northern Uganda.  

Under 6.6.6 we have observations and recommendations: 

(a)	The Law Development Centre has not been receiving development funds from government for the past 11 years. This has led to inadequate accommodation, inadequate computers, inadequate library stock and failure to computerise the Centre. Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that government provides funds for capital development to enable LDC build lecture rooms, staff offices and acquire furniture to meet the increasing number of students.

(b)	The Ford Foundation did not renew the funding of the LDC Legal Aid Clinic when the funding expired. The clinic now depends on contributions from students and JLOS. The committee recommends that government honours its commitment and take over this clinic as in the agreement of 22nd June 1999 with Ford Foundation. This clinic provides free legal services to offenders (and the aggrieved) who cannot afford to pay legal fees.

(c)	The government pays half of the tuition fees for students at LDC who are government sponsored. Needy students cannot top up the tuition since they are required to pay over Shs 1 million on top of the government contribution. Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that government starts paying full tuition fees for students at LDC effective this financial year as it is doing with all other public institutions. This will help the needy students accomplish their studies at the Centre. 

(d)	The committee, therefore, recommends that the budget for Vote 109 - Law Development Centre, be approved as follows: non-wage, Shs 1,178,694,000, and it has the same total. 

On page 25, we have the Uganda Human Rights Commission and its activities for last year are in 7.1. The major achievements during the year are in 7.2, which takes us to page 26 of the pending and on-going activities, which include: 

1.	Monitoring the human rights situation in camps.
2.	Visiting places of detention to ascertain conditions of inmates.
3.	Receiving, registering and investigating complaints.
4.	Research into human rights topical issues.
5.	Monitoring of the return and re-integration of the IDPs.

The budget performance for the Financial Year 2007/2008 is contained in the table under 7.4, and the planned activities for the Financial Year 2008/2009 are under 7.5, which takes us to page 27 of un-funded priorities under 7.6, which include:

·	New and approved UHRC structure.
·	Failure to enhance staff salaries as per the new structure 

The observations and recommendations on this include the following: 

a)	The Uganda Human Rights Commission does not have the mandate to punish the perpetrators of violence or abusers of human rights. It is up to the various government institutions to punish those abusers.

	The committee recommends that the Uganda Human Rights Commission Act be amended to enable the Uganda Human Rights Commission punish the abusers of human rights.

	The committee further recommends that individuals who abuse rights should be made to personally account for their actions, including requiring them to personally pay awards given by the Uganda Human Rights Commission.
 
b)	The budget line to pay compensation/awards to victims of torture by government agencies is under the Office of the Attorney-General. Only Shs 265,172,989 out of Shs 657,633,122 awarded by the tribunal, which represents 40.3 percent, has been paid. The committee recommends that government speeds up compensation of victims.

c)	The core activities of the commission like investigations, inspections of alleged human rights violations, tribunals, sensitisation programmes, publications and office accommodation for regional offices and outreach programmes continue to be funded by donors under the basket fund. However, donor support is reducing over time. The committee recommends that government should match with equal increase in Government of Uganda funding the decrease in donor financing.

d)	The Ministry of Public Service has approved a new structure for the commission to enable it recruit staff for the eight regional offices. However, funds have not been provided to pay the staff salaries and other allowances. Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that government avails Shs 1,618,094,247 to enable the commission operationalise the new structure and bring services closer to the people. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission has accumulated arrears to the tune of Shs 576,381,963 for NSSF contributions. The interest which accrues to these unpaid arrears is Shs 5 million per month. 

The committee recommends that the government should avail the above funds to enable the commission pay the arrears to NSSF, which have continued to accumulate due to interest on them. This will reduce on the money the government is paying to NSSF as interest. 

The committee further recommends that the commission negotiates with NSSF to waive the interest.

The committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget for Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission as follows: wage, Shs 1,875,790,000; non-wage, Shs 1,308, 713,000; arrears, Shs 1,231,254,000; development, Shs 2,596,470,000; and the total is Shs 7,012, 232,000.

Madam Speaker, this takes us to page 29, which has the Judiciary. The planned activities for the previous year 2007/2008 are under 8.1 and the achievements of the sector are under 8.3. This takes us to page 31 for the budget performance for 2007/2008. This is in a table under 8.4 and planned and proposed activities/programmes for this current year are under 8.3.

This brings us to observations and recommendations on the Judiciary.  The committee made the following observations:

a)	The constant creation of districts and staffing for Grade I Magistrate Courts and the recent appointment of new judges to fight case backlog poses more logistical challenges in form of facilitation. The committee recommends that the ceiling, especially for the non-wage budget, be increased from Shs 12,755,640,000 to Shs 29,330,318,000 to match the increased operation requirements for the Judiciary. This is to make justice accessible to all citizens.

b)	The duo staff management structure in the Judiciary is a challenge to the control and management over the staff. Whereas the judicial officers are appointed and managed by the Judicial Service Commission, the other staff are appointed and managed by the Public Service Commission. The constant transfers of the latter category affect the staff development policies of the institution. 

	The committee strongly recommends that the Administration of Justice Bill should provide for structural removal of the entire human resource from the Public Service Commission to the Judicial Service Commission. 

	The committee further recommends that the Administration of Justice Bill, as pointed out earlier be brought before this Parliament before the end of 2008/2009.

c)	There is need to construct the Appellate Court building, which would require Shs 7.5 billion and 55 courts, which would require Shs 3 billion. These courts are currently housed in rented premises. The expenses on rent are eating into the already meagre non-wage provision of the Judiciary. 

d)	The committee recommends that government should provide Shs 7.5 billion in a phased manner for the construction of the Appellate Court building and Shs 3 billion for the 55 courts currently in rented premises to reduce on rent charges. 

e)	Madam Speaker, the salary enhancement for members of the lower bench excluded Grade II Magistrates. This is discriminatory and may lead to resentment by those who were excluded and litigation by the aggrieved parties. 

f)	The committee recommends that funds be provided to the Judiciary to enhance the salaries of Magistrates, Grade II since they are also officers in the Judiciary. 

g)	Only Shs 549 million has been provided for land tribunals for the Financial Year 2008/2009 yet land matters are causing a lot of unrest across the country. There is need for Shs 8.4 billion for the land tribunals to be reinstated. 

h)	The committee recommends that government should provide the Shs 8.4 billion to reinstate the land tribunals.

i)	The Judiciary still operates a manual system and this makes it difficult for judicial officers to store and transmit data for planning and management purposes.
 
j)	The committee recommends that the government should provide Shs 30 billion for the implementation of the computerisation policy so as to have all courts online with the aim of easing work for judicial officers in settling more cases, storage and transmission of accurate data. 

The committee recommends that the budget Vote 101 - Judiciary (Courts of Judicature) be approved as follows: wage, Shs 13,351,383,000; wage for land tribunals, Shs 740,280,000; non-wage, Shs 22,755,640,000; arrears, Shs 2,906,607,000; development, Shs 1,841,000,000; and the total is Shs 41,594,414,000.

Directorate of Public Prosecutions

Madam Speaker, the planned activities for the Financial Year 2007/2008 are under 9.1 and the achievements are under 9.2. This takes us to page 35 for the budget performance, which is in a table under 9.3.

The major planned activities for the current financial years are under 9.4. This takes us to page 36 for unfunded activities under 9.5, which include:

·	Opening and equipping 11 new stations and upgrading 19 resident state prosecutor stations.
·	Facilitation of state witnesses. 
·	Carrying out prosecution-led investigations.
·	Procurement of PROCAM (computerised case management) Funding for prosecution of new cases. 
·	Purchase of three vehicles, one for the DPP and two for the Deputy DPPs.

Madam Speaker, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

(a) 	The recurrent budget of the DPP does not match the increased staff level as per approved organisational structure. The directorate’s MTEF wage provision is Shs 3.3 billion against the required Shs 5.01 billion, leaving a funding gap of Shs 1.7 billion.

	The committee recommends that the government should provide Shs 2 billion for recurrent wage since payment of wages is a mandatory payment.

(b) 	Facilitation of state witnesses is critical for effective prosecution and would result into saving vital resources, which would otherwise be paid as damages in suits against the government.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Shs 617.6 million be provided by government to enable the Directorate of Public Prosecutions pay for transport and lunch allowances for state witnesses to save the government from loosing suits.

The directorate lacks a central, national databank for easy retrieval of information on cases. There is need to establish a central database system, which is computerised, for easy retrieval of information.

The committee recommends that the government should avail Shs 500 million to supplement the SWAP funds to enable the Directorate establish a national database system on cases.

In the MTEF, the funds which are provided are mainly to cover the backlog of cases in the system. There is limited funding for the new cases registered, which unless attended to, will become a backlog. 

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Shs 400 million be provided by Government to enable the directorate prosecute new cases so as to reduce on the backlog of cases.

The creation of new districts requires opening up of offices for the DPP in those new districts and their counties. However, when new districts are created, the Directorate is not provided with funds to extend its services.

The committee recommends that the government should always provide funds to the Directorate whenever there is creation of new districts. The committee also recommends that government should provide Shs 330 million to enable the Directorate open and equip 11 new Resident State Attorney’s stations. 

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the budget for Vote - 133 Directorate of Public Prosecution be approved as follows: wage (statutory), Shs 54,900,000; wage, Shs 3,349,440,000; non-wage, Shs 2,605,391,000 and development, Shs 407,706,000, which brings the total to Shs 6, 417,437,000.

The Parliamentary Commission

Madam Speaker, this is where we belong. The planned activities for the Commission are in 10.1. Its achievements are also shown below, which takes us to page 39, where we now have the budget performance for the Commission for the year 2007/2008. The performance is in the table under 10.2.

The planned activities of the Commission for this year include: debating and passing 45 bills and 40 motions; holding committee meetings and adopting reports; handling 20 questions for oral answers; processing design of the Camber for Parliament up to the start of the construction; identification and purchase of land for the Speaker’s residence; purchase of security machinery, equipment and furniture, and purchase of vehicles.

Madam Speaker, under 10.4 the committee observes and recommends the following:

(a)	The delay in the construction of the new Chamber has been due to technical considerations during the design process.

(b)	The committee recommends that the Commission should fast track the construction of the new Chamber since the current Chamber cannot accommodate properly all the Members of Parliament.

(c)	The Bills are taking too long to be considered by Parliament and passing them into law.

(d)	Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Business Committee addresses the problem of Bills taking long when being considered by a particular committee in accordance with rule 113(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

(e)	Only Shs 6 billion, instead of Shs 19 billion was provided for Pension funds for Members of Parliament and staff. 

(f)	The committee recommends that the government provides Shs 19 billion to cater for contributions towards the Pension Fund. This will also enable the Board of Trustees invest the funds so as to get better returns for the Members and staff.

(g)	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not attend Commission meetings. This is having an impact on the financial planning of the Commission. 

(h)	Madam Speaker, the committee strongly recommends that all the Members of the Parliamentary Commission, including the Minister of Finance, attend to their work so as to enable the commission perform its duties effectively and efficiently. An explanation should be given by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as to why he does not attend Commission meetings and why he is undermining the Commission. 

(i)	The budget for Parliament has maintained the same ceiling from the time there was the Movement Political System yet the change to multiparty dispensation led to the creation of more offices like that of the Leader of Opposition, Government Chief Whip and Opposition Chief Whip, among others, which require more funding.

(j)	Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the government should increase the MTEF ceiling for Parliament to enable it operate properly in the multiparty dispensation.

(k)	The Constituency Development Fund is minimal to effect any development in the constituencies. The purpose of the fund was to address the pressures, which were being faced by the MPs. With the current guidelines, it has been quite difficult to account for the funds by some Members.

(l)	The committee’s recommendations are listed, but the last one reads: The Commission should formulate new guidelines on how best the funds can be used since the current guidelines have made it difficult to account for by some Members.

(m)	There is no system in place to manage parking at the Parliamentary Building. This has made people who do not work for Parliament to use the parking yards denying parking space to those who are entitled to it.

(n)	Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the commission issues parking stickers to all Members and staff of Parliament so as to solve the problem of parking.

(o)	The committee recommends that the budget for Vote - 104 Parliamentary Commission be approved as follows: wage, Shs 14,236,817,000; non-wage, Shs 95,488,586,000; parliamentary pensions, Shs 19,800,000,000; PAF monitoring, Shs 230,000,000; EALA, Shs 2,320,146,000; and development, Shs 16,682,405,829. This brings us to a total of Shs 148,757,954,829.

Madam Speaker, under 11 we have the Inspectorate of Government.  The Inspectorate is established under Chapter 13 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Inspectorate of Government Act (Cap 167). The Inspectorate’s budget for 2007/2008 is in a table under 11.1, which now brings us to the observations and recommendations of the committee. 

The committee raised issues, which required the input of the Inspector-General of Government. 

The Inspector-General of Government went on her annual leave after the committee had requested for her personal attendance. The committee has not interacted with the Inspector-General of Government for the past two years yet she is the head of institution, which reports to Parliament. 

The committee resolved not to consider the Inspectorate’s policy statement since the Deputy Inspector-General of Government could not answer some of the issues the committee wanted to put across.

The committee failed to interface with the IGG and in view of the above the committee was not able to comment on the budget for Vote - 103 Inspectorate of Government, which is as follows: wage, Shs 3,531,105,000; non-wage, Shs 6,271,500,000; arrears, Shs 617,111,000; development, Shs 5,855,707,000. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and your committee for that very elaborate report; the minimum required signatures have been appended to it. I do not know whether the shadow minister is around?

12.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, when the session began I was given a note and I walked out because that note was telling me that hon. Lukwago, the Shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs fell sick and is in a clinic at Buganda Road. So we have just been consulting among ourselves and since I was out for quite a bit of time, my colleague was taking specific notes and will respond on behalf of hon. Lukwago. However, I would like to just cover a few things very briefly.

I would like to start by thanking the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Members, for the very difficult task that this particular committee faces in the workings of Parliament.

Going through their report, I notice that it is a well-prepared report; they covered all the sectors and the statutory bodies under their charge very effectively. So I think it is only appropriate that we congratulate them for work well done. (Applause)

There are a number of bodies covered under this committee’s report that we need to commend for the good work they are doing. The Uganda Law Reform Commission, in our view, is doing very good work and we commend them. The Judicial Service Commission has obviously played its role and evidence from the report that they have submitted names for consideration for appointment; they cannot do more than just that, but we also commend them.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission, which is a body that really has helped this country particularly us who realise that respect for every citizen’s human rights provides moral strength to our country. The Uganda Human Rights Commission, particularly its chair, should really be commended for being able to respond to situations on time; to submit comprehensive reports and to act in a manner that it has become an example to many other commissions internationally; we truly commend them for that.

As a Member of the Parliamentary Commission, I would not want to say anything about that Commission except to reassure Members that the Commission is doing everything possible to make sure we get a new Chamber built so that the crowding that we suffer particularly when there are important things and every Member wants to be addressed is handled, but to also make our Parliament as modern as possible. 

It is also the thinking of some of us that the Eighth Parliament should go on record as having been responsible for the erection of a new Chamber. That is a historical opportunity that we should do everything to ensure we get the money –(Applause)– and build. So, hon. Members, the Commission is doing everything possible to make sure that the Chamber that comes will be a Chamber that you will truly be proud of.

Two areas of concern before my colleague takes over are: the Electoral Commission. Madam Speaker, the record of elections in Africa in the last one year has been scary, to say the least. And in the centre of all those things have been the electoral commissions. It, therefore, becomes critically important for us as a country to treat the management of the Electoral Commission – have competent Ugandans appointed in such a way that everybody feels pleased that the appointment is fair to all sides; the Electoral Commission must be funded adequately and early enough every time there is an election. 

We rush the Bills for the Electoral Commission, we rush the funding of the Electoral Commission and they are just human beings, limited by their numbers and the institutional structure that they have. Once the money comes late, then the money cannot do the things that the human beings within the Electoral Commission must do.

So we concur with the recommendation of the committee that adequate money should be provided so that the Electoral Commission begins preparations for the 2011 elections early enough. I think that the last elections, which were the first multi-party elections under this Constitution, came at a time when even the movement to the multi-party system had just begun. And, therefore, people should accept even in bitterness, that the shortfalls that we witnessed in those elections can substantially be explained as due to circumstances beyond the Electoral Commission. But that explanation will not hold for the next elections, either the elections will be right or the consequence for the country will not be good, because the people will not accept an election that is not handled properly. 

Therefore, our view and position is that when the term of the Electoral Commission expires next year, the process of appointing a new commission should be fully consultative; it should reflect the fears and expectations of all sides in the politics of Uganda. 

Secondly, we ask that Parliament should get the money that the Electoral Commission requested for this year so that they can begin their work and we have no other excuse about the elections. If you loss, you would have lost because people voted you out and not because the Electoral Commission in its weaknesses allowed room for fraudulent elections to take place.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is disappointing – I would like to start from the positive by thanking the President for partially responding to the resolution of this Parliament that urged him to appoint judges who had already been nominated to him for appointment. I know that he was extremely upset with the resolution of Parliament, but at least subsequent to that resolution, some judges were appointed. 

But the report of the committee clearly shows you that the Supreme Court is manned or “womaned” – I do not know what the right expression would be, because they are even no staff –(Laughter)– and yet nominations are there. Similarly, the other bigger courts have vacancies and nominations have been made to the President. I just got a letter on Friday from hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and he said, “In your capacity, you should raise this problem. The Inspector-General of Government unfairly knocked me out of Parliament; I went to court and up to now my case is not being heard. Ask those people what is happening?” Part of the problem is the people to handle the cases. If they are not there, you suffer the consequences. 

There are many people who have sought justice in the courts of law but they are being denied justice in the context of delaying. I know that justice delayed, is justice denied – something like that - so it is important that once again we make an appeal to the President that the vacancies in the High Court and the Court of Appeal be filled to allow for people to receive justice as expeditiously as possible. 

I want to sit down after saying that I have nothing to comment on the Inspector-General of Government; if the committee did not comment, I do not think I have any powers to comment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.19
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for a very well organised report. I do appreciate the manner in which the committee proceeded in handling each vote on its own and finally compiling it into one report. I also want to thank the chairman of the committee for his ingenious method of presentation. 

I would like to start by making one general observation that by and large, government spends a lot of money on office rent; in all department, not just in the Justice, Law and Order sector, but in all departments. And there is dire need for Government to take a bold step and have its own premises so that we can save a lot of resources. 

I was also touched by – I would call it poor record keeping habits. It is deplorable that government has up to now not considered operationalising the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. How else can we have a clear record of what is obtaining in our country: the registration of births, the registration of deaths, if such a bureau is not well facilitated? I am aware that even the board has not been appointed. That funding gap alone will keep Uganda in the dark. We need to know what we have in order to be able to plan for further interventions in order to cater for our population. So, I would like to support the committee’s recommendation to allocate the Shs 3.074 billion for the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and for the appointment of a board there to.

The other thing, which is of concern, is that whereas certain organisations come to our aid to help us start off with an understanding that Government would then take over institutions that will have had initial support from them, sometimes we develop cold feet at the end of the programmes. 

On page 7(viii), colleagues will realise that whereas you said USAID supported to establish a centre for dispute resolution and government was to take over that centre by 2005/06, nothing happened. And yet it is our considered opinion that if such a centre was active, it would probably give some relief to the courts of law. There would be decongestion in the backlog of cases in the courts. A number of disputes could easily be attended to by such a centre rather than taking everything to the courts. So, the support to an alternative dispute resolution programme cannot be downplayed, and we would like to urge Government to consider re-operationalising the centre for dispute resolution.

I mentioned this, which I think is also on page 23, where we talked about the Legal Aid Clinic. The Legal Aid Clinic, which initially got support from the FORD Foundation, is now being supported by contributions from students. How can a whole government leave its own responsibilities to well wishers, students of all people? And yet a Legal Aid Clinic is extremely necessary in order to help those who cannot afford legal costs? The majority of our people cannot afford legal fees for lawyers. So the Legal Aid Clinic is another area that government should consider supporting. 

Madam Speaker, let me touch on the issues raised over the Electoral Commission. My honourable colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, has already made major comments on it but to be honest, we cannot expect a clean duty to be implemented by the Electoral Commission when they are just rushed through the process. By the way elections are not just about the year of elections, we need to have very clean preparatory steps towards general election time. The voters ought to be civic educated on the process. A register must always be cleaned and, therefore, the Electoral Commission ought to be busy throughout its term of office not just to wait for the election dates. So, it would be very unfair for government to think that the Electoral Commission should wait for that period 2010 or 2011. I think it is not fair. 

We need the Electoral Commission to have the resources to prepare for the elections. And in any case, even the by-elections, many local governments and also here in Parliament, are still stuck. By-elections take so long to the extent that some districts may actually even end up lacking quorum. And that can in itself render their resolutions a nullity. So, the Electoral Commission ought to be facilitated on time. 

I also want to point out something that was missing in the report about the constitution of the Electoral Commission itself. Let us be fair that in a multi-party political dispensation, all political parties’ interests, the participating political parties, should have their voices heard in order to avoid doubt from any player. I think there is a very strong justification for political parties to have a representation in the Electoral Commission. Therefore, we still need to reconstitute the Electoral Commission to take care or address the interest of all the participating parties. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on page 15, where we talked about the under funded priorities of the Uganda Law Reform Commission. How else can we operate if we revise laws and we do not print and publish them? This will lead to others referring to old laws. Therefore, it is important that the under funding for the printing and publishing of the revised laws should be urgently addressed. In any case, we are also of the view that such laws, the revised laws, should not take more than two months before they are published and printed but apparently this is taking years.  

There is the issue of appointed public servants, where some of the public servants appointed by the Attorney-General are being regarded as the “other public service.” I think we need to rethink that particular nomenclature. Once the Attorney-General has appointed somebody into service, in my opinion that automatically should be under the Public Service. Therefore, I find it a bit wanting that those appointed by the Attorney-General are regarded as the “other public service” and therefore even their arrears for pensions have accumulated for eleven years to date. We need to redefine what those public servants appointed by the Attorney-General should be. 

I am inclined to object to the proposal by the committee on page 20 where they say that we should amend the Constitution to increase the retirement age of a judge. There are a number of competent persons in this country who would wish to get elevated, to grow up the ladder. Amending the Constitution to increase the retirement age of a judge would be stifling those who would probably ascend to such levels. The argument given by the committee about the appointment of chairpersons of tribunals, who should be qualified to be appointed High Court judges, to me is not strong enough to warrant a constitutional amendment to increase the retirement age of a judge. 

I would like to thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the efforts it has undertaken to help give redress to human rights abuses in this country. And I observed that the Uganda Human Rights Commission actually gives very modest penalties to the complainants. Remember that most of the abuses – let me call it torture of victims – a number of them have actually been committed by government officials, especially the law enforcement agencies.

Madam Speaker, the awards that the Human Rights Commission has been giving are extremely modest. Sometimes even people get murdered through brutal handling by a government official - I would call it an extra judicial killing. However, even the modest awards of penalties by the Human Rights Commission are by and large not honoured. Only 40 percent of the awards so far have been paid according to the report. I think there is a need for us to have pity on the victims. Today it is them but tomorrow it may be you or me. How would you feel if your rights are abused and the courts give awards and nothing happens?

I would like to comment on the land tribunals. The intention for creating the District Land Tribunals was to help decongest cases involving land in ordinary courts, and this was also meant to address problems of land conflicts. However, before we could fully operationalise the land tribunals, we quickly turned around to say, “I think there is a problem; maybe we need to amend the law.” To us it is not just a gap in the law but a gap in the implementation of what we undertake to do. As long as the district land tribunals are not funded, as long as they are not operationalised, even having a beautiful law cannot help us address land disputes in this country. Those district land tribunals know best how to resolve issues of land because they are resident there. Amending laws here and there over land administration is not enough. We, therefore, insist that the district land tribunals should be funded. The Shs 8.4 billion that is missing should be found.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on our very institution here, the Parliamentary Commission. In the 2007/2008 Financial Year, one of the activities that were planned was to construct a parliamentary Chamber. In 2008/2009, another major planned activity is to process a design for a new Chamber of Parliament. I think we have not moved fast enough. You will all agree with us that this Chamber is extremely limiting. Sometimes when all members are in the Chamber, some end up operating either while standing or while sitting on the floor -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or attempt to share seats with the Opposition -(Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Something of that kind. Some Members on the government side voluntarily cross to the Opposition. I would like to observe that the speed at which we are moving to have a new Chamber for this institution is wanting. 

This leads me to our recent decision to change the garden at the North Wing into a Commonwealth recreation centre. All along I thought that this garden would probably be one avenue for us to keep for future expansion of this institution. Sometimes Parliament gets so congested that Members have to run around looking for parking. There is need for us to re-discuss the issue of space for future expansion of Parliament. The Commission should take it up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Minister, concerning that land, actually it does not even belong to Parliament. It belongs to KCC. However, I can confirm that the Commission is discussing its utilisation with KCC.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much. I knew that it did not belong to Parliament, but Parliament could have gone ahead to discuss. Now you have reported that Parliament discussed with KCC about the utilization. If anything, we still need to find alternative space for ease of work at Parliament. I am wondering why up to now, according to the committee’s report, the Minister of Finance, who is a member of the Parliamentary Commission, is very lax about attending meetings. I think he ought to be brought to order. I am surprised that the Minister of Finance who ought to answer a number of questions in meetings of the Commission is perpetually absent according to this report. The Leader of Government Business, I think you need to take some serious note about the concerns of Parliament and about his conduct.

Finally, members of the committee said they could not comment on Vote 103 of the IGG. If the IGG cannot meet or interface with the committee for two years and expects this Parliament to appropriate monies year in year out without getting a feedback, I think that is out of order. I am sorry that I am now ruling. (Laughter) On that note, I would not even want us to proceed with Vote 103 until the IGG stands to the tune of Parliament. (Applause) There is no way we can keep passing the budget when the person who is to report to us is keeping aloof. That is our position. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to announce the presence in the public gallery of some members of staff from the Department of Public Relations and Protocol of the Kenyan National Assembly. They are up there to witness our proceedings. You are welcome.

12.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report. I want to start my observations on page 11 where the committee notes that there is need for operationalisation of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. I want to plead with the Minister for Justice that if we have to enhance democracy, this is one of the vital ministries that should help this country to do that. We passed the Political Parties and Organisations Act and in that there is supposed to be a framework for a political parties’ forum, which should allow political parties to discuss. The forum should be formed and operationalised by the Electoral Commission to resolve issues of contention in a multiparty dispensation. It is sad that up to now, we have not created a budget, even this financial year, to operationalise that forum. Unless I am mistaken, in this committee report, that has not been provided for. 

This is a forum that should have enabled political parties to amicably resolve most of the issues that have been resolved on the streets of Kampala. We would have probably avoided most of the teargas issues and demonstrations if we had created this political parties’ forum. I want to urge the committee and the minister to take this as a serious matter because it is one of those frameworks that should enhance democratisation and the operationalisation of a multiparty dispensation.

Secondly, I want to comment on the question of the backlog in relation to what we have been told several times, that the ministry is seriously looking at recruitment of judges and magistrates to deal with the question of access to justice and the backlog in Northern Uganda. I have scrutinised the budget activities related to the Judicial Service Commission, which are on page 17, and I have not seen either in achieved activities or planned activities where it indicates recruitment of personnel to deal with the backlog in Northern Uganda, except for DPP on page 35 that has dealt a little bit with that question. 

On page 29, there is also one line talking about special projects under PRDP to construct seven offices. However, we are not even told where these seven offices are going to be constructed. If they are going to be constructed without personnel, I do not know then for what purpose they shall be constructed. I think this is a serious matter that we need to deal with. I would want the minister to assure us how this issue is going to be dealt with.

On Parliament, page 40, the committee talks about CDF and how inadequate and minimal it is to effect any development in the constituency. However, let alone the minimal amount that is given to all Parliamentarians, if you look at the constituencies represented by women, surely CDF should come with a framework that relates to the constituency and the people represented. If you give Shs 10 million to a Member of Parliament who represents a constituency and you give the same money to a Member of Parliament like me who represents three counties and 17 sub-counties, how do you expect the MP to utilise that? 

I propose that the constituencies represented by interest groups -(Interjections)- yes, the truth of the matter is that the committee has raised the issue of increment in constituency development fund. The principle should, therefore, be that if a county represented by a Member of Parliament is getting Shs 10 million, then a woman who represents two counties in that district should get in respect to each of the county the amount which is approved. This is an issue that we should deal with. The problem is that most of the people who represent direct constituencies have some difficulties dealing with women. Maybe they are thinking if the women get money according to counties, maybe they will have difficulties with the women, the youth and those with disability on how effective they will be in managing this fund. We should accept the principle and I hope that when we move, mostly men will support it.

I want to conclude by saying that I agree with the committee that the funding for the structure of the Opposition in this Parliament should be enhanced. If we are going to support and strengthen democracy then we have to deal with the question of how to fund the Opposition. Now you see how most of the shadow ministers have been fumbling with responses to the policy statements and the committee reports. It is because they have to do the research themselves, they have to type and they have to do everything on their own and yet the capacity is not there. I agree with the committee that there is need to strengthen the Opposition in the multiparty dispensation. The structure and institution created in this Parliament should be supported. 

12.49
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): I will start from page 11 where the committee observes that no funds have been provided for the conduct of elections for administrative units, youth, women and the elderly councils. They say that the budget was submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but no funds have been provided in the budget. 

Article 32 of the Constitution talks about affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups and this involves the youth, women and people with disabilities. It says laws cultures, customs, and traditions which are against the dignity or welfare of interests of women or any other marginalised group to which clause (1) relates or which undermines their status is prohibited by this Constitution. If it is prohibited by this Constitution, that means that either this Constitution has been undermined, abused or abrogated. 

Article 3 of this Constitution talks about the defence of the Constitution and states that any person who singly, or in consort with others, by any violent or other unlawful means suspends, overthrows, abrogates or amends this Constitution or any part of it or attempts to do so in such an act commits an offence of treason. Whoever is halting the elections of these councils is committing treason and as this is a marginalised group, we want to come out seriously. 

These persons have to come and explain why these elections have not taken place since 2005. I can give an example of myself: I am the district youth chairman of Jinja. My term of office was supposed to expire in 2005 but because we have not held these elections, I am still the district youth chairman and I am depriving other young people of the opportunity to come and take over. The reason why we hold these elections is for capacity building. If one is a youth chairman for more than eight years, then some other people are being deprived of their right to build capacity and become leaders of this country. I would like to request the Minister of Finance, the concerned ministry and the Electoral Commission to organise these elections as soon as possible before we take them to the courts of law for treason.

My second issue concerns CDF. I would like to thank the honourable member who spoke before me and raised this issue. The way this money is given out is very unfair as it is a uniform figure for all of us. If I may use myself as an example; I represent 26 districts. My constituency starts from Jinja to Nakapiripirit but I am getting the same amount of money with somebody who represents Kampala Central Division. 

Currently, the youth are the people who are most in need. We need to support and help them start up their own projects as well as sensitise them about important activities and government programmes. However, if I divide this money by the number of districts that I represent, I will have only Shs 300,000 to spend in every district for development programmes. There are some districts like Nakapiripirit, which have more than 10 sub-counties; Shs 300,000 will not be enough in terms of fuel alone to move from here to Nakapiripirit. I will reach there and fail to support any programme. So I think we should really support her idea so that this money is given out in consideration of the area of jurisdiction of every Member of Parliament.

Lastly, there is the issue of the IGG. Although I agree with the person who said that she should come and interface with the committee, I would like to lobby the committee. When you get an opportunity to interact with the IGG, there is a problem in this institution in the sense that they take long to execute their obligations. I can give you an example. In 2005, there was a problem with the building of Jinja Central Division. The IGG wrote stopping the construction of that building yet they had already spent Shs 750 million. Up to now, there is a problem between that institution and the Ministry of Works. The ministry gave Jinja Municipal Council the go-ahead to continue with the construction of the building but the IGG said that there are some things that they need to sort out. The building is collapsing because it was not roofed and the heavy rains do not help. Who is going to lose? (Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek clarification from my colleague. When you look at the problems that the IGG is facing, isn’t it the more reason for the IGG to come and interact with Parliament and present those problems?

12.55
MS OLIVER WONEKHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee and the members for this good report. I would like to speak on the issue of certificates. These are vital documents and I am surprised that our government does not take them as a priority. Birth certificates, death certificates and marriage certificates are absolutely necessary and I hope that as we debate, government will take them seriously and provide the money that is required. 

Listening to this report, no wonder there is such a backlog on cases in the courts of law. You know that in many of these cases, we have the vulnerable concerned. When justice is not delivered on time, it is justice denied. So when we do not have enough funding and personnel, we have vulnerable people being denied justice. 

The other day in the newspapers, the Commissioner for Prisons was blaming courts for the congestion in prisons. He was saying that it is because the courts are not handling the cases in time. However, given this report, where is the problem? Is it with the courts? We are all aware about the number of judges in the courts of law and we are aware that the President has recently made appointments but as Parliament, we urge him to make more appointments so that justice is delivered. 

Looking through the whole report, the issue of under funding or no funding at all is very prominent and ranges from small monies to big ones. I propose that especially where the issue of wages is concerned, it should really be mandatory that someone gets paid for the work that they deliver. So, on page 20 (d), the budget for the wage and non-wage for JSC is not enough, leaving a funding gap of Shs 23.41 million. This is really small money and you are talking about wages for the people who are working in this particular section of government.

When it comes to the Uganda Human Rights Commission, I will refer to page 27 of the report. On page 27 under the observations of the committee, (b) says: “The committee observed that the budget line to pay compensation awards to victims of torture by government agencies is under the Office of the Attorney-General.” When it comes to these awards, again the people who are involved are vulnerable persons. Everybody is entitled to the awards but you will find that it is mainly women, people with disabilities, or even the poor on whom injustices are committed. 

Finally, on the issue of the Parliamentary Commission and parking in particular, we find vehicles in our parking areas whose owners we do not know. Not only that, in the parking area we also find unscrupulous persons busy removing parts and pieces from vehicles of Members of Parliament. Mine has been such a vehicle and –(Interjection)- yes, there are people who are really redundant; they are unemployed and they think the parking space of Parliament is where to spend their time. So, I think it is time our Parliamentary Commission paid attention to that particular issue. I thank you. 

1.01
DR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was trying to recollect your name; you are Dr Serunjogi?  

DR SERUNJOGI: Yes, and I wanted to say that I am Dr Lastus Serunjogi from Kiboga East. You seem to have forgotten my name -(Laughter)- but I know one of the problems I have is that there is another Katende and in many fora, my submissions have always been attributed to the other Dr Katende Sematiko. 

I am grateful and I would like to thank the committee for this excellent report on this large cohort of institutions – 10 of them – which are very important in this sector of Justice, Law and Order. To me, this is very important in the propagation of order and stability, which are also instrumental for development and prosperity of the nation. However, from the report I am alarmed by the shortage of funding in a number of these institutions especially in this year’s budget. I will just give two examples where I am concerned, and that can be generalised to the other institutions. 

On page 5 there is the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, where there was an omission of Shs 3 billion already talked about by other members. The board of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau cannot even be operationalised. Worse still, when you go down, they are not able to print very important documents including births, deaths, and marriage certificates. All this and yet funds denied for those essential activities will affect the operations of other sectors in Government. We need this documentation for planning purposes, registration for elections and security. We need to know who Ugandans are and so on. You can always verify through such documents.

When it comes to marriage certificates, if those were in place, it would go a long way in curbing family disputes over assets especially at death. If they are not given, there will be a number of cases and disputes at the Administrator-General’s office. So, I support the recommendations of the committee that the funding of this ministry, especially the omissions mentioned, be looked at.

The second area of concern for me, like for other Members, is the Electoral Commission. I looked at the problems of the requirement of administrative units, including the women and youth councils and so on, which need to be updated through elections, yet here we are saying we do not have such funds. I would like to recommend that the Electoral Commission be given money. I would have proposed, if conditions warranted, that it should be at ad lib – that is money available at all times for the Electoral Commission. This is because there are always updates which we need to do; for example in cases of people who have come of voting age –(Mr Mukitale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking it?

DR SERUNJOGI: I propose that he gets a chance, since he is going to impinge on my time. We should not wait for time for elections to start running around. 

I would like to end by saying that I support the adoption of this report with proposals made by the committee. Where I have not seen clarity is the case where some institutions are collecting revenue. On page 4, for example, there was a collection of Shs 12.4 billion from the Administrator-General and he later paid out some Shs 10 billion. It is not very clear whether the Shs 10 billion paid out is out of revenue; what is the appropriation? Using the revenue in appropriation should come out clearly because it could circumvent the problems where we got shortage of funds if we appropriately use the revenues collected by various institutions. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katende. I will make sure I do not confuse you with the other Katende. 

1.06
MS LYDIA NYAGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. On page 9 under achievement 4, you may find that the Electoral Commission spends a lot of money on hiring lawyers that represent it in electoral petitions. I wonder whether at the end of the day this should be termed as an achievement because you find that the recovery is almost 7.7 percent. I wanted to know who really is concerned with recovering the costs that are awarded to the Electoral Commission. 

On filling the vacancies in the new districts - page 11 - you may realise that in most of the new districts, they do not have quorum in their councils. If one citizen came up one day to challenge all the decisions made in the new districts, you may find that it would be a shame to the government. 

When it comes to by-elections for Members of Parliament, the by-elections are held within 60 days but when it comes to districts, a full term may even end without having by-elections. I will give an example of Namutumba District and Buliisa District. You find that in Buliisa, a council is made up of only two councillors. I wonder what sort of council that is. I want to support the observations as well as the recommendation of the committee that as a matter of urgency -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! I know it is exciting. Are you taking it? 

MS NYAGO: Madam Speaker, I have little time. Perhaps he will clarify or seek for clarification after me.

I want to support the observation and recommendation of the committee that as a matter of urgency, money be sought to hold elections in these new districts to avoid all the inconveniences that may be caused afterwards. 

I wonder if the Minister of Finance is aware that since 2005, huge sums of money have been sent to districts for women, the elderly, the disabled and the youth. That money lacks accountability because there are no organs in place. At the end of the day, even the people concerned are not aware that monies are being sent from the centre to the districts. You find that the money is just spent for Women’s Day, Youth Day and that is all and yet billions and millions of money has been sent from the centre to the districts. I thank you very much.

1.10
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to register my thanks to the committee for the good report. I have a few observations to make. 

One is on page 4 but it starts from page 3, under achievements of the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs. On point three, they talk of having won 35 cases worth about Shs 329,645,000,000 and lost 26 cases amounting to just Shs 679 million. I am sure that as we debate this report, all the Shs 679 million must have been claimed by the people who won these cases against the Judicial Commission. The Shs 329,645,000,000 relates to just July 2007 to May 2008 but I am sure there must have been balances of cases carried on from the previous years that the Ministry of Justice has won. 

It is not enough to state here that they have won these cases that are worth this amount; now this is budgeting period and this is also one of the ministries that are asking for additional funds, so why don’t they help us as Members of Parliament to recover this money? What is their plan for recovery of this money for this period and also for the previous periods so that we can also help them to finance their budgets for their activities? The same applies to the Electoral Commission; it also does not give a recovery plan for the Shs 340 million, which they have won in terms of the petitions that they have conducted and won. 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission, page 14, under proposed activities for this year item No. 4 says that they plan to publish simplified and translated laws etcetera. The Constitution was written in 1995 but to date there is no translation into the various key languages in this country, and I am sure it was one of the commitments that the Constitution be translated. On the various laws, I can give an example of when we were trying to sensitise the public recently about the Land (Amendment) Bill. It was a problem. One person will come with a translation or with the interpretation he wants the people to get; another also comes with his or her own interpretation. So, at least when the masses down there have these laws interpreted in the local languages, it will be easier to make them understand what the laws dictate; there is a saying that ignorance of the law is no defence. 

On the Parliamentary Commission, I just want to make an observation that most of us, Members of Parliament, when we joined this Parliament we were a few inches smaller especially around the waistline. Today when you look at most Members of Parliament, they have got extended waistlines. What I want to say is that we need a gym or a kind of health club for Members of Parliament. The saying goes that a healthy mind in a healthy body, and I think as Members of Parliament we indeed need to keep fit and healthy. 

There is also the walkway between the North and South wings; whenever it rains there is a problem. You have to run across that walkway and yet it is slippery. I do not know whether there is any provision here for that? I have not seen any provision for that walkway to be provided with canopies on both sides so that when it rains, we do not take the risk of breaking our legs because we have to run across especially during the rain and the place is slippery.

Finally, still on the Parliamentary Commission, there has always been a problem especially between the Commission and Ministry of Finance when it comes to releasing our recurrent budget. The Ministry of Finance tends to indicate that actually, the recurrent budget for the Parliamentary Commission is subject to their changes as they wish. I want to state here that the recurrent budget of the Parliamentary Commission is a direct charge to the Consolidated Fund. All the Ministry of Finance can do is only to comment, but not adjust that budget. This was intended, I am sure, to enhance or to emphasise the independence of Parliament as one of the three arms of government and of course not for the Executive to have an opportunity to arm-twist Parliament. I just wanted to re-emphasise that the recurrent budget of the Parliamentary Commission is a direct charge and the Ministry of Finance should have no say; they can comment but not adjust those figures. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.16
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is my conviction that the stability of any country or government depends on an effective Electoral Commission, carrying out its mandate of free and fair elections. It is from this conviction that I want to support the budget of the Electoral Commission as stipulated and recommended by this committee.

Issues have been raised, for example, that the youth, women and elections for the elderly have not been conducted and even at the LC I level, since we turned to the multiparty dispensation of government, there have not been elections because of lack of money. This has resulted into conflicts among those who were holding offices and those who are to hold offices. The Electoral Commission per se cannot do this unless they are empowered and there is money allocated to them.  

It is also my conviction that many cases of electoral petitions come up as a result of the un-preparedness of the Electoral Commission due to lack of funding, and it is from this conviction that I strongly support the recommendations of the committee to empower the Electoral Commission so that it can be well prepared to come up with a well formulated framework on how to conduct the elections.  

Still on the Electoral Commission, they talked of lack of training. I wish to add lack of a computerised voter registration system, which needs to be updated from time to time. This needs to be installed in the Electoral Commission to empower them to carry out their mandate as stipulated by this Parliament -(Interjection)- I am not taking any information since I have only five minutes.  

I want to turn to the LDC. The LDC used to operate as an institution when this country had only one university, Makerere University. Between you and me, Madam Speaker, you know there are over 20 plus universities right now and it is my contention that the LDC as a single institution cannot handle the training of the so many lawyers who come out of these institutions.  

I wish to recommend the breaking of the monopoly of the LDC and the creation of private bodies, which can be looked into by the Ministry of Education so that they can take up the so many graduates who go to LDC or who fail to go to LDC. It is my contention that if we go this way, we will have solved the problem that exists at LDC. They have been in the papers recently for the wrong reasons. Should we break the monopoly, we would be sorting out this problem once and for all. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I recommend that the budget for the Electoral Commission and the budget for LDC be approved by this Parliament. Thank you.

1.21
MS BEATRICE AMONGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I wish to join my colleagues in commending this committee for the good job done. 

I want to start by thanking the Uganda Law Reform Commission for the work that they are doing. It is reported by the committee on page 14, as part of the achievements of the Uganda Law Reform Commission for the year 2007/2008, that they reviewed the Domestic Relations Bill. It is my conviction that this Domestic Relations Bill and other gender related Bills are about to leave the Uganda Law Commission. They are about to find their way back to the Judiciary and I believe the Minister of Justice will ensure that it gets on this Floor urgently.  

On page 33, the committee recommends that government provides Shs 30 billion for the implementation of the computerisation policy so as to have all courts online with the aim of easing work for judicial officers in settling more cases, storage and transmission of accurate data. This thing looks very innocent in this report but you may not realise how important it is. Some years back, like 14 years ago, I had a very traumatic experience because of this business of judicial officers manually recording, manually storing and all sorts of things. I am happy - my lawyer then is inside this House and he will bear me witness – but we got the shock of our lives when we finally got the recording from the court where a judicial person manually recorded and we discovered that the recording was upside down to fit with whatever judgement it was. First of all it was very difficult to get the records of the case. Then the record was - and we had no way of disputing since there was no automatic recording. So I think this recommendation is important and government ought to make sure that proceedings of the court are recorded by computer so that I do not have to stand up and challenge the whole Judiciary to say, “This judge or this magistrate is corrupt.” 

It is a serious problem for us seeking justice. I was traumatised and up to now I do not want to go to court for any issue because of that one experience unless I really must  –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, very much, hon. Lagada.  I think on top of that recommendation we should recommend that the honourable members of the Bench should really know how to work. They are too British to an extent that they keep on adjourning a case and go for recess. In fact they work lazily and yet there is a lot to do in these courts. I think there is a need to reform the way these honourable members of the Bench work. They start to work at midday and adjourn courts before 1.00 p.m. 

MS BEATRICE AMONGI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I also want to briefly comment on what has been commented on, about the elections of the councils. You will realise that in 2004/2005, there was a review of the Constitution with the article on affirmative action being retained. The NRM Government, right from the word go has been very proud of affirmative action. How come, three years down the line, we do not have funds for the election of these councils? Have we given up on the women, youth and people with disabilities? The government must put its money where its heart is. Otherwise, we are going to start doubting whether this government loves the women, youth and people with disabilities as we always knew it did.

Lastly is the question of voter education as indicated on page 10 amongst the planned activities for 2008/2009. The report says that the Electoral Commission intends to conduct continuous voter registration and education. So many years ago during the time of the NRC, I was in this House. I also was in the Constituent Assembly; I want to say that there is a big difference in the way the voters view their representatives in the House.

I have been wondering whose responsibility it is to ensure that the country knows what to expect of a Member of Parliament. If the Electoral Commission had been doing its work as indeed it ought to; to educate the voters continuously, not just about casting votes, but about what sort of representatives to look out for to elect; what to expect of their voters, then the hon. Members of Parliament today would not be under the sort of pressure they are going through.  

I think Members in the NRC were more comfortable, but today honourable members here do all sorts of things: sometimes people think that we ought to work like LC I chairmen because, truth be told, most of us have grumbled quietly. Otherwise, there can be this burial; the other burial and you wonder when the Member of Parliament ever does Parliamentary work if he is going to be running around all the time burying people. And if you do not go it is a problem; if you go, it is a problem. So  –(Member timed out)  

1.28
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I want to add my voice to the voices of my honourable colleagues by thanking the committee for their report. I am particularly impressed about the format because soon after they came up with an observation, immediately the recommendation followed; I found it very easy to follow.

I have only two issues to raise and one is on page 33(e), which talks about the land tribunals. Sincerely the land tribunals were doing very good work; we really need them in Northern Uganda where people have been in camps for the last 21 years and now have quite a lot of land disputes. However, they should be effectively facilitated so that they can meet every day like any other regular court to handle serious issues on land. So, I really support the recommendation by the committee and if government can give that money, it will be very good.

Madam Speaker, my last issue features at page 41, where the report talks about the system of parking and I want to particularly focus on parking marked, “For persons with disabilities.” In the parking of the Northern Wing, there are two spaces marked with yellow with a picture of a person on a wheelchair. In the Southern Wing parking, we also have two spaces marked like that, but people are not respecting this marked parking yet it is really reserved for persons with disabilities.

If you look at the Southern wing particularly, that parking is near the ramp for William to park and walk easily on the ramp to Parliament. However, everyday I come I find people’s cars parked in it already.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Nokrach for giving way. I would like to give this information in relation to the general deterioration in discipline in regard to parking. About one and a half hours ago, I needed to get to a meeting. However, when I got out, I found one honourable member parked her car in front of mine; she did not even leave the keys to her car with the policemen, and walked away. I just gave up on going for the meeting. This general indiscipline is the kind of thing that makes Members not to respect the fact that that parking is specifically for people with disabilities.

MR NOKRACH: Thank you for your information. Madam Speaker, I was in South Africa. In South Africa, in all public places for parking, you find that kind of mark for people with disabilities. I also was in America last year and noticed that all public parking places had parking signs for persons with disabilities, and there, if you are not disabled and you park where such people are supposed to park, you pay a fine of US $200 immediately.  

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has enacted so many good laws in respect to persons with disabilities. It is a shame for Parliament to break the laws!

I, therefore, would like to appeal to the Parliamentary Commission to ensure that from tomorrow people leave those parking place free for us. I further appeal to honourable members to take the examples from South Africa and America so that in all public parking places in Kampala in Uganda, we have specific parking places meant for persons with disabilities.

Last but not least, I want to talk about CDF. My sister hon. Betty raised a very nice issue, which is true. I am finding it very difficult to use the Shs 10 million in 21 districts. My colleague, hon. Ndezi representing Central region has 17 districts. It is not easy really to distribute this money for any meaningful development in the constituency. I, therefore, appeal to the Parliamentary Commission to make a review so that the money makes meaning to our people. I thank you for giving me the opportunity.

1.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The question of the CDF has become a liability to Members of Parliament. It is now being used by those who want to degrade the integrity of Parliament. I would like to appeal to the Parliamentary Commissioners that if they cannot find a befitting amount for CDF, they either change the guidelines or just call it a constituency office imprest for rent, the attendant and office upkeep. If not, scrape it because it has become a liability. Every time people are asking us for CDF, what can Shs 800,000 do per month for a Member of Parliament? Can it do any meaningful development? Kindly save our integrity.

Secondly, on the question of special interest elections, I have a problem in my constituency: I only have three councillors and a district chairman. In other words, with the speaker who has no vote, I have only three councillors and there is one committee for all purposes – actually we have a very big problem. I would like to appeal that the money be found in the Electoral Commission to consider such unique places like Buliisa so that we can at least have what is required by the Constitution - at least the minimum requirement of councillors. 

We also have a problem as people of Buliisa: on 05 January 2005, under the Masindi District then, the DVO sued the first nucleus of herdsmen in Buliisa for lack of a movement permit. Nine herds were taken to the Lower Magistrate’s Court. This case has never been heard to date. Instead, one Mutazindwa, the magistrate for Masindi said that this case could not be heard; the file has been summoned to Kampala. So we would want to know from the Judicial Service Commission, who called this file and who has the power to pull strings? The people who had only 10 herds are having about 40,000 cows now; their illegality is now being protected by the same courts of law.

Madam Speaker, I have three prisoners in Masindi, since April 2005 whose cases disappeared in the Office of the DPP. The three prisoners were taken up under alleged murder charges. They have never been heard, they have suffered. The IGP even informed a committee of Parliament that these people were cleared that they were maliciously sued and that the person who committed the murder was found. But these three citizens are still suffering in prison on charges of murder. How does one get justice in Uganda? Who are these powerful people who can actually pull strings with the DPP to deny other citizens justice?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, if you really what your people to be assisted, what is their case number and what are their names; how does the minister know their names?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, this information is already with the relevant people including the Ministry of Internal Affairs; we have also raised it to another level, but I can bring a copy of all these details tomorrow. 

Again in Buliisa, we have people who allegedly had 20 guns. They were caught in the act with these guns. When the police decided to take them to court martial, they used what we call habeas corpus; that they were not produced in court before 48 hours and they were released. I would like to know, does that mean that the investigations and the case of the illegal possession of arms are relaxed just because they have to be produced in court in 48 hours? Where are these 20 guns, which they reported in the first place? How can these people who were planting guns against a community be brought to book? They are at large; they even threw a big party because they used the habeas corpus yet they were in illegal possession of arms. 

Finally, on the question of the commission and the chambers, you all know that we do not sit in an honourable manner here. My children have even asked me why we cannot find the money, yet we are the ones responsible for voting. Can’t we ensure that that question of Parliamentary chambers is taken as a priority, otherwise sitting here in such a manner is not befitting! I thank you. 

1.39
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East): Madam Speaker, I want to join my colleagues and thank the committee for the very good report. I sometimes get worried: this year we passed a law when I was still on the Committee of Local Government, the Local Government Act No.1 of 2007. Under that law there was the Certificate of Financial Implications and that law was supposed to operationalisation the elections of all LC I, II, IV. Unfortunately, up to now nothing has been done. Why was our committee given a task and we hurried that much yet at the end of it we are just here? 

New sub-counties were created and the law requires that they should serve only six interim leaderships for six months. In our place, it is now two years and there are no elections. In fact in my place, after creating new villages, people have gone ahead and elected interim chairmen and they are working; they ignored the Electoral Commission. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which is your place?

MR WOPUWA: Manafwa District, Bubulo East –(Interruption) 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Wopuwa for giving me your valuable time. The information I want to give to the House is that I also got a town council in Kalongo recently and for some strange reason, elections were held in all the other regions except Kalongo. We have now suffered a crisis where the LC chairperson of the sub-county where Kalongo originally came from decided that he was going to be the chairman of the sub-county. And he has a habit of communicating with guys in security and the people are scared. They are even implementing town plans without approval. You can imagine the situation I am in, given my position, and this thing is happening in the very town I come from, all because of elections.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to deny the Leader of the Opposition information, but I have really lost. 

You are aware that the Ministry of Finance – I think they have a problem. This ministry does not have very many elected ministers; I think out of five three are not elected and only two are elected and I think that is why they do not appreciate the work of the Electoral Commission. For us who sit down there, the general feeling is that the Parliamentary Commission is not doing a very good job because when you are crossing that place there, you run like a thief. And one of these days a Members of Parliament will get knocked down along that junction. We are told the Chinese have come in and so on, but it is now silent. 

The other issue I want to mention is that the Chairman of the Electoral Commission and the commissioners are paid Shs 2.9 million since 1999. A High Court judge is paid Shs 5 million. And if you look at the good work the Electoral Commission is doing - we have not had the case of Kenya or even Zimbabwe here. Even when our brothers lose elections, they go to court and come back satisfied. Why don’t we support this commission?

Then there is this issue of renting; I think it is a way in which government donates money to people. They were saying that the Supreme Court lets Amamu House; I think it belongs to Sudhir. But this Crested Towers was a government building. Why do we give away our own buildings and then we go and start renting. The other day we were here and even the Minister of Energy did not know that Amber House was a government house, and he made a statement here to prove that they were paying the right people. If ministers cannot know, we cannot know which buildings are ours. Really where are we headed?

Lastly, I do not want to talk about the issue of CDF but for us who have been around, where we came from to start getting that small thing – we should encourage it to be modified and increased. But even if it is a small thing, you eat with other people. For us we have little money but we account and use it with other people; so we just want you to be – those who are not satisfied, do not sign for it; nobody is compelling you to sign for it. And also when we are lobbying, let us not divide ourselves among those who have big constituencies and those who have small constituencies. It is not healthy. Let us just ask for a big thing and we do a good job and the Electoral Commission ensures that we are continuously re-elected -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Wopuwa. You are not being realistic. You cannot expect somebody who represents Jinja Municipality West to still get the same amount as somebody who represents Ibanda. That one is not acceptable. (Applause)

MR WOPUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make those comments. But I respect your ruling. Let us move together when we all get. Thank you.

1.45
MS ANNE AURU (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for their good work. 

I have one area where I would like to make very serious observations, that is on page 42, the Inspectorate of Government. Madam Speaker, I am really sorry for the bad blood that flows between the Inspector-General of Government and the committee. This is simply because the Inspectorate of Government is a very important institution that we all look up to in as far as corruption is concerned. And to come up with a recommendation that their budget cannot even be considered is a very serious issue and I hope that it will soon be resolved so that their budget is looked at and also passed. 

As you are aware, it is a process to pass a budget. The committee internalises the policy statements and then they raise questions, which are sent to the relevant ministries. What I would like to know is whether this committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs also came up with questions, which they raised and sent to the Inspectorate of Government. If they did and the Inspector-General of Government kept quiet over it, that is a very serious abuse to the committee and to the institution of Parliament in general. But if the committee did not do that, I think that is an oversight, which needs to be looked into.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the honourable member holding the Floor is that I have been a member of this committee, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for quite a long time. I want to give information to the effect that for the last three years, the committee has made an effort to interact with the IGG but failed. This is on record. And it is what we wrote in this report. This report is signed by all Members of this committee. We are earnest; we do our work with no fear or favour. And we know that we have an important responsibility. This Parliament gave us important work. We must report and tell the truth. It would not be necessary for the committee to send questions to the IGG; what we wanted for the IGG was to appear. All heads of institutions must appear before committees to defend their budgets and their ministerial statements. 

Therefore, the question of merely sending questions to the IGG does not arise. Madam Speaker, all that we are saying is that the IGG refused to appear. Therefore, she was not interested in having the budget of her department approved. She was not interested in the money. Thank you.

MS AURU: Thank you for that information. However, Madam Speaker, I think the issue of the committees sending questions to the relevant ministries cannot be ruled out because it is in that process that they are able to prepare adequately to come and respond to the committees. Anyway, that is just for the information of this House. I just consider it as a step missed out. And I thought that it was after such questions are sent that there will now be interface with the ministries. Anyway, I am also a new person in Parliament, maybe it is a process of learning but for the first two years, that is what has been happening with the different committees that I sat on.

In paragraph four on the same page 42, the committee also resolved not to consider the Inspectorate’s policy statements since the Deputy Inspector-General of Government could not answer some of the issues they wanted to raise; “… they wanted to raise” that means they did not even raise them to him. I thought the Inspectorate of Government is an institution! When the head is not there, the deputy could take over and do the work, which the senior should have done herself or himself. So I appeal to this august House to really be considerate and maybe find a way of looking into this issue. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

1.51
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report that they have presented. I have some observations.

Let me use this phrase that politics is the mother of peace. If there is no political peace, I do not think that a country can have peace. We have seen this with other countries. And the labour ward for this mother to deliver under a good environment is the Electoral Commission. Therefore, if the ward is not properly prepared, you know what is going to happen to the mother and the child. If there is a request - and moreover you are the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs - I happen to be a member of the Business Committee. These people came up with this proposal that they take it as a project and Ministry of Finance agreed, then what happens when it comes to giving them money? Even if we have good roads, good schools, good health centres, if there is no political peace, all those will be just structures, which are there but people are not using them.

Therefore, that is how we have to look at the Electoral Commission if we are really a democratic country that appreciates that leaders must come in democratically. We must assist the whole process of this. The Electoral Commission, the only staff which they have in our districts is the district registrar and the assistants. The other people who assist during elections are hand picked. These are presiding officers, these are polling assistants, these are police constables who have not been trained and do not have enough skills to conduct elections and yet they are the majority. When are they going to train them if the money is delayed? These are the crash programmes they will push and these people will not do a good job. Then you will hear all of us filing petitions. How much money are we going to spend on these petitions?

So, Ministry of Finance, please look at this as a crucial matter, which we have to manage. Look at the administrative units, these are LC Is. How many villages do we have? I am sure they are over 60,000 and yet the law is saying these chairpersons are to be elected by secret ballot. Therefore, they should be nominated and they must prepare ballot papers. If we do not give them money now - and yet these are the people we go to and say, “You go and the LC I chairperson will sign your form.” Minister of Finance, please we are all Ugandans, you have to find money just as we found money for CHOGM, we should also find money for the Electoral Commission, because we are able. We are able! We found money for CHOGM, where is the problem? Tell us and we all work on that.

Another issue I want to comment on is on page 16. This is for the Law Reform Commission. Ministry of Finance, you are good at rushing to see whether those who collect taxes have deposited that money but when it comes to facilitating them to collect that money, you are not willing. I support the committee when it recommends that you should allow the Uganda Law Reform Commission to use the NTR for printing and publishing laws, which are made. Otherwise, where do we have them if we do not know them, if we do not publish them?

Because of time I want to comment on the judges’ retirement age. When they are retired, replacement takes long and judgment is delayed. This is just unfair to somebody; you are condemning that person. So if we cannot have enough judges at the time, then we accept –(Member timed out)

1.57
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the chairperson and the members for the report. On page 40, Constituency Development Fund - I want to agree with hon. Mukitale that the fund has really brought problems to the Members of Parliament especially when you go to the constituency; everybody is asking for Constituency Development Fund. It has reached an extent of even some Members getting money from their own pockets to reinforce the Constituency Development Fund.

I also share the view that if really the fund cannot be meaningful, we should abolish it or adjust it so that the fund is really meaningful to our development endeavours in our constituencies. I want to agree with the Members who come from big constituencies like the women representatives and the youth. Honestly, the fund should be adjusted in such a way that they get slightly higher and it should not offend those of us who come from small constituencies because in any case these women and youth MPs, when they come to reinforce you in the development efforts in your constituency, it is really an added advantage, especially the youth. For me, my youth representative for the Western region for example has never been in my constituency but I do not blame him because of the ill-facilitation.

So if we increase the Constituency Development Fund for the youth and the women MPs, it would even help us Members of Parliament who are in small constituencies because then we can network and we have a reasonable effect in as far as development is concerned. 

On the guidelines, to say that this money should not be spent on government projects; for instance in my constituency we were benefiting from this school facilitation grant and there were some primary schools, which benefited from this grant and some of those projects were not complete. So I thought maybe I would commit my first CDF to primary schools in my constituency only to find that the guidelines are saying we should not use this money on government projects. I still request the Parliamentary Commission to adjust this because in my constituency I had already committee myself to supporting ten schools who have unfinished projects with the next CDF release. 

I would also like to talk about the court bailiffs. We have a very big problem of court bailiffs. There is a way they work together with some lawyers to cause a lot of suffering to the people. I think the minister in charge of this sector is aware of this problem because I have raised this problem even in writing. Some of these court bailiffs have even safe houses. They have prisons. If you cannot pay their charges they can even arrest you, they confiscate your house, and they take your land. It is really very terrible. I do not know how we can regulate these court bailiffs and also the legal fees from some of these lawyers are very exorbitant. I am sorry we have some learned friends here, but up country there is an outcry of uncontrolled legal fees. You find that for just a simple case, a learned friend is requesting for Shs 2 million or Shs 3 million and a peasant has to surrender his piece of land to this learned friend. And so many people have lost their land through these exorbitant legal fees. 

I do not know whether there is a way the minister in charge of this sector can regulate this or reinforce legal aid projects targeting the poor. If we can help them and provide that legal advice more especially as the Land Bill comes in place, our people will need this legal aid component because it will be very expensive for these peasants when evicted to consult and seek legal advice. 

2.03
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start by thanking the chairman and the committee for the report, which was well prepared. I want to talk about office space for government ministries. 

The government starting with the building they are putting up for the Prime Minister and the President needs to utilise the vertical space. If our friends have support for a five or six storey building, let government fund a strong foundation where we can do the construction stage by stage and we can add on later. But we cannot afford to waste space the way they did with Statistics and Foreign Affairs buildings. 

On page 20, I am surprised that there is no mechanism for the Judiciary to assess the performance of judges. I find this unacceptable and the Minister of Public Service, the Judicial Service Commissioner or whoever is concerned should see that things are made good. No wonder I have been called as a witness to court and these people are never in office before 10 O’clock or 11 O’clock because there is no way of assessing them. Something must be done; there must be a mechanism of assessing their performance. 

When you come to the Judicial Service Commission, in the report they say they have recommended people and they have not been approved. The question is, many other institutions have recommended many people and they have been approved. The percentage of acceptance is in 90 plus, why is it low in the Judicial Service Commission? That means there is something wrong with what they are doing. There must be a problem with the way they are doing things. Why are they not advertising these jobs so that people know the competition to come? 

I think the appointing authority, using the available machinery of government, has more information to explain the refusal of these people and the Commission should try to find out why their acceptance rate is very low. They must be doing something wrong in their recommendations. 

On the construction of the Chamber, the Commission is telling us there are some technical problems, which are these technical problems? I understand they met the Ministry of Works - can I request the Commission to involve the Committee on Physical Infrastructure so that we meet them together? There are no problems here; people are building structures in water and how about here? This must be solved and the Chamber must be built during this Eighth Parliament.

On the IGG, the report said the deputy came and he could not answer some questions. Fine, but that is not good enough. Supposing the IGG was here and could not answer all the questions, what would happen? That cannot be the reason why they cannot approve their budget. I think they need to give us more information in writing other than just saying the deputy came and could not answer all the questions.

I appeal to government to seriously fund the Electoral Commission because we want fair and free elections; we want to defeat people and they do not have any excuses that they were defeated because of Electoral Commission. Let them be given money; we go in the field and we compete -(Member timed out)

2.08
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report and say that this report has generally convinced me because they have tried to highlight issues that I thought were pertinent and should be raised in this Parliament. 

I want to react to the committee recommendations on page 12 on Shs 15 billion that should have been provided to the Electoral Commission to facilitate elections of administrative units LC I, LC II, youth and women. Democracy is the government of the people by the people and for the people. The last component is quite important. 

It is very unfortunate that the Electoral Commission prepared a budget to facilitate elections and provided all the details to the Minister of Finance and the minister either deliberately, or on a selfish note decided to ignore the inclusion of Shs 15 billion meant for the facilitation of these administrative units’ elections. 

Members of Parliament were elected to come and represent their people in this House as well as the President of Uganda. It would be a crime to deny the ordinary people a chance to have leadership at those levels where democracy and decentralisation can only be effective. I am tired as a legislator of answering questions to the local people on when elections of LC I and LC II are going to be conducted. Therefore, this Parliament through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should explain to the people of Uganda. 

I went to my constituency recently and I found that the LC I and LC II who are actually expired were holding some small courts and they were passing judgments. This is illegal! I am not learned in law but I am aware that we have the two learned lawyers here and they will explain to me what is happening at LC I and LC II courts. As a Parliament vested with the power to protect, defend and uphold the Constitution, we cannot continue to move illegally and to encourage illegality in our society; this would be wrong. 

I briefly interacted with the Electoral Commission and I can tell you how disappointed this institution is as of now because they have been directly frustrated by Government to carry out their legislative duties. We empowered them, gave them responsibilities and we say that we are now in a multi-party dispensation yet we are the ones frustrating the essence of multi-partism in this country! 

As a Member of Parliament, I would urge the Minister of Finance to think of providing money to elect two commissions within two months because if you do your arithmetic, from now until 2011 before we conduct other elections, there is no other time to carry out these elections -(Interruption)

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: I don’t think that it is very correct on our part to put these colleagues from the Ministry of Finance on the board and cut them into pieces. Ministry of Finance does not appropriate the funds of this country; we do. I have heard from hon. Wopuwa and I also have my own examples of some members of the local council who died and others who have not been elected. Another example is like the one the Leader of the Opposition talked about; town councils are created but they have no leadership. 

It is really upon us to suggest. Ministry of Finance presents proposals and that is why they are called as such. Can we shift funds because we have the authority, rather than talking here and there without making concrete proposals? Can we propose areas where funds can be shifted say from here to there according to priorities? The Ministry of Finance says, “Here is my basket; these are the oranges that I have. If you want to give oranges to hon. Okello-Okello, Guma and Kaliba and others while the rest go hungry; it is up to you”. So, can we make concrete proposals about how we want to have funds shifted to address priorities the way we see them as Parliament?

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you colleague for the information. The information is that the Ministry of Finance should now look for alternative opportunities for funds to facilitate these elections as soon as possible. I hope that the Ministry of Finance has taken this seriously. 

On the same issue of the Electoral Commission, this Commission needs to acquire some equipment like cameras to help them continue with registration of voters. Also, these capital development projects need to be funded urgently. However, the same Electoral Commission is complaining that the release of these funds has always delayed to the extent that money is provided to buy cameras only when we are approaching elections. This has always affected their work. I think we should be able to address this matter.

Secondly, I want to give a small comment about the roles of the Parliamentary Commission. The Commission tried to highlight the issue of the Constituency Development Fund but before today, I made a very serious statement that how I wish that Parliament moved hard to remove or scrap the CDF. This is because even the phrase Constituency Development fund is a misnomer. I think that if we cannot go with the recommendations of the committee that the name be changed, I would strongly urge Parliament that we scrap CDF so that we are not looked at as corrupt leaders. 

Members of Parliament have legislative duties that they are supposed to perform and as such it is meaningless for me to be laboured with the task of constructing roads and providing clean water in my constituency because government is not doing it. If a Member of Parliament is being pushed by the community to provide clean and safe water because he is paid Shs 10 million per year, I think it is very unrealistic. That is why some of us are almost becoming beggars because the demand is overwhelming merely because of the term CDF and the Shs 10 million given to Members of Parliament.

Lastly, I want to comment on court awards and compensation. In this same Parliament, I made a statement about how the Government of Uganda was sued by the people of Loro Adyeda Group Farm after the destruction of property by UPDF and they won the case. The court awarded them Shs 343 million. Almost four years later, the government has only paid them Shs 10 million. Some of them have actually died –(Member timed out)

2.18
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where hon. Otto is ending and that is on court awards and compensation. On pages 3 and 4, the committee does not tell us the total amount of compensation and court awards that are still left pending. 

On page 27, the committee tells us that of all the awards given by Uganda Human Rights Commission, only 40 percent have been paid. This is a very serious matter. The awards, particularly those by Uganda Human Rights Commission, are given to the people who have been tortured and some of them are completely deformed. They cannot perform the way that they used to so these little awards should be given to them.

I don’t know what kind of people are paid because there are some cases that have been pursued for years and payment has not been made. In 2002, 21 civilians were arrested in Gulu including hon. Openyto who is here. They were taken to the barracks and tortured and one of them, Peter Oloya was shot dead within the prison premises in Gulu. Hon. Okumu Reagan and I sued the Attorney-General under Miscellaneous Application No. 63 of 2003. The High Court made an award of Shs 30 million to the family of Oloya who was shot dead within the prison premises and to each of the 20 victims including hon. Openyto. We have been following this matter through our lawyers but up to now no payment has been made. 

I read in this report that people are being paid. How are they being paid? What is the method? Who are being paid? I think that we should be transparent so that we know the path to follow to get compensation and court awards.

My second and probably last point is on the Inspector-General of Government. Article 227 of the constitution of the Republic of Uganda - Independence of the Inspectorate reads as follows: “The Inspectorate of Government shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to direction or control of any person or authority and shall only be responsible to Parliament.” 

The Constitution talks about the institution, not the individual. I am a believer in the institution rather than the individual. Individuals come and go, but we must build institutions in this country if the country is to move forward. I have been following with keen interest the wrangles between the committee and the IGG, and I have been asking myself: is there any specific law or rule in our Rules of Procedure which requires the person of Justice Mwondha to appear before the committee? I think  –(Interruption)

MRS MUGISA: Thank you very much, hon. Okello-Okello for giving way. I think there is quite a stalemate between the person in the name of Faith Mwondha and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It was reported sometime back in the press that she said, “…she had vilified appearing before Parliament in person because she believes Members of Parliament are dangerously idle and disorderly.”  That is the reason she has refused to come before Parliament. 

So, I think Members of Parliament were calling her in good faith to come and interact with them as the head of the institution because as a head of the institution if you do not respect people - you know the fish rots from the head - people will not respect that institution as well. So the stalemate is between her as a person and not as an institution but at the same time, the two are inseparable. You cannot say the IGG is separated from the institution of the IGG, and I think that is where the problem is.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank hon. Mugisa Muhanga for the information. But my point still remains: I am saying the money being provided for here is for an institution. It is not for the individual. We cannot deny the institution money because of the behaviour of an individual –(Member timed out)  

2.24
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to commend the committee for this report and I will start by seeking clarification on the point that hon. Okello-Okello had put across. That was my first concern on page 4, where the committee talks of court awards in arrears to 30 beneficiaries. Who are these beneficiaries and how much money is it, so that we are also able to appreciate what is necessary?

On the same page under key planned programmes and activities, I feel that the committee and probably the ministry should talk in terms of things that are measurable instead of saying that they are going to increase government departments’ compliance with the law. By what or by how much? So, they need to talk in terms of measurable things.

On page 5 the committee says that the Uganda Registration Service Bureau is not yet operational.  This is contrary to what the committee itself says on page 4 where they say that a total of Shs 2.127 billion was collected as non-tax revenue through the system in the registration of births, deaths and so forth. So, if this Bureau is not operational, what procedures were they using to collect this non-tax revenue through birth registrations?

Secondly, on the same issue, I want clarification because at the moment, I know that these birth registrations for instance are taking place. I want to find out how the cost for birth registration is determined. Does a district determine it; do the individual sub-counties determine it? At the moment I am aware that some people are paying a certain price for getting birth certificates? So, is it nationally determined, or do the respective sub-counties determine it?

Madam Speaker, allow me to also comment on the backlog cases with our Judiciary. I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and year in year out, we get this report that the congestion in prisons is mainly due to the Judiciary’s failure to work fully. I really wonder why because we have heard here that the problem is money. Ministry of Finance, what is going on? Please, give them money and in any case, I do not think it is only lack of money that is making us have this entire backlog in prisons.  

I was accused of telling lies when I complained about problems of congestion in Patong prison in my district - the only district prison we have - where women were sharing facilities with men. All these are things that could have been dealt with if these backlog cases were not there. So, I really call upon the Judiciary to work very hard. If Parliament can sit from 10.00 a.m. to 9.00 p.m. in the evening in order to clear committee reports and all that, why can’t they also schedule some sittings maybe beyond time if they are to clear backlog cases?

I will not sit down without finally commenting on the CDF money. I represent a district and representing a district as a Woman Member of Parliament, I am not voted for by women alone; I am voted for by the youth, by the people with disabilities and all that. Now if I am to support my constituency or my district, I do not need to support only women because if I were to support only women, the other side would say, “Okay, what about us? Does it mean we do not vote for you?”

I remember last year I invited you to launch my programme in the district. You heard what the women were saying that, “Please, add these Members - especially the Woman Members of Parliament - more money than their counterparts.” When I compare with our neighbouring country Kenya, they get an equivalent of Shs 100 million –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like you to join me in welcoming 50 scouts from Trans-Nzoia District in the Rift Valley in Kenya. They are up in the gallery. You are welcome! (Applause) 

2.30
DR WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by commending Members of the committee for compiling this comprehensive report and the chairperson for eloquently presenting it to us. 

I have very few areas to comment on although there are very many areas I am concerned about. The first general statement is that it appears that there is a problem with the capacity or capability of planning in Government. Why I am saying this is that very vital units have been established and some of these units are collapsing. I do not know how they were planned and I do not know how their sustainability was catered for. The unit in question is the Uganda Registration Service Bureau. This is a very vital unit if Government has to plan for the future. You cannot plan in darkness. Another one is the Uganda Centre for Arbitration and Conflict Resolution. This unit has been established and it is a vital unit but it is collapsing. I do not know why. 

Specifically on page 2, Madam Speaker, Parliament is creating districts without regard to the service these districts require and in the Justice, Law and Order sector we are being told that there is no fund to cater for the institution in these new districts. So, that is also a planning problem. 

On page 17 the committee is talking about major achievements of the Judicial Service Commission and the major achievements include appointment of one judge to the Supreme Court when seven are recommended and appointment of one judge to the Court of Appeal when 12 were recommended. I do not know where the bottlenecks are.

The other thing, which I am worried about, is the attitude of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The revelation that the Ministry of Finance is undermining the Parliamentary Commission is very serious. Of course all of us would like to know how it is undermining the commission and what the cause of that action is. 

Last but not least, people have talked about the CDF. I think this was started in good faith but at this material time I think it is not serving its purpose and I think the commission should review this. They should either do something about it or leave it out altogether. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know that people want to contribute but 21 Members have contributed. I would now like to invite Commissioner Guma to speak on the issues of the Commission and then the Minister of Justice. I will give other Members opportunity to comment on the other reports. 

2.35
CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I request for your indulgence that before I speak about the Parliamentary Commission, I want to say a few things about the report generally. I want to request the indulgence of the House that we stay the passing of the budget of the Electoral Commission as a Vote until when there is sufficient consultation with the Minister of Finance. The ministry should source for Shs 2 billion for the non-wage component so that we can assist the Electoral Commission to establish lower local governments in this country. 

Hon. Latigo is talking about a town council that was created somewhere in Pader and elsewhere in the country. The Electoral Commission has a problem of establishing -(Interjection)- yes, in Buliisa, Lyantonde, and some chairperson, Mrs Makumbi, died in Lubaga - so that the Electoral Commission can be helped to put in place these lower local governments especially at LC III because as you know, LC III is a vital organ. It is a centre of political power. 

So, I request that we stay the passing of the budget of the Electoral Commission today so that there is immediate consultation with Electoral Commission officials and the Ministry of Finance must get Shs 2 billion. I have consulted; give them Shs 2 billion, they will conduct elections throughout the entire country in the new districts where chairpersons have died and so forth. That is a request, Madam Speaker. You may be having a similar problem in Kamuli; I don’t know. But since you are the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, if it is a problem elsewhere, that is it. 

Secondly, about the Parliamentary Commission budget, I have heard the views and sentiments of Members. We are going to look into the matter of the parking space. There is no doubt that Members are correct about the parking space. The other day I saw a young man that I know. He brought his car, parked it somewhere there and went to the President’s office. I know what he does and I know where he works, and yet the car was there the whole day. So, Members of Parliament come here and they cannot get where to park their cars. I am sure we shall look into the matter. 

CDF - it is not Constituency Development Fund; no, it is Constituency Development Facility. When you call it a fund, you invite some legal complications. There must be a law put in place by an Act of Parliament to create a fund. 

The question, of course, of increasing the facility is a very intricate one. We are beneficiaries and I would not mind having more money but, hon. Members, I do not think that it can be possible because we have attempted it anyway and we have been told that because of a well established local governments system in this country unlike Kenya, which is referred to quite often, we do not require more money for purposes of development. This facility was put in place to ease pressures for non-state and funded demands as we know, like the church. We attend fundraisings of Churches and Mosques and apart from the politics; it is also human that you attend some of these functions or even burials. Who does not contribute towards a burial? So, that is why this facility was put in place. My problem with it is that I do not know how we came up with these guidelines -(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Commissioner Guma. I want to add that when you read the Auditor-General’s report, I wrote to the Auditor-General giving the same scenario and genesis of our constituency development facility. After a decision being taken by the commission, it came as a facility to which a Member of Parliament is entitled after he has taken oath. 

And I think the Public Accounts Committee has received our concern and we do expect that the accountability and the guidelines were a precaution that where government has contributed, you do not need to contribute. That was the basis of the guidelines. But I think and I hope that after that report from the Public Accounts Committee, I do not think it will be liable to accountability; rest assured. 

CAPT. GUMISIRIZA: Of course our local cheap politics, hon. Tumwebaze from Kamwenge who is my neighbour, there is someone who is already raising dust and campaigning for 2011. That person owns a radio and he has been going to the radio and saying that these Members of Parliament get Shs 10 million per month -(Interjections)- yes, the entire Toro sub-region, parts of Ibanda and Kiruhura, where that radio reaches - even here in Mubende they think that we get Shs 10 million per month. It is aired on radio -(Interjections)- yes! So, this facility is to ease our pressure here and there. We are going to sit and streamline and repackage this facility. 

But also you must stand your ground; why are you so afraid? Stand your ground and say, “We get this money and I know how to spend it.” Nobody can raise it in my constituency. Munagopa gopa! Are you children? Someone comes to shake you around because you get Shs 10million? How can 10 million develop a constituency? Which type of development can be achieved by Shs 10 million a year? 12 months? –(Interruptions)- Wacha yiyo maneno ya RDC! So, you must stand your ground as leaders and say, “Yes we get this money. Yiyo mambo wacha! I am also using Swahili because you know it is our second, official language. If you do not understand, do not think I am really becoming - yes. So, you must stand your ground and say, “Yes we get it. Osiniulize maswali. Do not ask me a lot of questions. I know how to spend it.” If you become so timid then you will have problems. For me nobody can raise it in my constituency. But we are going to repackage it in the Commission and see ways and means of how we can insulate you so that you do not get these problems.

Madam Speaker, hon. Margaret Kiboijana is talking about the interest groups not only women but interest groups in general. There are some proposals in the budget; I will not go into the depth of the details again to invite animosity and so forth. We should leave it at that.

Construction of the Chamber: The Chamber for a very decent Parliament requires a lot of money to build. So, those of you who are saying that we delaying, there are lots of consultations that are necessary amongst Government organs and departments so that once a building is put in place it is a decent building. Government takes long to get all this money. The small monies you see in the Budget like the Shs 16 billion, there are requirements of Parliament that are of a capital nature: computers; vehicles; it is not all the money that will be going to the building. Yeah, this is money for take off so it is necessary that government really plans to source for money to put up a decent building for the Parliament of Uganda. It is not NRM Parliament or anybody’s Parliament. It is a Parliament of this country for today and the future. So, for me my appeal to government and the Prime Minister is that government must really look for good money to kick start this thing; real money, about US $20 million and we put up a structure in place that can be there for the next maybe 60 to 100 years because the population is increasing. We are now about 300 MPs. The plan is to put up a structure for about 500 Members of Parliament. 

The hon. Member of Parliament from Budaka, Madam Kiryapawo was talking about CHOGM that we found money. Yes, we found money. I would like to raise the same call that government and all of us must make concessions and we raise this money the way we raised the money for CHOGM. Like one financial year, US $20 million is not a lot of money from government; make concessions; cut here and cut there and we put up a Chamber. That will be a job well done and I am sure the President will support that because he likes priority setting.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance these days attends the Commission meetings so do not chastise him anymore. I have been seeing him attending. When he does not attend he sends his deputies or the ministers of state. 

About the gym and the waistlines, again this is a function of the availability of money to put facilities in place like a swimming pool, gyms for Members of Parliament to have all these facilities here. 

About Bills taking long, it is a function of the Business Committee which does not really fall within the ambit of the Parliamentary Commission. The Parliamentary Commission is an administrative body –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, Commissioner! Once the Bills come to Parliament, they go to the respective committees; they do not go to the Business Committee at all. The committees should tell us what their problems are.  

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, the Chairman of the Commission is at the same time the Speaker of Parliament and he is also the Chairman of the Business Committee. I am not a Member of the Business Committee and I do not know how the priorities of the Business Committee are put in place. We have never discussed a legislative function in our Commission meetings. So, I do not know.  

I think is an issue that we can look into, although I really do not quite grasp how it falls under the jurisdiction of the Parliamentary Commission. I am saying this because we have never discussed issues of setting business, order of precedence - which Bill comes first. We have never discussed anything of this kind. However, we can look into it. The Leader of the Opposition is here, Madam Speaker, and you are also here; we can discuss it in some of these Commission meetings and find out reasons why Bills take long, especially once they are already property of Parliament. 

I do not know whether I have answered all the issues raised in respect to the Parliamentary Commission budget. There is something I had forgotten about, the Electoral Commission. I am told we have roughly 65,000 villages in the whole country although of course some villages are just created. Anyway, we passed a law here which says that LC I elections would be by secret ballot. I made some consultations and realised that this would be extremely cumbersome and expensive. I want to request the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to look into this thing with a view to bringing back this Act for amendment of some of the sections. This should be done very quickly because elections of LC I chairpersons are not taking place. The funds required may be enormous, and time is running out. Someone may one of these days take government to court because the existing leadership of LC Is in the country is illegal. So, I would like to request the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to bring an amendment for us to run through this law and see its practicability.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank Members for supporting the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

2.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you.  Madam Speaker, one Member of Parliament said that the Minister of Finance should attend the meetings of the Parliamentary Commission. My view is that it is not always possible for him to do that because sometimes he goes to negotiate loans for us. So, he should be allowed to send a minister of state to represent him. Once the minister of state takes a position, he should not disown that position. (Applause) I think that has been the mistake. If the minister of state is not sure, he or she should inform the commission that he or she cannot take a position and needs further consultation. So, I think that is how we can resolve that problem.  

My second and last point is on some issue, which appears on Page 42.  This is the statement that the committee has not interacted with the Inspector-General of Government for the past two years yet she is the head of the institution, which reports to Parliament. The committee resolved not to consider the Inspectorate of Government’s policy statement, since the Deputy Inspector-General of Government could not answer some of the issues they wanted to raise.  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, my view is that we should not punish this institution because of an individual. (Applause) What I suggest is that we pass this budget, because in any case it appears in MTEF. The individual can be dealt with by the Speaker, preferably interfacing with the appointing authority, of course as the Speaker may decide. I do not think it is correct, on my part, to direct the Speaker as to when he or she is going to take action. I think this is the best way of resolving this issue.  

If we do not pass this budget, we may be misunderstood. I am a Prime Minister but I come and lead my delegation and I attend these committees; what about a person who is lower than me? However, we should not punish the institution. Let us pass the budget; the Speaker can take corrective measures after interfacing with the Head of State. I suggest. I thank you.

2.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, I rise to respond to the last item that the Rt hon. Prime Minister presented. We would like to concur with the Rt hon. Prime Minister that we have no intentions whatsoever of punishing the institution of the Inspector-General of Government and we will support the passing of the budget. However, I would like to personally think that the debate that has been going on in this House and the reactions that honourable members have given on what transpired between the committee and the Inspector-General of Government has reached everybody clearly. It is only appropriate for us to presume that the Inspector-General of Government takes the views of the members seriously. It is high time that we found an avenue of resolving the standoff, which is totally unnecessary, between the Inspector-General of Government and Parliament because I do not think it is the intention of Parliament to belittle that office. Coming to Parliament and dealing with the members amicably does not belittle that office either. 

The final appeal is that the Inspector-General of Government should review her stand vis-à-vis Parliament because working like this is not going to help the country; if any thing, it is actually undermining the stature of that office. 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Leader of the Opposition. In concurring with the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition that we should not punish the institution but we should take measures of making the individual answerable for her failure, I want to read section 18 of the Budget Act. Appearing before the sessional committee of Parliament is a mandatory requirement of this Act. Section 18 reads:

“i) Where any department, institution, organisation or commission fails to meet any requirement under this Act, Parliament may compel the relevant minister to appear before it and give an explanation on the circumstances leading to the failure. 
ii) Where it is evident that any officer intentionally or through negligence led to the failure of the department, institution, organisation or commission to meet any requirement under this Act, that officer shall be held personally liable.” 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, it will not even be necessary for Parliament to invoke that provision of the Budget Act because of the nature of the institution that the Inspector-General of Government leads. All it takes is for all of us to be sober and stop being too vain sometimes. You will find that there is actually no problem between the Inspector-General of Government and Parliament. All it takes is just to be ordinary human beings and to act with some degree of humility and it will solve a lot of problems. So I support that the budget of the Inspector-General of Government be approved by Parliament. 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, there are a few specific issues I am going to respond to before my senior colleague comes to respond to the rest, in demonstration of how the Attorney-General’s chambers function because we work in teams; that is why it is called a chamber. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs welcomes the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee report and the contributions that have been made on it. First, one of the specific issues I thought I should clear was raised by hon. Lagada, and that was in relation to the Domestic Relations Bill (DRB) and related gender Bills. 

About two months ago, Madam Speaker, you graced and closed a workshop here in Parliament for all the relevant stakeholders at which you encouraged us to bring to Parliament all the relevant Bills, particularly the desegregated Bills on domestic relations and the domestic violence. I want to assure you that we are on board and we are on schedule. Within this year, particularly those three Bills will be tabled in this House for the first reading. On the 31st this month to 2nd September, we shall have our last consultative meeting with members of the bench in Jinja. After that, we shall put together reports on the relevant Bills for Cabinet and then for this Parliament. 

The other issue that I thought I should mention was raised by hon. Amongi Betty, and that is about the political forum and the code of conduct. You may recall that some time back, consultations were made by the Electoral Commission with the relevant parties. We found out that those consultations were done more or less on individual level rather than on party basis. For instance, a person from FDC would be consulted and then another one from NRM would be consulted. Also, two new parties came on board which had not made a contribution. So we thought we should have another consultative meeting with parties and this is already being undertaken by the Electoral Commission. 

There is also an issue that section 20 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act specifies the membership of the forum without specifying who the chairperson would be. That matter will also be consulted on together with the funding of the forum because section 2 is silent on that. In fact, the Electoral Commission has, when appearing before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, already proposed an amendment to the Bill, which is coming here on funding of political parties so that it may be included within that Bill that is still under discussion.

The final issue I thought I would talk about is a sensitive one. Without prejudice to the request of the Commissioner that the budget of the Electoral Commission be deferred, there is a problem. If you only defer for the sake of raising Shs 2 billion when we are talking in terms of Shs 15 billion which is still unfunded for the elections of the local council executives, women and youth, what are we doing in essence? I thought that to be more prudent, we would pass the budget and take it up as a very serious challenge to raise funding for these other very important areas. In fact, there was actually an issue which was raised, that we passed a Bill which is now an Act of Parliament, which encompasses multiparty dispensation for elections of these relevant officials at the relevant levels. 

The problem is that we also have to amend the laws relating to the elections of youth and women. When you do that, a person who is elected chairperson of youth at LC I becomes secretary for youth at LC I. The one who was elected chairperson for women at LC I becomes secretary for women at LC I. Those executives move to LC II to elect the officials at LC II. So, by passing the other Bill alone without passing the ones on youth and women, we have not actually finalised the process. So, we have to wait until we also do that. 

That is why we are here; we are happy that when we talk in terms of “we need resources”, we are speaking with the same voice. With that voice, we urge all the relevant officials concerned to take up the challenge and mobilise the resources for effecting those services. Thank you.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to thank you for this opportunity to intervene in this debate. When I sat there and I listened to the chairperson presenting the report, and I sat there and listened to honourable colleagues debating this report, I actually thank God that I am alive today -(Laughter)- and that I am able to come to Parliament. I also thank the people of Katikamu South for sending me to the Eighth Parliament. (Laughter)

I am very serious because there is the thorough going and analytical report of the committee itself, having studied our policy statement and having interacted with the institutions under the ministry. There is also the scientific presentation by the chairman and there is the sustained interest. We started at 10.30 a.m. and it is after 3.00 p.m. and people have been debating analytically and seriously. If you do not thank God for being a part of this process, then you do not know who God is. (Laughter)

I would, therefore, not want to pick point by point but I would like to assure our honourable colleagues that we indeed take seriously the recommendations which are stated in the report. We take seriously the recommendations, which arise from this debate, and we undertake to study them with the view, first of all, of implementing. If we find that for one reason or another we cannot implement, we will report back to Parliament through our supervising committee. 

If I stopped there I think other people would be disappointed. Therefore, I have a few details to go into. I agree with the honourable members who have been talking about the composition of the Electoral Commission under a multiparty dispensation. We undertake to study this matter, which must be done before the next general elections. Again, we will be reporting on this. This is a process, so we will be reporting to Parliament through the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. It is a serious matter. It must be studied and we decide on it; for God and our country.

Backlog of cases was raised and we are requested to take this as a serious matter. I can assure you that we take it as a serious matter. We will study it seriously and the structures of the Justice Law and Order Sector programme. However, we have been trying in various ways - for example, as a ministry we have established a regional office in Gulu for that sub-region. Next month, we are going to break ground for constructing another regional office in Arua under the same programme –(Interjection)- yes, you are free to clap, sir. (Laughter) You know, we have operational funds for running special court sessions in this area. So we are not just sitting and folding our hands; we are trying but it is a matter that we can go into in more detail. 

The Law Development Centre: there is a proposal that we privatise the professional training of future advocates and disband LDC and license other institutions. This is another serious matter. There was a time when there was no LDC; lawyers trained in Dar-es-Salaam, London, wherever and came and they were pupils for six months and they were called to the Bar. If you read the law reports of that time, the performance of the lawyers, whether on the government side or in the private practice, was deplorable. A committee was set up and it recommended that a law degree alone was not enough; you needed to instruct future advocates in practical skills. That was the origin of the LDC. I think there has been a big difference between the lawyers who did not have the advantage of postgraduate training at the LDC and those who have had that advantage. 

Of course, numbers have become big. In the past, the legal profession used to be an elite profession, with very few people, only one law school and so on. Now we have licensed other law schools to teach law and we have moved from 50 law graduates per year to 400 or 500, and by next year I do not know how many we shall be training. The LDC will be too small for this but you need to again go back to the drawing board and see if privatisation and licensing of other institutions will be a way forward. We have no problem. We will go and study it. It is a serious matter.

Court awards and compensations: this has been a very peaceful debate except that when it came to compensation and court awards, I heard some voices going up. This matter of compensations and court awards is covered in detail. I think this is why the committee did not go into it in this report because it is covered in detail in the policy statement itself, with the actual policy followed and with lists of beneficiaries who have been paid and pending beneficiaries. Honourable members, I recommend that you check between pages 54 and 71 of the policy statement. These details which you have been asking for are actually there - the actual policy itself followed and the lists of beneficiaries from last year, the lists of pending compensations and court awards. It is all there. In case you find it unsatisfactory, we will be around to answer. 

Madam Speaker, I need only to mention one more point because if it remains unanswered, it will reflect badly on us as legislators. This is Article 128 of the Constitution on the independence of the Judiciary. Article 128 reads: 

“(1) In the exercise of judicial power, the courts shall be independent and shall not be subject to the control or direction of any person or authority.
(2) No person or authority shall interfere with the courts or judicial officers in the exercise of their judicial functions. 
(3) All organs and agencies of the State shall accord to the courts such assistance as may be required to ensure the effectiveness of the courts.” 

In the course of the debate, it emerged from some contribution that honourable judges work lazily - they come to court at 12 noon, they leave at 1.00 p.m. and they go on recess. Parliament goes on recess and that does not make us lazy; does it? I wanted to know. Parliament goes on recess just as the courts. It is their arrangement and, therefore, I thought in defence of some of the problems identified by this very committee about understaffing, limited operational funds, limited working space, if this one remains as it was rendered, we may not be answering to the requirements of Article 128(1), (2) and (3). 

Otherwise, I must repeat that I thank God that I am alive today and I have been part of this process. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I urge you to support this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just one thing. I do not know whether you considered the Registration Bureau important. Many Members thought it should a funding priority. I do not know what you have to say.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for reminding me about the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. First of all, there are activities which are going on. The companies’ registry is functioning, the registry of births and deaths is working, the registry of marriages is working, and the registry of business names and firms is working. The idea of Uganda Registration Services Bureau was, and still is, that all these functions instead of being within the mainstream ministry should be handed over and handled by a semi-autonomous agency called Uganda Registration Services Bureau. The law is already in place and the process of appointing the board is now in very advanced stages. It has passed Cabinet level and it is only awaiting implementation. 

I have to admit this delay arose from some revisionist thinking in the ministry some time in the past. There was some sort of resistance to surrendering power from the mainstream ministry to this semi-autonomous agency. However, I would like to assure you that we have taken the position after various consultations that the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act must be implemented as it is. We must establish this semi-autonomous agency to which these functions must be handed, largely because the government bureaucracy was frustrating business in the private sector. We think that the semi-autonomous agency will do a better job of these functions than the mainstream ministry. 

Yes, there has not been a board for some time, but I think next month we shall be in position not just to begin the process but actually inaugurate the board so that it can take over the management of these functions. It is the board that will be recruiting staff and doing the day-to-day supervision of these functions. I agree this is important, but the question of saying the URSB does not have a board or is not operational will not be part of the policy statement for next financial year. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we conclude, I want to ask you to welcome a group of supporters from the United Kingdom, Ireland and Scotland who have been constructing a technical school in Ngora represented by Dr Epetait and hon. Egunyu. They are: Micky Hobbs, Mike Hobbs, Sinead McCarthy, Maura McCarthy, Ruth Allen, Naomi Marsh, Katie Barr, Tom Gallacher, Shan Hui and Andy Edwards. They are up there. You are welcome and thank you for the support.

3.27
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Guma is reminding me that he wants to go. I will try to be as brief as I possibly can. I would like to thank the Speaker and Members of Parliament for the good reception that you have afforded our report and also for the good response that it has attracted from you. 

I only have to add that what has come out clearly is that we need urgent funding for the Electoral Commission in order to expect very good results in 2010 and 2011. We hope that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and government will take our recommendations very seriously in respect of financing the Electoral Commission for this exercise.

On the matter of late passing of Bills, I can only make two comments. One, when we came in during this session, we inherited a lot of backlog mainly because of the type of business we had last year. Members may recall that because of CHOGM and other related activities, a lot of time was lost and when we were starting the session, we had more than ten Bills in our committee. As members are aware, our committee is a clearance house for Parliament so this necessarily affected our performance. 

I have already brought this matter to the attention of the Speaker and yourself, Madam Speaker; there is need to review the way Parliament committees sit because in spite of this very big problem of getting Bills out of committees, we still get a lot of disruptions especially by having concurrent committee sittings and we fail to raise quorum. We hope that we shall have more discussions with you, Madam Speaker, in order to streamline discussion of Parliament work and also see how we can prioritise discussion of Bills and getting them to Parliament. This is because one of the cardinal responsibilities of Parliament is to make laws.

Commissioner Guma said it was not got correct that the Minister of Finance does not attend meetings. I am happy to hear from him but we picked this matter from the Commission. So now that he is withdrawing it or making the position clear, we go by what he has informed the House. 

On the matter of the IGG, you are aware about the efforts we have individually and collectively taken to handle this matter. As members are aware, we have new sessional committees in place. The bulk of our members in the committee are new and the leadership of the committee is new. We have done what we possibly can, both formally and informally, to have the process moving and this is the best that we could do. In our recommendations, we did not recommend that the House does not approve the Inspectorate’s budget but we wanted you first of all to know the circumstances and the way we have operated to bring the report that we have presented to you. However, we have no objection to having the Inspectorate’s budget passed as recommended by the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition. 

The matter of URSB has been reported on by the Attorney-General. We are pleased to note that he has committed himself that we shall not have this matter in our subsequent reports. 

On the matter of compensations and court awards, the Attorney-General also correctly mentioned that the manner and the beneficiaries of the people who have been compensated are contained in the policy statement. I can only add that in compensating beneficiaries, the matter of cooperative unions that lost their properties in various wars should be remembered. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General, his deputy and their staff, members, chairpersons and accounting officers of commissions for being very cooperative with us and enabling us to do our work. As you are aware, if it were not for the problem of the institution we have discussed, our committee was first to be ready with our report. I thank Members of Parliament who have worked with us in preparation and submission of this report.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. The clarification that I am seeking from the chair of the committee is with regard to the IGG because you indeed agree with the suggestion from the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of Opposition that we pass the budget, which is okay but you did not comment on the other suggestion that the Speaker should liaise with the appointing authority to discuss the issue of the person holding the office of the IGG. I wanted you to clarify whether you agree with that because as Parliament, we should be able to set the record clear and not set precedence where any head of commission, institution or minister just refuses to come to Parliament and it is taken as business as usual. 

I just want you to comment as the chair because we get information that there seems to be a problem. I have heard for instance that the Inspector-General of Government does not talk to the line Minister of Ethics and Integrity; she has refused to talk to him and that the deputy IGG can only access the Inspector-General by writing a chit through the secretary and then she gives him an appointment maybe a week later. There seems to be a problem so I just want to be clear that this meeting between the Speaker and the President will take place. I want clarification either from the Chair or the Speaker that this recommendation will be recorded, that something will be done and probably within a given timeframe Parliament will be notified that something has been done with regard to the specific issue of the IGG. I thank you very much.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you. The committee has presented its report and as honourable members are aware, the head of this institution is the Speaker. The Prime Minister asked the Speaker to take up the matter further. Maybe at this point I would request the Speaker - may I seek the indulgence of the Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are in breach of rule 60; you are pre empting what I was going to say. Conclude your part and I will deal with mine.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, I have nothing useful to add. I beg to report. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and also the members. The Speaker has benefited from this debate and has been brought abreast of many of the challenges of the committee and especially in the matters raised concerning the IGG. The Speaker will take it up. We have also benefited as a Commission from what you have contributed and we shall do our best to make your lives much better. I now put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suspend the House to 4.30 p.m. 

(House suspended at 3.37 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.45 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

4.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Amongi): Madam Speaker, hon. Members, in accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Section 62 of the Budget Act 2001, I have the honour to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budgetary estimates for the Financial Year 2008/2009.

The methodology

The committee held consultative dialogue with ministers and officials from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. In addition, the committee reviewed the documents listed.

On page 2, No. 3.1 is the budget performance for the FY 2007/2008 and 3.2 is the physical performance for FY 2007-2008. Under 3.3, the recurrent activities for that year are listed up to page 3. In addition to the listed recurrent activities, the ministry also undertook other activities like the development of guidelines for the implementation of the Uganda National Policy for the Older persons on page 3, developed qualification framework for adult learners, printed 2,000 copies of the Persons with Disabilities Act, translated the National Policy on Disability to Braille, disseminated the National Policy on Disability and commemorated international and national days. 

The development activities for that year are listed from pages 3 to 4. In addition, the ministry undertook some activities that were outside the ceiling of the ministry budget. These included hosting of the Commonwealth Youth Forum, they conducted field visits to 80 districts, organised dialogue with youth out of school, implemented a pilot cash transfer scheme in six districts to support the chronically poor and with support from DFID, they developed indicators and produced evidence performance on SDS.

The ministry’s programmes and activities have been embedded in five Vote functions, namely: administration and institutional development, community mobilisation and empowerment, mainstreaming gender rights and other social development concerns, promoting labour productivity and employment and social protection for vulnerable groups.

On page 5 the achievements for the Financial Year 2007-2008 are listed. The ministry shall continue to promote social protection and social transformation of communities for meaningful development through its mandate to empower communities to harness their potential through cultural growth, skills development and labour productivity for sustainable and gender responsive development. It generally addresses the concerns of the people. 

If we go to page 8 we shall see the summary on a table of the financial performance of Ministry of Gender. That excludes the donor component. 

7.0 Challenges and constraints faced by the sector

(a)	Inadequate sector budget ceiling. The ministry has continued to experience perennial under funding. As a result, it has been unable to: 

•	Clear arrears and fully staff the ministry,
•	Adequately fund contributions to international organisations,
•	Monitor the working conditions of Ugandan workers abroad,
•	Fund the operations of CDOs at the lower government levels,
•	Adequately fund social protection programs for the vulnerable groups,
•	Widely disseminate enacted labour laws,
•	Fund mainstreaming of gender, rights and other social development concerns,

(b)	The absence of a constituted Industrial Court is making it difficult to solve industrial disputes.

(c)	Though some of the activities of labour administration were decentralised, this has not been given the attention that it deserves by a number of local governments leading to poor sector delivery; nor do these activities get any budgetary support from the centre. 

(d)	The amendment of the National Youth Council and National Women Council Act has delayed the election of the office bearers.

(e)	Lack of a comprehensive and effective sector wide monitoring and evaluation system for the Social Development Sector means that the impact of the meagre resource flows to the sector are not easily captured. 

(f)	Dependence on volunteers to implement Community Mobilisation and Empowerment activities. 

(g)	Community Mobilisation and Empowerment activities are currently being carried out by many sectors including water, education, health and local government. This has led to the overlap and duplication of activities resulting in wastage of resources.
 
(h)	There is a high demand from traditional, cultural institutions to be facilitated by government. 

(i)	Lack of labour market data and institutional support. Labour market and employment data needs to be updated on a continuous basis and be made available to its main consumers, that is, the job seekers and other interested parties. 

(j)	There are also new and emerging labour related issues such as HIV/AIDS at the workplace, the question of sexual harassment, drilling of oil that requires new guidelines and training of labour inspectors. 

(k)	There are limited labour officers across the country. At the moment there are only 35 officers against the 84 districts in the country. 

(l)	Insufficient human resource especially at the institutions and the local governments to handle probation and welfare services. 

Madam Speaker, planned activities for the Financial Year 2008-2009. Under recurrent activities, the ministry intends to: 

(a)	Support five children and two institutions. 

(b)	They also intend to buy a switch board for the ministry intercom. 

(c)	13 vehicles will be purchased; one tractor for Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre, a youth truck to back up youth activities, 3 vehicles for monitoring and eight for departments. 

(d)	The budget framework paper and estimates of revenue and expenditure for recurrent and development for FY 2009/2010 will be finalised. 

(e)	Labour complaints and workers compensation cases will be handled. 

(f)	5,000 workplaces to be registered, 4,488 work places to be inspected of which 300 are construction sites while 200 steam boilers, 800 air receivers and 800 lifting machines will be examined. 

(g)	Staff will be inducted and trained in short and long courses. 

(h)	7,000 instructors will be facilitated with bicycles for transportation to conduct FAL classes. 

(i)	100 sector resource personnel will be trained in gender and equity budgeting. 150 district and line ministry officials will be trained in gender mainstreaming and budgeting. 

(j)	Journalists from both print and electronic media will be trained in Sex, Gender Based Violence reporting. 

(k)	120 CBOs will be trained in community based rehabilitation. 

(l)	3,000 street children and adults from the towns of Kampala, Jinja, Iganga, Bugiri, Tororo, Busia and Moroto will be withdrawn, rehabilitated, resettled and supported. 

(m)	Five districts and 28 sub-county councils for disabilities will be established. 

(n)	759 deprived juveniles and children in institutions will be provided with care and protection. 

(o)	66,510 youths and parents will be sensitised in adolescent, sexual and reproductive health. 

(p)	400 persons with disabilities in Kireka, Lweza and Ruti rehabilitation centres will be supported. 

(q)	150 officials will be trained on child labour legislation and undertaking visits to monitor child labour. 

(r)	11,000 youth leaders at the sub-county level will be trained in entrepreneurship. 

The development activities for this financial year include: 

(a)	The establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission,
(b)	An acquisition of the office block for the ministry,
(c)	The implementation of the new ministry structure, which has already been approved by Cabinet,
(d)	Seven community libraries to be established,
(e)	The Community Development Policy to be launched and disseminated, 
(f)	The Human Rights Mainstreaming Strategy to be launched and disseminated, 
(g)	Uganda Gender policy operational guidelines to be developed and disseminated to local governments, 
(h)	Employment policy to be finalised, 
(i)	Equity Promotion Strategy to be finalised and launched, 
(j)	Ministry final accounts to be submitted to Ministry of Finance in time, 
(k)	Regulations on the new labour laws to be finalised, 
(l)	Social Development Sector Review to be conducted, 
(m)	Community Mobilisation and Empowerment Strategy to be operationalised, 
(n)	Houses for the Teso and Adhola traditional leaders will be constructed.

The budget allocations for the FY 2008/2009: a total of Shs 22.527 billion has been budgeted of which Shs 19.582 billion is from the Government of Uganda while Shs 2.946 billion is expected from development partners. This shows a 0.37 percent decrease from the last financial year. Nevertheless, additional finding has been realised in critical sector departments like Occupational Health Safety and funds to kick start the Equal Opportunities Commission has been provided. More funding is needed for the children institutions, the national youth councils’ community based rehabilitation and national women councils and this is reflected in the table on page 12.

The table on page 12 shows the fluctuations in the budget ceilings for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. There was a 73 percent decline in the ministry’s ceiling from Shs 18.54 billion in the Financial Year 2005/2006 to Shs 13.51bn in the Financial Year 2006/2007. However, the 67 percent increase in the ministry’s ceiling for Financial Year 2007/2008 was attached to specific activities like the Afro-Arab Conference and the down payment for the purchase of the ministry’s premises, as well as purchase of the house for the Queen Mother of Toro.  

This financial year, the budget estimates are Shs 22.52 billion, which is a 0.4 percent decrease from last year’s estimates. Some specific activities totalling to Shs 3.17 billion, that is, for the construction of houses for the Teso and Adhola traditional institutions whose funding is Shs 0.50 billion; establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission at Shs 1 billion; removal of street children at Shs 0.250 billion and domestic arrears of Shs 1.42 billion have already been included within the budget. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is allocated only 0.4 percent of the national budget.

Observations and Recommendations

Vote function No. 1: administration and institutional development. The overall Vote function showed a 52 percent performance in Financial Year 2007/2008. This was attributed to unspent funds worth Shs 4 billion meant for mortgage – that is down payment - of office accommodation.

Declining budget ceiling

There is a slight decline in the ministry’s budgetary allocations for Financial Year 2008/2009, from Shs 22.610 billion to Shs 22.526 billion in Financial Year 2008/2009, hence showing a 0.37 percent decrease in the ministry’s budget ceiling. The Ministry of Finance attributed the decline to a one-off expenditure such as the purchase of the Queen Mother of Toro’s residence and the recently concluded Afro-Arab Conference in Kampala. However, the facilitation for cultural institutions is an on-going activity expenditure even this year. The ministry has to facilitate the construction of houses already mentioned, for the Teso and Adhola traditional institutions. 

The Budget Committee while considering the ministry’s budget framework paper recommended that the ministry be funded as a priority under affirmative action policy given that the ministry handles all vulnerable and marginalised groups. Some inter-sectoral allocations were recommended by the Budget Committee but are, however, still not funded as per the recommendations. These include: Shs 14.5 billion for acquisition of office premises, Shs 2.1 billion as additional funds for the Equal Opportunities Commission and Shs 3 billion support to the cultural leaders. A list of the ministry’s unfunded and other under funded activities is hereby attached as Annex 1.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry activities be fully funded as the ministry handles all categories of people especially the marginalised, that is, the youth, children, elderly, disabled and women. For government to fully realise its programmes, the grassroots people should be able to benefit from them through the Ministry of Gender by increasing the ministry’s ceiling to at least 1.5 percent, which is approximately Shs 77.52 billion of the national budget. 

Rent and Mortgage

The committee was informed by the ministry that a real estates investment analysis was done on the space specification needed by the ministry and a tentative figure of Shs 21 billion was provided based on market prices. Evaluation by the government valuer is going on and this will form the basis for the negotiations on the purchase. Once the negotiation process is complete, a 50 percent initial payment will be required, which is Shs 10.5 billion and the balance will be paid in the subsequent financial year of 2009/2010.

Last year, the ministry was allocated Shs 4 billion as down payment. If the negotiation process ends by December 2008, then the ministry will have Shs 4.5 billion and a shortfall of Shs 6 billion to make the initial payment for acquiring the building. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the ministry goes ahead with the bid evaluation and negotiation process and that the Ministry of Finance provides the shortfall of Shs 6 billion in this financial year, to cover for the initial down payment. 

Wage Shortfall:

The ministry intends to implement the new, approved structure. However, there is a wage shortfall of Shs 1.25 billion. The wage bill this financial year is Shs 3 billion but only Shs 1.75 billion has been allocated, which is at the same level as that of last year. This leaves many vacancies still unfilled especially at the sub-county level, which is a critical unit for development.  

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expeditiously follows up the issue with the ministries of Public Service and Finance to secure funding for the wage bill. 

The Equal Opportunities Commission

The committee was informed that the Equal Opportunities Commission is to be established this financial year and Shs 2.6 billion is needed for its establishment. This is a constitutional body whose establishment is long overdue. Resources have now been provided by the Ministry of Finance to establish the commission, recruit staff, secure office accommodation and provide logistical support for its operations. The secretariat is being organised pending appointment of commissioners.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development follows up the establishment and functioning of the Equal Opportunities Commission this financial year. 

The committee further recommends that Shs 1.5 billion more be availed as promised by the minister to operationalise the commission this financial year.

Vote function No. 2, community mobilization and empowerment: last financial year the Vote reflected a low performance of 42 percent. Out of the Shs 3.0728 billon allocated for the programme, only Shs 1.301 billion was released and spent. The ministry, however, clarified that Shs 1.301 billion was the Government of Uganda component that was released and spent, whereas Shs 1.4 billion was the donor component but it is not within the ministry’s control.

The recommendation from the committee is that the ministry follows up the donor activities. All donor activities carried out in the ministry should be captured and harmonised with the government activities. 

Community Development and Literacy Programmes

The committee noted that most of the community and literacy programmes carried out by the ministry are mainly centred in Kampala, Wakiso and Mpigi.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the ministry considers the districts that are not urbanised in order to benefit the grassroots people in the villages, since districts like Kampala, Wakiso and Mpigi are urban districts and are privileged to have most of these programmes. 

Cultural Leaders

The committee noted that the number of traditional leaders is increasing and the facilitation given to the cultural leaders is adhoc. The committee is greatly concerned about the emergence of new cultural leaders and fears that the provision for traditional or cultural leaders in the Constitution of Uganda 1995, Article 246(6), could easily be abused. 

The committee was also informed by the ministry that the budget ceiling of the ministry was reduced in the Financial Year for 2004/2005 to cater for cultural institutions and this has since has been ongoing. 

While considering the national Budget Framework Paper for 2008/2009, the Budget Committee recommended that government comes up with a comprehensive policy on support to cultural and traditional leaders, including facilitation, institutional support and their royal well being and that Shs 3 billion be allocated equally between the cultural institutions of Tororo and Teso for construction of their palaces whose drawings have been submitted to government. However, only Shs 0.5 billion has been allocated in the ministry’s budget for the construction of these palaces.

Recommendations

a)	The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance creates a budget line within the Ministry of Gender to cater for the welfare of cultural institutions and that these funds be availed. 
b)	Shs 2.5 billion more should be provided for the construction of the palaces of the Tororo and Teso chiefdoms as earlier on recommended by the Budget Committee.
c)	The Ministry of Gender should draft a comprehensive policy for guidance and to ensure that uniform support and facilitation is availed to all cultural leaders. 
d)	The committee recommends that the ministry consults with the Solicitor-General for guidance on Article 246 of the Constitution that defines a traditional/cultural leader, an Article that is viewed as too open and which states, “Traditional leader or cultural leader means a king, or similar traditional leader by whatever name called who derives allegiance from the fact of birth or descent in accordance with the customs, traditions, usage or consent of the people led by that traditional or cultural leader.”

The Uganda National Cultural Centre

The committee notes that the Uganda National Cultural Centre comprises of two autonomous institutions, namely the National Theatre and the Nommo Gallery, which are directly under the supervision of the ministry. Both these institutions generate income and are audited by the Auditor-General. 

Recommendations

The committee strongly recommends that the ministry monitors and reports on the activities carried out at the National Theatre since it falls within its mandate.

The committee further recommends that a report on the performance of the Uganda National Cultural Centre, which comprises of the National Theatre and the Nommo Gallery be availed to the committee.

Functional Adult Literacy Programmes

The committee was informed that all the 80 districts have been covered by the Ministry of Gender in collaboration with ICEIDA, that is, the Iceland International Development Agency. A process review of the FAL Programme in Uganda from 2002 to 2006 was carried out under the theme: “Promoting Literacy for Improved Wellbeing and Poverty Eradication”.

Recommendations

a)	The committee recommends that the ministry should recruit FAL instructors who are people with disabilities in order to ably cater for all groups of people enrolling in the FAL programme for improved wellbeing to be attained across the board. 

b)	In addition the FAL instructors should be facilitated to carry out their work effectively. The committee suggested a fee of 20,000 per month payable to FAL instructors. 

National Libraries and Community Libraries

The National Library of Uganda has secured land at Nakawa for the construction of its premises. UNESCO has expressed interest in constructing a building for the National Library. Community libraries have been established in 43 districts and more libraries are yet to be established this financial year in Iganga, Yumbe, Luweero, Ntungamo and Apac. 

Recommendations

a)	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender expedites the process of acquiring funds to construct the library especially since UNESCO is willing to construct it. The ministry should, therefore, follow up this funding so construction starts this financial year.

b)	The Ministry of Gender should also endeavour to equip community libraries with text books and other facilities in order to promote literacy in the communities.

Vote function No. 3: mainstreaming gender and other social development concerns. The committee observed that the Vote’s main function is to ensure that gender equality and social development concerns are considered across all sectors of the economy. The ministry, in collaboration with Finance, developed gender and equity budgeting guidelines.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender works closely with Finance to ensure that gender focal persons in the different sectors are equipped with knowledge and skills in gender budgeting since the former leads to implementing gender-based budgeting.

Equity and Rights

The committee noted that the ministry intends to establish a grant scheme for the poorest of the poor. The scheme is to be harmonised with the cash transfer scheme that was initiated last Financial Year 2007/2008.

The ministry also informed the committee that this is a pilot scheme, which is meant to help mainly the most vulnerable who cannot afford a meal a day. Based on studies carried out in Lesotho and Malawi on the scheme, the ministry is coming up with implementation guidelines.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the ministry urgently conducts assessment exercises amongst the communities before notification is done on the benefits attached.  This shall result in gathering concrete and accurate information ideal for implementation. A comprehensive data base can therefore be developed to help facilitate the implementation of the scheme where older persons and other categories of vulnerable people can benefit.

National Youth Councils and National Women’s Councils

The committee was informed that the National Youth Council and the National Women’s Council Acts have been gazetted pending presentation to Parliament for amendment.

In 2004/2005, Shs 2.5 billion was allocated to councils when the districts were 56 at an average of 0.044 billion per district. Currently the ministry is disbursing to the council, grants of Shs 1.5 billion to 97 higher local governments, that is, 84 districts and 13 municipalities, at an average of 0.015 billion per year. This translates into a decrease of 0.029 billion per year per local government. This has affected the operations of the councils. If the councils are to be restored to the original allocation of Shs 0.044 billion per year per local government, then the ministry requires Shs 4.3 billion per year, which reflects a shortfall of Shs 2.8 billion needed to restore the council to the former average. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Acts be presented to Parliament as 	soon as possible for amendment, to enable the election of new office bearers take place.

The committee also recommends that national women, youth and disability Councils should be adequately funded.  

The committee further recommends that the funding of Shs 2.5 billion that the councils had when they were only 56 be further increased to Shs 4.3 billion now that there are 97 higher local governments.

Vote function No. 4: promotion of labour, productivity and employment. The committee observed that the budget line for the Vote function No. 4 has been increased from Shs 0.609 billion in the last financial year to Shs 1.51 billion this financial year hence a Shs 0.542 billion  increment.

Occupational Safety and Health

The programme budget for this sector has been raised from Shs 0.218 billion to Shs 0.605 billion, an increment of about Shs 0.387 billion from last financial year’s budget. The committee was informed by the ministry that a proposal was sent to the Ministry of Finance to allow the Ministry of Gender spend the non-tax revenue at source, a proposal hoped to greatly fund the OSH programme, to carry out more inspections.

Employment Services

This is a new programme that has been introduced by the ministry to help curb the problem of unemployment in the country. It involves job creation strategies, externalisation of labour programmes and career guidance to school leavers.  The ministry is yet to constitute a national steering committee to identify the areas in the legislative instruments that need harmonising and elaboration of the externalisation programme.

It was observed that labour officials in the districts are not adequately facilitated to carry out and effectively monitor the activities of the ministry at the district level.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the OSH programme carries out inspections in upcountry places to prove that more funding has been attained.

The committee also recommends that the ministry should plan to conduct inspection exercises of the oil exploration areas. The OSH programme in the ministry should liaise with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to ensure success of the exercise.

The ministry should come up with a work plan on how the available funds for the programme are spent and how they intend to raise more non-tax revenue. The ministry should discuss and follow up on the issue with the Ministry of Finance for implementation. 

The committee recommends that the ministry expedites the process of a legal framework to regulate the externalisation of labour programme.

In order for the ministry to achieve results from the various activities and programmes, labour officials at districts should be facilitated for effective monitoring and evaluation of the activities.

And lastly, the ministry should expeditiously operationalise the labour laws.

Minimum Wage

The committee noted that currently the country does not have a minimum wage, unlike its counterparts in the region. This has greatly led to the exploitation of workers. A study on its implementation was last done in 1999 when the Minimum Wages Board drafted a report to that effect. The ministry is in the process of reconstituting the Minimum Wages Board to review minimum wages and prepare a comprehensive budget for the different sectors in the economy.

Recommendations

The ministry should expeditiously come up with a draft policy on the minimum wage. 

The ministry should be represented on the Immigration Board since it is the lead ministry that handles labour matters.

The Industrial Court

The committee observed that whereas the Industrial Court is under the Ministry of Gender, it is not facilitated to carry out its mandate. The court was elevated to the level of a High Court but its funding is not statutory like all other institutions with equivalent status.

The court is not adequately facilitated to handle labour disputes; the remuneration of the President is statutory, charged on the Consolidated Fund, while other staff are paid from the general salaries from the ministry and are not fully facilitated to carry out their activities as a court.

While considering the Budget Framework Paper for 2008/2009, the Budget Committee recommended that the salaries of the Registrar, Assistant Registrar, the Secretary, and support staff be prioritised by the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance. This would enable the operations of the Industrial Court to comply with the law.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the ministries of Public Service and that of Finance respectively approve the structure and commit funds to the Industrial Curt, to enable it carry out its activities as a High court.

The committee recommends that the Industrial Court be reverted to the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) for effective staffing and functionality. For example, the Commercial Court is under JLOS yet it handles trade issues.

Vote function No. 5: social protection for vulnerable groups. This Vote function has programmes aimed at protecting the vulnerable groups such as the youth, children, the disabled and the elderly.

Youth and Children Institutions

The committee was informed that three institutions were rehabilitated last financial year namely: Mobuku in Kasese, Ntawo in Mukono and Koblin in Moroto. Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre was also rehabilitated.

The committee was further informed that the youth centre in Apac constructed some years ago, has remained incomplete. Reports of allocating the Lweza Rehabilitation Centre to a prospective investor and relocating it had been received.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the ministry should endeavour to renovate all rehabilitation and remand homes because the majority, for example Nakapiripirit, are in deplorable condition.

The ministry should come up with programmes and activities that involve the youth and children in these centres in addition to the funds provided for welfare and utilities.

The ministry should follow up the issue of the unfinished youth centre in Apac; this will be instrumental in the development of the youth in the North.

The committee recommends that Lweza Rehabilitation Centre be relocated to an appropriate land with better facilities.

The committee further recommends that the ministry, in consultation with the Police should come up with a three digit, toll free number and popularise it to help children get aware of it and can use it when in danger.

Street Children

The committee observes that the problem of street children is recurrent. Every financial year, over 1,000 street children and adults are withdrawn and resettled. However, the ministry does not have permanent measures to settle the street children and adults, thus explaining their continuous influx on the streets.

Recommendations

(a) 	The committee recommends that the ministry should address the-push-and-pull factors that have continued to sustain the problem of street children and adults. The ministry should come up with a campaign to sensitise the public on some of the causes of street children influx for example giving them money and other material handouts, which have kept the destitute children and adults glued to the streets.

(b) 	The ministry should endeavour to settle the street children and adults in fertile areas with farm implements, to enable them engage in meaningful and gainful agricultural activities.

(c) 	The committee recommends that the ministry should carry out a detailed study to establish the underlying cause of the problem and recommend to government and Parliament a sustainable solution. 

Madam Speaker, the budget proposal for the Financial Year 2008/09 is – I beg that this House do approve a total including arrears and taxes of Shs 22,527,000,000 of which Shs 12,140,000,000 is for recurrent and Shs 10,387,000,000 is for development as the total budget required for the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development for financial year 2008/09. I thank you and beg for your support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your team. I do not know whether the Opposition has a response.

5.26
MS SUZAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and my committee for this good report. I would like to start with the issue of inadequate funding. The Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development is poorly funded. A total of Shs 22 billion was budgeted for the ministry with an extensive mandate to serve the most vulnerable groups. 

I do understand that so many people in this country do not understand the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development. The Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development is a ministry which should empower women, the youth, the elderly, the disabled, the workers and other special interest groups. These are our voters but they are the people we neglect. In fact if I was the President of this country, I would make sure that this ministry is funded well. I remember, during the Obote regime this ministry was well funded because Obote knew that this was a people’s ministry. 

We propose that the sealing of the ministry be improved to fund all the programmes and activities that are embedded in all the five vote functions of the ministry. 

On rent, we are very suspicious over this process that the chairperson has told us about that the ministry should go ahead with the bid, evaluation and negation process. But we know what happened to NSSF, we do not want to experience that any more. There are so many properties that Government has bought that are not worth the amount. So we need a select committee to oversee the purchase of the building for that ministry.

Equal Opportunities Commission: we are glad that this year the commission will be established. This commission is mandated to eliminate discrimination; all forms of marginalisation and inequalities against all groups of people including albinos. 

Madam Speaker, albinos are not getting any support, in fact government does not even recognise them yet they are people like us, they are so much discriminated against, marginalised, stigmatised and they are regarded as freaks in society; they are regarded as people with a diseases or an abnormality – but albinism is not a disease but an abnormality which is caused by absence of a pigment called melanin. So I do not see a reason why Government does not pick interest in a group of such people and even know their statistics. You understand me? (Laughter) So when the commission is established, I request that it considers this group of people.

Child Labour: This should be a priority concern for this ministry; it is one of the principal sources of child abuse and exploitation. Child labour is wide spread. For example, in Mutukula, so many Ugandan children are exploited right now; they are used in commercial sex and by businessmen to grab commodities from Tanzania because the businessmen know that such children would not be interrogated that much at the border. 

But this is contrary to the provisions of our Constitution and the UN Convention of Children’s Rights and the Children Act and the National Child Labour Policy. So we propose that Government should urgently investigate this matter. I got this information and I decided to inform this House on it. Government should urgently investigate this matter and be willing to enforce the existing laws on child labour. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of the street children is just growing; it is a very big problem in this country. But I think government should find out where these children stay before we even address the push and pull factors. We need to come up with a plan – we need to categorise these children and know that these come from Karamoja and so forth. 

The Karamoja region is a different case. They know that when you put out your hand, they will give you money, which is not the case with children from other areas. There are so many factors that cause these children to join the streets. So, I propose that after categorising these children, it will become easier to for Government to find a way of addressing the plight of these street children and the adult.

Minimum wage: since I joined this Parliament, the ministry has been talking about reconstituting a minimum wage board to carryout fresh studies. Madam Speaker, to date Uganda has not adopted a minimum wage. Many employees and workers are inadequately paid. And I think the best means to ensure fair pay is through establishment of a minimum wage that will be reflective of the cost of decent living in society. 

In 1995 government set up a minimum wage board. The board made a report which it presented to Cabinet. Cabinet came up with recommendations, which they presented to the President but up to now, the minimum wage has not been set. What does that mean? [Hon. Kabwegyere: “Information”] No, no, I am informing you. Sit down. Just listen to what I am talking about. (Laughter) Listen to why the minimum wage has failed do up to now. Madam Speaker, when the Cabinet presented the recommendations to the President, the President declined to adopt the minimum wage on grounds that he did not want to discourage his foreign investors. 

We propose that government should urgently institute a minimum wage to safeguard workers’ rights.

Functional Adult Literacy: Madam Speaker, there are so many people who did not go to school but can be useful in society. Government should introduce universal functional adult literacy programmes to cover everyone just like UPE so that if someone has not been successful under UPE, he or she can enrol for Universal FAL programme. This will equip the illiterate populace with basic literacy and numeric skills, which will go a long way to eradicate poverty in our country, especially among women. 

National women councils: there is need to refocus the concern of the councils. The ministry allocated only Shs30 million to these women councils and this money is only to fund women’s day celebrations; you can imagine. But, Madam Speaker, I think there is a lot that can be done other than celebrating women’s days. 

This government has not empowered women -(Interjections)- no, this is not real support. You allocate only Shs 30 million – do not ask me, “Why are you here?” What about the women at the grassroots? -(Interjections)- this is not the real support that we want for women. In fact this is cosmetic empowerment. (Applause)

We are tired of this cosmetic empowerment of women. We want real empowerment in all aspects of life. We propose that the budget for women councils be increased. (Hon. Nyombi Thembo rose_) No, no, sit down, please. What is wrong with you? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, what is wrong with these ministers? Please, sit down!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is the Shadow Minister for Gender, she is giving her alternatives. You listen to her and then you will respond. (Laughter) 

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also want to comment on the Afro-Arab youth festival which was hosted this year, and this activity or programme was among the planned activities for the last financial year.

During the conference, it was alleged that there were -(Interruption)- Uganda hosted the Afro-Arab youth festival this year in March and it is alleged that there were so many cases of mismanagement of funds and the general weakness in the organisation of the conference. It is also alleged that there was sexual harassment of Ugandan female participants and volunteers by foreign delegates. I would like the minister to inform this House about all that happened. And the minister of youth should also inform this House the criterion that was used to select the participants in that conference. 

Most of the Ugandan delegates were drawn from one part of the country. Hon. Kinobe brought 70 delegates from his constituency -(Interjection)- listen, and yet –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Is the hon. Shadow Minister in order to say that hon. Kinobe has a constituency in Luweero when she knows very well that I -(Interjection)- she knows that there were changes and he is not having a constituency in Luweero? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did not hear her say in Luweero but I know that the Minister for Youth and Child Affairs has a constituency for youth and children. So, I think he brought youth and children. (Laughter)

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was actually talking about the district but you never know things may change and he retains the seat. (Laughter) Participants were to be selected from all over the country representing the National Youth Council, civil society organisations, special interest groups and political parties. 

I would also add that about Shs 6 billion was earmarked for the event but the actual number of participants was 250. The number which was put on the list was more than 250. Sincerely, Madam Speaker, if this conference was to promote the youth agenda, why did most of the Ugandan youth delegates desert the conference rooms to the facilitators who started even talking to empty chairs. We do propose that the minister should produce accountability of close to Shs 6 billion -(Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you hon. Nampijja for giving way. I appreciate the analysis you are making on the report especially on the Afro Arab Youth Conference. I would like to inform this House that I was part of the organising committee of the Afro Arab Youth Conference and indeed fully participated in the entire events of the conference. 

I want to inform you that the delegates of Uganda and other delegates from other countries did not desert the conference. Instead, they were more and more interested in attending the conference and there was no such a time where the facilitators talked to themselves. I am sure if you had been part of that conference as we had invited you, you should have observed differently. So, it should not be alleged that the conference did not achieve anything. They achieved something; the youth made many resolutions and from the opening to the closing the youth were fully involved in all the activities, which we had organised.

It was also alleged that the female participants from Uganda were sexually harassed and basically they were pointing at the committee of ushers. I headed that committee of ushers; I did not have such a case coming to my committee. I did not have a girl being victimised on sexual harassment. There were rumours in the conference as it happens anywhere but if it had come out, I would be aware of it. 

I want to allay your fears that there was no girl who was sexually harassed unless she kept it to herself. But we did not get such reports. I want to assure this House that Afro- Arab youth conference was conducted in such a manner that gives dignity to this country and to all the citizens of this country. Thank you.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nalubega is a youth representative and at the same time she was a beneficiary. What do you expect from her? (Laughter) During that time we tried to talk to the participants and some of them consented –(Interjections)- I carried out some research and I know what I am talking about. (Laughter)

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order because all of us heard hon. Nampijja say that there were allegations that some of the youth were involved in sexual harassment; they were sexually harassed. But again when hon. Nalubega stood up on a point of information to say that there was nothing like that, hon. Nampijja, the shadow minister responded by saying that hon. Nalubega was a beneficiary. Is she in order to insinuate that sexual harassment can be beneficial to some people? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should not trivialise the issue of sexual harassment. It was not done on the table here in front of everybody. Please, accept that some things go wrong sometimes and try to correct them. Do not try to trivialise what she is saying. Sometimes these things happen and these are young girls. (Applause)

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not know that the honourable minister was even speaking nothing. (Laughter) 

Finally, about the externalisation of labour, we propose that there is need for a strong regulatory and supervisory arm in the ministry to ensure that all migrant workers are not exploited. Thank you.

5.49
MR CHRISOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues of interest. One, it is very clear that our people are being transported to Middle East and that there are so many companies clearing these people to Middle East. These companies are cheating Ugandans. Could the minister be in the know of these companies? How many are they and which ones are genuine? People are being cheated and if exporting people to Iraq is normal, why can’t these activities be coordinated in your office? You cannot subject your citizens to private companies to sell them abroad. This cannot work. How do you privatise your people? How do you? The essence of government goes to - I do not know. (Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you hon. Kibanzanga for giving way. In fact, they are not privatised; they are sold like slaves.

MR KIBANZANGA: That is the workers’ representative. I was only shy to say this is slavery in the modern times and it must stop. Government, if you are brave enough to coordinate the activities and sell our people to Middle East, do it but do not privatise our people.

MS NAMAGWA: Madam Speaker, I just want to support what my colleague is saying about Ugandans who are in Iraq. Yesterday, there was a letter from one of them in The New vision that their salaries have been reduced from a range of US $2,000 to US $1,000 to now about US $500 and they were trying to find out whether there are some officials trying to help them so that their well being is not reduced to that level.

When I read that letter, I wanted to find out whether the Ministry of Labour is working hand in hand with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because Foreign Affairs is responsible for all Ugandans who are abroad. I think given what is happening maybe the Ministry of Labour should link up with Foreign Affairs to find out the well being of these people. Thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: You can see the magnitude of the problem especially when the mandated department of Government is just sleeping. Can you wake up? (Laughter) You can imagine paying Shs 0.5 million to go to Iraq. Shs 200,000 is for a passport – where can you purchase a passport of Shs 200,000 in Uganda here and at the end of the day you do not even go? You can imagine working in Iraq for US $2,000 and at the end of it all you are given US $500 and the rest is taken by the companies you have created; are you a government? 

My second point is on cultural institutions. The committee has made a statement that has scared me. That they are greatly concerned about the emergence of new cultural leaders and fears that the provision for traditional/cultural leaders of the Constitution of Uganda 1995, Article 246, clause 6 could be abused. 

On page 19 (d), the committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development consults with the Solicitor-General for guidance on Article 246 that defines cultural/traditional leaders, an article that is viewed as too open. My fear is that it seems the committee is thinking that we should review this article to make some restrictions -(Member timed out) 

5.55
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to comment on point 8.1 (l) on page 10 and this is concerning the rehabilitation and resettlement of street children and other adults under the recurrent activities. But it only covers the towns of Kampala, Jinja, Bugiri, Tororo, Busia and Moroto. 

In the municipality which I represent, we have street children, adults and other vulnerable people who as a consequence of the war have got stuck within the towns. And if the Ministry of Gender is returning people resettling them and rehabilitating them, I would wish that this would be considered as far as the municipalities are concerned because we had an additional problem when people began returning home. In fact before they started returning home, government stopped support to IDPs in the town in a view of encouraging them to return to their homes or to go to the rural camps and which in fact did not solve the problem but increased the vulnerability. Many of these people still remain in this context.

My second point touches on those who took advantage of such people in their times of hardship. At the spinning mill before it went under receivership, when they were spinning the cotton for Phenix, IDPs were being employed for wages of between Shs 10,000 and Shs 20,000 per month. This is way below what anybody could survive on but the circumstances which the IDPs found themselves in without any support in the form of food, they accepted any job. They work long hours without any intervention and the conditions of work is something which as Ugandans we should not accept. 

Further to that, if we are looking at Phenix as the exporter of Ugandan organic cotton for markets which are very conscious about how the products are being produced, information about how these companies are treating the workers who are producing what is going to be sold is something which Government should take very seriously otherwise it will affect the ability to export some of these products.

That brings me to the point about the minimum wage. The committee reported that we should have a policy; but we have a law and it has been in existence since 1957 with amendments along the way. The law provides for the ministry to set up advisory boards and councils to look into the conditions of workers and to recommend a minimum wage or conditions of service and those conditions are then submitted to the minister who will publish and the public will be given 30 days to respond to that after which it goes to the President. 

We should have no excuse about a policy; we have a law. Our duty is to implement the law. We should be a country of laws and the law exists. I can see no reason why we are not looking into various sectors whether we are exporting people to Iraq or elsewhere there is a law which provides the ministry with the tools to be able to oversee the conditions under which Ugandans are working. I think we should not waste time with policies, let us implement the law as it is written. The law provides a clear methodology in which the government can act. Let us act. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.59
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Members of the committee and contribute as follows. 

On page 26, about the youth and children institutions and there is somewhere the committee is saying that last financial year, Mubuku was rehabilitated in Kasese. I am a Member of Parliament for Kasese and what I want to tell this committee is that there was no rehabilitation done to Mubuku. What was done in Mubuku was that the ministry sent 80 mattresses and 40 blankets. If that is what it means by rehabilitation, then I will stand to be corrected.  

What I know is that around 1997 or 1996, some contract was awarded to some company to renovate the youth institute and this money disappeared in thin air and the renovation was not done. Government gave the certificates of completion to the contractor, the structures are still there without any rehabilitation done and I hear it was close to Shs 200 million, which was given to renovate the youth institute.

If you may remember very well and it was you chairing, Madam Speaker, in my very first speech to this House, I requested Parliament to take up the issue of the youth institute in Mubuku and that it would help the youth of Kasese and actually Western Uganda to settle and acquire some skills. We should not be deceived that this institute was renovated. I would request that some plans be put in place to renovate this institute to help the youth of Western Uganda because this was a national youth institute that I am talking about to cover the whole of the Western region which is just lying there unutilised and the structures are about to collapse. 

I also wish to report to this House that the whole of Kasese District does not have a remand home which means our children are being accommodated with the elders in the prisons. So if there is a consideration to have remand homes established in districts, I would request that Kasese be given a chance so that our children are not contaminated with hard core criminals.

If I may add from where my brother hon. Kibanzanga ended, the people of Kasese and Rwenzori region who believe in the establishment of the cultural institution have for so long been demanding the recognition of the cultural institution of Rwenzururu and when the committee says these institutions are becoming so many when ours has not yet been recognised and yet the demand has been on for so many years - other institutions are being recognised somehow somewhere without us knowing and ours is just lying there without being recognised. How many have been recognised anyway? If we are having so many districts, how many are the cultural institutions that you are calling many? You are not calling the districts many. I still request that before the committee says the cultural institutions are getting many, can the one of Rwenzururu be also recognised so that it can be among those many institutions. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and beg to rest my case.

6.03
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a few clarifications I need from the minister. On page 6, item (i), they acquired and distributed 100,000 books to 35 libraries countrywide. I do not know whether these were school libraries or community libraries and if they were community libraries, can we know where these locations are? 

On page 8, on the challenges and constraints faced by the sector, item three, that among the challenges they have, they do not have enough funds to monitor the working conditions of Ugandans working abroad. Even here in Uganda, the Ugandans who have a chance of working here, the working conditions are terrible. Can the minister tell us whether she has endeavoured to explore the working conditions especially the so-called investors who are employing Ugandans at very bad terms of employment?

Lastly, the minimum wage: this is a very serious issue. The so called investors in this country - I call them so-called investors because when you look at what they pay the Ugandans who are supposed to benefit from the investments that are brought in this country - they are hardly paid anything. In fact they are more or less working like slaves. 

I would like the minister to tell us how many foreigners are working in this country vis-à-vis the Ugandans because when you look at the universities we have and how many Ugandans are graduating every year, and you look at the number of foreigners who are working in this country - I would like the minister to give us the number and the figures. In some countries, the foreigners should only be able to work where no citizen has qualifications in that field. But here, you go to a restaurant or a hotel –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague is referring regularly to investors as foreigners who are coming to Uganda. This morning we had an opportunity to look at one key local investor and he owns a factory called Crown Bottling Company. The same investor has a bank. This bank should be lending out money to our citizens in this country. But the same local investor is actually going to borrow money not from his bank but from NSSF. I would want to know whether this local citizen is not an investor yet we only look to foreigners as investors in this country.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very mush for the information. This is a very serious issue and I would like the minister to give us the number of foreigners in this country.

I am a Member of the committee on finance and we all knew that the NSSF was under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We now know it is under Ministry of Finance. Can the minister tell us who transferred this NSSF to Ministry of Finance and why it is there? Thank you very much.

6.08
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, let me start by complaining about the budget of the gender ministry; it is too small for the ministry. Maybe that is why we are even failing to pass gender related Bills in this Parliament because we reduced this ministry. 

I want to give an example of work which should be done by Gender. I am happy they have put here gender budgeting but gender ministry has to analyse most of the data and programmes to see how both women and men benefit. But you find that this is very much lacking even some times with some documents we receive here in this House. 

Recently, we were given some names proposed for National Planning Authority board. I must say that all the four names given were male names. Don’t we have women who can qualify to be on National Planning Authority board? Even after two names failing to go through, again the next names brought were male names and women were not there. Maybe if our funding was alright, our Ministry of Gender would be able to analytically go through all these papers. 

Even on the PRDP, the documents we have lack a lot on gender and yet this is what for us women of the North see as a saviour to our women who have the worst impact of the war but because the gender ministry is not well facilitated and funded, you find that such analyses are lacking. The documents do not have Gender. If we try to see how women should benefit, you find that they are really lacking. We need our women to benefit and so we need this gender mainstreaming. When we talk about mainstreaming, it should go along with a budget and not without one. If you see page 5, they mention mainstreaming but page 7 states the challenges that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development faces because of poor budgeting. 

When we go to page 26, they talk about those other institutions. In Gulu we also have an institution to rehabilitate children. Its construction started when I was still in the council and it was by us, the councillors. I have seen now that some districts are benefiting. Can Gulu District also benefit? Apac has not yet been completed but they are looking forward to the completion of that institution. How about our children’s rehabilitation home in Gulu? Can it also benefit since it looks like the council is failing to complete and equip the centre? That is to be clarified. 

On sex and gender-based violence training for journalists, I must say that we in Gulu have UNDP programmes which have put one officer in the gender department. That one officer could be well facilitated but if facilitation for staff of the district is not alright, since we lack funds in this ministry, you find that work is not done and we have a lot of sex and gender-based violence in the community. 

We need our community workers to be on the ground to try and help the local leaders so that when things are brought to the local council courts, they are able to handle them well and not marginalise women and girls -(Member timed out)

6.13
MR LULUME BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a few questions to ask and they include the following: why has it taken so long for government to develop an employment policy? Should we have a timeline when this policy will be produced so that we can know?

Secondly, I envisage that it should be in the mandate of this ministry and in line with the East African Community that the promotion of Swahili language be encouraged. I thought that this ministry could have taken this up.

Thirdly, the policy talks about training of youth leaders in entrepreneurship. This is very interesting. Training of youth leaders in entrepreneurship skills and leaving out the majority of the people they lead is doing almost nothing. What is the rationale of training only youth leaders and not the people they lead who form the majority? Is it a point of classification of our society - having some of the people privileged and others under privileged? What could this policy be about?

Fourth, I want to also know the benefits of the Afro-Arab festival. Where there some tangible benefits that youth in Uganda could have accrued from a festival in which the Ugandan Government spent colossal sums of money? Are there some tangible benefits that could have been accrued from there that somebody can articulate to this Parliament?

Last is the issue of external labour from which Uganda derives a lot of remittances. I wonder if this ministry has ever had a database of Ugandans working abroad. For those who have found themselves where they work and are remitting colossal sums of money into this economy, has there ever been any tangible step to ensure that their welfare is intact abroad wherever they are? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I submitted here on the economics of rent, I pointed out that this ministry was one of the highest rent payers. It paid rent to the tune of eight percent of its budget. It is now very consoling to hear from the committee that this ministry is making arrangements, through mortgage, to own its own premises. I wish other ministries could also follow suit because the country is spending a lot of funds in this area. 

I would like to urge the ministry not to make street children and other destitutes on our streets a permanent phenomenon. Walking the streets of Kampala can be a nightmare because every step one meets somebody. I do not blame them because they really look destitute stretching an arm, asking for some assistance. If you are of any moral standing, the little you have in your pocket will be given out, but it is endless. The next stage you meet another one and the cycle continues. It does not look good and the ministry should come up with a solution. We have a representative at the highest political level – in the office of state minister - to look at this matter. I would like him to justify his emoluments in that ministry by solving some of these problems. 

Without trying to hurt the very delicate feelings and emotions of those who cherish cultural leaders, my understanding of the law is that these cultural leaders were resurrected on the understanding that those who wished for them would have them and they would maintain them. We in Madi-Okolo do not have these institutions but increasingly, I am seeing that these cultural institutions want to be a stone around the necks of taxpayers. This now explains why cultural institutions are sprouting up where they did not exist; they have seen a loophole where they can subsist. My people of Madi-Okolo and I object to this - if you cannot sustain your cultural institutions – please, do not ask for them. 

I see funding being provided for construction of palaces. We have the Vice-President - the second highest individual in the land – who has no official accommodation and he has no office, but here we are. What reason do we have? How can we explain this to the taxpayer that the second in command does not have these facilities but cultural institutions which did not exist are now being funded by the taxpayer? Madam Speaker, I object to this. 

Community libraries: I want to put my application to the ministry. We have, through a good donor, constructed a very big community centre in Madi-Okolo. Some committee members who have gone to Arua - about 30 miles before reaching Arua - have seen that building. They have been asking me what we are going to do with it. We said this is a resource centre; there will be a library inside. 

6.21
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I have a few issues. 

On page 15, rent and mortgage, I am surprised that our government has again made a U-turn to start acquiring buildings. When I came here in the Sixth Parliament, I was on the social services committee and I used to ask myself why the Ministry Of Gender could leave a government building and start renting. They told me it was because of privatization, that it is now a style. I got surprised. Now we are coming back looking for rent and I am surprised that every ministry now wants to be housed by Government. So, when those policies were being made, didn’t they have people who knew that by renting you spend more money than when you have your own property? Was it just that some people wanted to have money to eat? This is too much; instead of moving forward, we are going backward. I am very surprised and I am very uncomfortable about this -(Interruption)

MR BAYIGA: The point is that government has been working on trial and error. Thank you.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you for the information. Another issue is on page 21, on equity and rights. We are going to have a scheme where the poor of the poorest will be helped by government and I have read that about six districts were piloted. I would be surprised if I do not find districts that have suffered because of wars and those districts that I know very well that are very poor, like some districts in Busoga and the Rwenzori region, which have been suffering for a very long time with wars. I really want to know these districts. 

Madam Minister, I want to know the people who are going to benefit from this scheme. Are they the poorest of the poor or are we just generalising? Rwenzori region looks gloomy; it has never got anything like other districts that are getting NUSAF, PRDP, Luwero triangle, etc. We also want affirmative action; we have also suffered like others.

Another issue is on health and occupational safety. I have seen a certain increment in the budget but who are these that are going to benefit? The people and the workers who died of Ebola in Gulu and Bundibugyo; I do not know whether those of Gulu have been compensated. The children of these health workers right now have embarked on selling the property of their late parents to try and continue with their education in higher institutions like universities. The President said they would be compensated “as soon as possible”. Now I do not see the “as soon as possible”. What do we do? The children of the young doctor are crying. They were in very expensive schools but they are now just there languishing like people who were not born of a capable human being. So, I need the Minister of Gender to tell us when these people will be compensated because they are taking so long. 

6.27
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the committee for their comprehensive report. Madam Speaker, you have been in this Parliament since the Sixth Parliament and whenever we debate policy statements and budgets, we talk about the under funded ministry and that ministry is the Ministry of Gender. That ministry has got many departments: there is labour, youth, women, PWDs, the elderly and the children. Why is it that this ministry’s budget is 0.4 percent of the main budget? Why don’t we take it away? Let us make them departments in other ministries. 

I get concerned. There are so many issues concerning children. Children are being neglected, they are being abused, they are being tossed up and down, they are being taken for prostitution and they are going for child labour. Everything nasty is happening to the children but what can we do as Parliament? Can’t we really stand up and speak for these children so that something can be done? I have had occasions to interact with the National Council for Children but I was surprised it was not even mentioned in this statement. Has it been scrapped? Maybe the minister will tell us.

May I propose that since everybody is aware that our President has been advocating and talking about HIV/AIDS, we move it to the President’s Office so that he talks for the children and we get money to make sure that these children are catered for? Can we do this so that everybody listens when you start talking about children? Let everybody listen and do something. There is no single day in Uganda when you open the newspaper and you do not read about child abuse. Which day did you open the newspaper and you did not read about it? You cannot tell me. Everyday, there is something nasty about a child. Let us be sincere to our future generation. If you are looking at the future and we want this country to develop, we must look after our young children.

Two, in this statement there is something about cultural institutions and the construction of palaces but what about our Isebantu Kyabazinga of Busoga? There is nothing mentioned about the construction of his palace. Maybe the minister will tell me. Thank you. 

6.31
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to say something. First of all, I would like to start from page 6. On page 6, the report says there are 4,000 new work places. How many jobs are now created out of these 4,000 new work places? 

Two, what type of jobs are Ugandans taking up? In fact the jobs, which are created, are created for foreigners. Ugandans are employed as casual workers where they have no protection at all. The employers do not want trade unions in these places so the workers have no right to associate themselves or to bargain with employers. Although Uganda ratified many ILO conventions, they are dormant; they are not for the benefit of this country.

To say that the jobs are for Ugandans is a little bit embarrassing because I do not see Ugandans benefiting much in these places. Even the places where we have sold the factories and there are new employers, they do not give jobs. The Ugandans who are found there are made third grade and they are not protected at all. That means nobody knows where our people are going to work. The government should come up to protect Ugandans and we forget about this issue of just worshipping the investors. We are worshipping investors; they have got what to do and they can do what they want but the interests of Ugandans are completely shattered.

On the issue of health and safety inspectorate, this is gone. There are no workers there. There are no people. I am surprised that they visited so many places. Where these places are, I failed to understand. 

The issue of a labour inspectorate in the Ministry of Labour should be looked into seriously. We do not have it and yet that is where the life is. We have seen so many people dying, so many buildings collapsing, factories burning and people are getting injured and nobody takes care of this. This is terrible. We just hear 11 people died and that is the end; whether they are compensated or not, God knows. These are some of the serious things. These are our children, our brothers and sisters and we should be able to protect their lives. 

I want to talk briefly about the minimum wage. I disagree with the committee when it says that we do not have a minimum wage. We have a minimum wage. Our minimum wage is Shs 6,000! If you employ somebody and you pay Shs 6,000 to that person per month, there is no problem. You are acting within the law. What we are saying is that the Shs 6,000 is inadequate. We need it to be revised. We are asking for revision. The law is here. 

The committee, which was appointed in 1999 - I was one of the committee members - recommended Shs 65,000 as a minimum but up to now the government has refused to announce that one. They say it is to protect investors. Our neighbours are getting a minimum wage; even the poorer countries have a minimum wage. We have complained even to ILO about the minimum wage and the committee which was appointed by ILO, which sits here, have also asked the ministry what is wrong with minimum wage. 

On the issue of the inspectorate, health and safety, the minister is here; he was in the committee and we accused him. He was the one who was prosecuted in ILO; he was sweating and he promised that he is going to work on it the coming year. I do not know what happened because here there is nothing like that.

We feel that we are the people who are making this money and yet you give the youth, the women, the elderly and workers only 0.4 percent in the budget. Who are making this money? It is workers who are sweating for this money and you do not want to look there. You allocate four percent for this entire group who are active and you give the kill to other departments that are involved in buying poison to come and kill people –(Member timed out)

6.37
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to thank the committee and the ministry in as far as maintaining the ministry, which is so crucial in mobilising this country, is concerned.

Allow me also to reinforce the fact that currently when you look at the revenue Uganda gets from people who are working outside the country, it almost equates to the total exports of commodities. So, I think as Parliament we need to take a strong stand on how we allow our people to go out there to work for the benefit of themselves and even to remit funds back home. Sincerely, these funds help most of our brothers and sisters back home here in terms of education, improving homesteads and assisting the elderly. 

I think we need to seriously engage the ministry to come up with a study to ensure that all our employees who are going out, go out as decent Ugandans and not mere objects who are exported as slaves. (Applause) This is a very serious concern that we must look into. We must deliberately put a policy in place to externalise our people to ensure they bring returns in terms of revenue, and they acquire a lot of expertise, cultural experience. When they eventually come back home, they will be able to invest and improve the economic situation of our country. When you talk about the Asian tigers, when you talk of China, you realise that they both pirated all the technologies before finally investing at home. So, we need to seriously consider this matter.

Let me talk about the issue of community development and probation officers at sub-county level. If we are to mobilise people in this country out of poverty, if we are to talk of Bonna Bagagawale as a programme, then these are the central people who should mobilise communities to ensure people’s perceptions and attitudes towards work, development and productivity is re-orientated from the current state. These will help the youths, women and other organised groups out there eagerly waiting for money to work for themselves, to organise themselves into SACCOs and other productive ventures. Community workers should be equipped to help people improve their quality of life.

My last submission is on the issue of Nsamizi Social Training Institute. This is one of the centres under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We need to seriously consider improving its facilities and training capacity to ensure they produce more community-based people. We should mobilise and ensure all sectors for example, education, sanitation improvement and income generation, are represented. These are the right people who should be trained and empowered to help communities improve their ways of living. 

Nsamizi Social Training Institute needs a lot of attention; it is limping on. I have been in close contact with them and they are doing a good job but they are under funded and sometimes not mentioned anywhere. So, we need to consider their plight and improve the infrastructure and ensure every sub-county and parish has got adequately equipped community mobilisers who will be able to improve and carry on development within our communities. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.41
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to air my concerns about some of the problems I see go on among our communities, which I would think are very detrimental to our social development.

Last year we had a lot of rituals with many children getting killed at shrines as offerings; it was a very big problem. In the same vein, cases of murder, sexual and gender-based abuse were also rampant. We also get to see many murders arising out of land conflicts. There is a lot of drug abuse in schools with some children getting to use narcotic drugs. We also have a lot of drug abuse in most of the towns. If you travel through some of these towns in the evenings, especially Kampala and Mbarara, you will feel a change in the air because there is a lot of contamination through the smell of these drugs. We also have a lot of emerging prostitution and homosexuality among our communities. 

The point I am raising is that all these are evils to social development in this country. I am saying this because the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the linkage ministry. This is so because when we talk about most of these issues, they will say they fall under the ministry of Education, Ministry of Local Government and so on. That is why I talking about them now.

Even the work ethics have changed. You wake up in the morning and get surprised to find people in trading centres just drinking beers and others playing pool and so on. There is total lack of direction and lawlessness with boda bodas chasing policemen and policemen shooting all over the place. There is general lack of order, general decay of the social fibre with the social structure gone –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, honourable member. Yesterday, I read in the newspapers that one of the ministers did tell the boda bodas to ignore the law and continue overloading their motorcycles. So the moral decadence is not just with people like the boda boda riders but with some important people who are supposed to ensure the laws work. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, WOMEN (Ms Rukia Isanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday it was alleged in the newspapers that I had talked to the Police –(Laughter)- that they should not arrest boda boda riders who overload. This is just an allegation because I did not get anybody to consult with me on whether what was in the newspapers was correct or not. So, is it in order for the honourable member to say that somebody was in the newspapers –(Interjections)– because it was I, before consulting with me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was not in that place where you addressed the boda bodas and so I am not able to know what you said. However, I think you would just tell us whether you did not say it or not because none of us was there. Okay, what did you say? (Laughter)

MS ISANGA: Madam Speaker, yesterday there was a story in the newspapers that I had directed the boda bodas to overload. That was not true because I did not tell them to overload. What I know is that they told me that they had had a misunderstanding with the traffic police officers. They said that traffic police officers had been arresting them in Mayuge District, accusing them for voting this government to power –(Interjections)– I am telling you what I said –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, the minister is explaining herself but at the same time alleging that the Police, which enforces the law, acts in a partisan manner. She said that they said they would deal with NRM. Is it in order for the minister to accuse the Police that is not here and, therefore, not able to explain themselves?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I hope the minister filed a complaint about the conduct of the Police if that is what they were doing. I think what Members are interested in knowing is whether you did or did not say “proceed with the overloading.”

MS ISANGA: Madam Speaker, I was narrating what I told the boda boda riders and what made a story in the newspapers. The police officer was trying to use the name of a political party to arrest the boda bodas who had overloaded. He told them that, “It is your NRM Government which put these laws in place and we have to implement them by dealing with you”, and he was putting a pole in the middle of the road to stop the boda bodas. So, when a boda boda comes and hits on that pole, it would cause an accident. So when they came to me, I told them that we were going to deal with that police officer and that could not be done in the districts when we are there. 

I went to the DPC and told him what his officer was doing. As I was going to the police station, I found that man arresting another boda boda in that same manner. So when I talked to the DPC, he called his police officer and I do not know what followed. What I wanted to do was to bring harmony between the police and the boda bodas. I had to intervene to stop the arresting of boda bodas that way. A police officer should not put a stick in the road in the name of stopping somebody; they can cause an accident. It was not even a stick. It was very big; it was a pole. So, I had to intervene and eventually these people probably thought that I had supported these people in overloading. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NGABIRANO: Madam Speaker, the other point I had on this is the influence of foreign culture. I am not against any religion but some people pray overnight the whole week. Are Ugandans benefiting from such type of prayer? When do they attend to their work? I request the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to help us to create a linkage to address these social problems. Do you have a working paper? You can talk to the Minister of Education about the problems in schools, the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Local Government. Help us as a linkage ministry to address these social evils in our society. 

6.51
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report. I have a few comments. The first one is on page 7; I want to commend Iceland, in collaboration with the Ministry of Gender, for the good work they have done in Mukono, especially in Buvuma Islands, regarding the deferral classes. I want also to urge the ministry to do a follow-up and inspect the good work that Iceland did in Buvuma Islands and other places. 

Among their planned activities, the ministry has planned to facilitate deferral classes with bicycles. It is on page 10. They say they are going to supply 7,000 bicycles to the instructors. This implies that Buvuma Islands will not benefit. We have 56 residential islands and if we are to benefit from such facilitation, then we need boats and outboard engines at least at a parish level. A bicycle cannot help. Some of these islands are just rocks. There is need for the ministry to carry out a ground survey before they carry our facilitation. We really need boats to enable our instructors to collaborate and teach these classes rather than giving us bicycles which at the end of the day remain on the mainland and the instructors will just sell them. 

I also want to say that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development needs to be facilitated. When we talk of labour officers at the district, the best they can have is a desk and a chair and they just sit and earn salary. They do not even visit the places to receive complaints because they do not have the facilities. In Mukono, for example, when will the labour officer travel to Buvuma; he needs one million. So, there is need to facilitate these labour officers.

I also want to comment on the minimum wage. A lot has been said about the minimum wage, but I want my colleagues to reflect on the law of demand and supply. We have many graduates that are qualifying everyday and when we evaluate the employment sector that is supposed to absorb them, it is almost not there. So when members argue that the ministry has not come up with a minimum wage, I think the minister can see the problem. 

There is a need to get an employment policy. If we do not get an employment policy, it will be very difficult for this government to set up a minimum wage. People are willing to work at any cost because the employment is not there. Every year, when the Ministry of Finance is reading the budget and giving their policy statement, they pursue Parliament by telling how thousands of jobs are being created by the Uganda Investment Authority. In reality, however, you cannot see those jobs. He says that five thousand, ten thousand jobs have been created but they remain here on the Floor. The reality is the rate at which we are creating new jobs is deceptive. Even in the existing ministries, instead of appointing people, you just hear of retrenchment everyday; there is every form of restructuring. So, there is need for the ministry to come up with an employment policy and a databank to know which area has the biggest numbers in this country? But if we are operating the way we are operating, I am not surprised if our colleagues who went to work in Iran at an initial wage of US $2,000 end up working for US $100. 

6.56
MR VINCENT NYANZI (NRM, Busujju County, Mityana): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin by thanking the chairperson of the committee for her good report. In fact the report is quite true. I have ever served in that ministry; I know whatever is there and she has reported correctly. And I tell you, I pity even the ministers who are in that ministry if at all it is still as I left it.

I want to correct a certain statement here, Madam Speaker. When I was a minister in Gender, I was at Udyam building. That Udyam House has never been a government building; it is a building for Mehta Group. So, I wanted to make that correction. 

People are talking about the minimum wage. Let us talk as Ugandans. Many of us here have house girls. You ask yourselves, “How much am I paying the house girl?” In fact I am going to give you my experience. I was a Minister of State for Industry for three years. Whenever I visited, people were complaining about the minimum wage, I started with certain industries here in Uganda. I talked to the investors to start paying what the honourable for the workers has been talking about. What they did was to implement Shs 65,000. In return they reduced the number of the workers. After some time it was the workers themselves who invited me to go back to the factories to talk to their managers so that they take them back to work and pay them the amount they used to be paid. Because when you talk of the minimum wage, it is not the government who is employing our people. At the present rate, we have so many unemployed. What if you increase the minimum wage now, are we going to get more people employed or not? So, we must be very careful with this. 

Yesterday we returned here very late. I drove my vehicle on Kampala Road. In fact, we were in a jam. A street kid crossed in front of my vehicle; went near the windscreen of the Land Cruiser, which was ahead of me and pulled a handbag from that vehicle and ran away. We remained there looking confused.

MR PAJOBO: Madam Speaker, I hear my friend saying that when he was minister they started implementing the Shs 60,000 minimum wage. I do not know which year he was a minister. Because in 1986, we had currency devaluation, two zeros were removed. In fact the minimum wage becomes Shs 600. After that one, the zeros were returned and then it became Shs 6,000. So I do not know when he really became minister and then he implemented the Shs 60,000 and people started leaving the factories. Is he in order to mislead this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pajobo, I do not even know what point of order you are raising. He is giving his experiences and the difficulties of implementing the minimum wage. That is what he is explaining that there are difficulties in implementing it and he is talking about his experiences. He was a minister, we know that. I do not have to say which year but he was a minister. (Laughter)

MR NYANZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Anyway, I will not attack him. I want to ask the ministers in Gender, have you ever tried to find out where these street children are coming from because their numbers are just increasing day after day? And when I look at their appearance, they are not as bad or as poor as the people in my constituency. I ask myself: why is it that my poor people do not come to Kampala and the people who look like the ones we see here on the streets keep on increasing? Maybe there is somebody who is just bringing these kids to the city to get money from our people. So, we must be very careful with this.

If we want the Ministry of Gender to fulfil whatever the government wants, we must give them more money. Even what they are asking government to get this year, as a matter of fact, it is not enough to implement whatever they are supposed to cover. So, I beg all our honourable members here to make sure that we support the report from our chairperson. I thank you. 

7.03
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (INDEPENDENT, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee for presenting the report.

I want to address myself to page 26 on social protection of vulnerable groups. The Ministry of Gender has done much to protect the vulnerable groups but I think a lot is still needed. Protection of vulnerable groups I think should start from the family unit. My colleague hon. Ngabirano has just been talking about drug abuse, sexual harassment, defilement, and the rape that is rampant in the country. It is very clear that Ugandans do not have social protection. Even us, the leaders nowadays are at a risk because there is too much drug trafficking in this country. 

We have a problem and a big challenge in this country. Alcoholism and drug trafficking are now almost a day to day activity. When you go downtown, the food vendors sell cocaine; they are selling Bhangi and marijuana. When someone asks for a cup of tea of Shs 100, they put cocaine in the tea. You find a person drinking tea and you think he is taking tea yet he is drinking a drug. The motorcyclists and taxi drivers carry a small bottle of waragi in their jackets while driving and they keep on driving and drinking; risking passengers’ lives. Madam Speaker, I think this Parliament should go back and revise the Enguli Act and also the stringent laws that deal with drug trafficking. It is very unfortunate that we even have prominent Ugandans who are in this business. Without addressing this problem, we shall not have social protection for the vulnerable citizens of this country -(Ms Kiiza Winfred rose_)- My time! Sorry, next time. 

When the ministry talks about rehabilitation centres for the street children, I do not think this is a fundamental programme because if you all recall during CHOGM we had no street children on the roads. After CHOGM, the destitute children are all back. The Shs 256 million that they used to remove the street children, was it value for money? Why have they not remained in the centres where they were put? I think we should have a comprehensive programme that seeks to make long term solutions to the street children problem. 

I know that if this government implements the social programmes like education, health, Prosperity-for-All, these children will not come on the streets. What brings these children to the streets is because they are looking for handouts to survive on. If they have food at home, if they have health care, if they have education and if they can even get employment after graduation, they will not come to the streets. Government should address itself to the root cause of the street children and street beggars. You find people who are able-bodied on the streets begging for Shs 100. Don’t they have – we are talking about Prosperity-for-All, how are we going to provide programmes for these people? The ministry is talking about rights and equity for the vulnerable; they are talking about giving the poor of the poorest money. How is it sustainable? Are you creating a begging society or we are trying to empower people so that they can work for themselves and perhaps develop the country? But if you empower people to beg, surely are we solving any problem here? 

I do not agree with this. Actually it should not be in this report because the government strategy is to empower people to be productive, not to beg or steal. So this equity and rights I think is misplaced and I would not like the Ministry of Gender to go ahead with it. Otherwise, we are just creating a disabled society or community -(Member timed out)

7.08
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the Members for a good report and I want to add my voice to all those who are lamenting that this ministry is a key ministry but I think it is chronically under funded because as we heard, as we know, it is the ministry in charge of women, youth, people with disabilities, the elderly, culture, labour and these are very important aspects. For us to give 0.4 percent - and the expectations of the ministry are actually quite high. This is a challenge, which we must address as Parliament and when you go to the local governments and community level, you cannot easily feel the impact of the ministry. 

I, therefore, want to support all those who are saying we should re-look at the budgetary allocations to this sector and as the economic performance improves and as we wait for revenues from oil, I think this should be one of the key sectors that should be supported in order for it to deliver. This is one of the ministries that do not attract a lot of support from donors and, therefore, the ministry needs affirmative action from Parliament.

No. 2, among the activities, which the ministry has planned to implement this financial year, is the operationalisation of the Community Mobilisation and Empowerment Strategy on page 12, activity (m). I just wanted a clarification from the minister on why it has taken so long to think of operationalising this strategy. I did participate in the drafting of this strategy over five years ago and to me it is a very good strategy because we need to strengthen mobilisation in this country. We have very many leaders both elected and cultural and other forms of leaders and I think they spend a lot of time politicking. They are not doing the real community mobilisation. You even get cases where leaders who have been elected are very active de-campaigning government programmes, telling people not to bring their children for immunisation. You get community radios de-campaigning positive programmes and you find we do not have a clear instrument or a clear strategy to guide and if possible even discipline some of the leaders at community level. 

When you look at the strategy, it has all these provisions but the ministry has been relaxed. I know they will say they do not have money, but for over five years the strategy has been lying down. I am happy you have now included it as an activity but I want to know why it has taken so long before the ministry realised that you need to implement this useful strategy.

The other comment I wanted to make is on the grant scheme for the poorest of the poor. I note that the committee observed that it has worked well in Lesotho and Malawi, and I also know in South Africa the strategy has worked but when we look at poorest of the poor in terms of numbers, there are many Ugandans. One study that has documented and quantified the chronically poor has put the figure at 7 million Ugandans being chronically poor. So it means this scheme is going to benefit many Ugandans. I want to request the ministry that probably you develop a paper and bring it to Parliament and all of us make an input into this scheme. If you are serious and you are going to initiate it, I think there is need for Parliamentary participation for us to guide and see how best we can design this scheme. 

I also want to comment on the issue of the foreigners who have investments and companies that employ Ugandans here. It has been raised but I also want to add that the minister should clarify whether there is a framework that the ministry uses to guide these employers because you go to a number of companies, you find even the gate keeper, the sweepers are non-Ugandans -(Interruption)

MS WONEKHA: Thank you hon. Baryomunsi for giving way. On that issue of foreigners working here, in the Seventh Parliament there was a select committee on immigration led by hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki and I remember that one of the recommendations that we made was to have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development represented on the board as one of the measures to be undertaken and also to help handle the issues of work permits and abuse of labourers.

I thought that hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki being now in the Executive he would follow up the work that he did while he was on the Backbench? Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you hon. Wonekha for the information. I want to inform this House that I have been approached by some employees particularly those who work in companies owned by Indians. I am neither a racist nor am I xenophobic but they have reported that they are being exploited and harassed and they seem to have nowhere they can go for assistance. A group of concerned Ugandans came to us and they were asking, “What can Parliament do?” So I just want to ask the minister whether you have a mechanism, whether you have a framework within your ministry to assist such Ugandans who may not be organised in trade unions but are being exploited and are being harassed -(Member timed out)

7.15
MR JOWALI KYEYAGO (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for coming up with this report. When I read about street children, I normally get perturbed because the fact on the ground is that we do not have street children but street families. You find a mother with about four or five kids placing them in strategic corners to ask for kikumi kikumi. This has been on and is still on. And then when I read some regulations, I realise that Police is mandated to arrest whoever it even suspects to be about to commit a crime. How long does it take Police to realise that these kids are becoming a menace and a national shame to the country? I do not agree with the business of saying you get them and rehabilitate them, because you are not solving the problem. As you do it somebody says, “Oh, so when you go to the streets you can get a solution?” I feel the minister should come up with a more comprehensive strategy to address the street families.

The other issue is about the Minimum Wage Bill. I appreciate the concern by the committee of coming up with a minimum wage board although that is something that we would have overcome yesterday. The issue of the minimum wage is something that we ought to have worked on a long time ago if we were committed to fighting corruption. If any of us ever asks how much a driver earns, for example, your driver puts on a suit and a tie and drives you to a supermarket. He sees you buying items of over Shs 200,000 but how much does he earn a month? What do you expect of him if he goes to do service of the vehicle? What do you expect of him when you tell him to go and fuel the vehicle? Are we sincere? I think it is high time we came up with a minimum wage that corresponds with the cost of living. 

I was formerly an accounts assistant. When you look at an accounts assistant’s pay vis-à-vis work and the roles that he does, it is very tempting. It is better we came up with wage Bill that will make somebody feel committed to his work in such a way that he fears to be sacked in case he does something wrong.

I want to react a little bit to the issue on page 20. When I move around my constituency, normally I meet very knowledgeable instructors. They are mobilising the community and the people are enjoying their lectures. Actually what they do is to normally call you to a specific place; you meet people there in a lecture but afterwards they confess that they do not get anything. Nothing completely! In fact, it is us that end up buying for them even blackboards and chalk. So as the ministry is reporting that it is doing something, I think let them go down to the ground and see – maybe the money reaches somewhere and it is diverted.

The last one is about Uganda National Cultural Centre. In the report it is clear that we have got two autonomous institutions, that is, National Theatre and Nommo Gallery under the ministry’s supervision. It is also clear that these institutions generate income and this income is audited by the Auditor-General. That is all on page 19. What is disturbing is the concern of the committee, which strongly recommends that the ministry monitors and reports on the activities carried out in the National Theatre -(Member timed out)

7.21
MR HARUUNA SSALABAYA (NRM, Kassanda County, North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will talk about adult literacy programmes, promoting literacy for improved well being and poverty eradication. When you are talking about youngsters, their programmes are UPE and USE. The adults, the parents, the majority of the Ugandans are not educated. When we were children this department used to help us very much but today we need to work hard to see that our adults get a literacy programme. The report states that these programmes have covered all the 80 districts. I do not know what they mean by the 80 districts because down on the districts we are segmented in sub-counties. 

I will take an example of the four sub-counties I represent. This programme is not yet at the grassroots. When we talk about literacy alone, there is reading, writing and the numbers for day to day use at home, in the villages. Our adults even use this in the garden everyday, in their shops, taxes, they can read magazines, newspapers, Bibles and they can even make their wills when they are dying but that programme is not at the grassroots and 80 percent of the people we represent are farmers who make up the community. 

The second point is about personal hygiene. We budget here a lot of money for health but the hygiene, immunisation, contagious diseases are destroying our families. I am suggesting that the ministry puts in a lot of emphasis and the community development officers who are at the grassroots should come out. This does not stop at the hygiene and literacy alone; we can put in the package of adult literacy and the poverty alleviation programme, because our adults need practical and modern methods of agriculture, marketing strategies and post harvest handling.

Finally, the programme can work better if we use our primary teachers who are the majority other than these people who are disabled and are very few. They cannot move quickly and according to our level of civilisation, the majority of them have not gone to school properly. But since we have got the primary teachers who are everywhere in the villages, this Shs 20,000 could be given as an allowance to the primary school teachers so that we can organise the villages at the school levels, it could make a better impact. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ssalabaya, are you saying that the disabled should be kept out of this particular activity because they are less educated?

MR SSALABAYA: No, they are not many. You can find in a sub-county when they are two who are able to teach and move but they do not even have facilities to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We made a law here to integrate all people into all our programmes. We cannot say you are less educated and you are not mobile and therefore you cannot participate. They should be part of all this.

MR SSALABAYA: I even have a disabled child; she is a secondary school teacher. But I am suggesting that in addition to those people; let us add on the primary teachers who are in plenty.

7.25
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for this report but I take exception to its recommendation on page 15 particularly as to the legality of the ministry acquiring property. In my understanding, a ministry is not a legal entity and our Constitution, Article 239, gives that responsibility to an entity called the Uganda Land Commission. I have read in various reports a tendency by very many ministries claiming money to be allocated to them to acquire property for purposes of their offices and other matters incidental thereto.

I also share the bitter experience these ministries are going through but we need to harmonise the process of acquisition of property vis-à-vis the law. A ministry on its own cannot acquire the property and cannot actually own it. Government needs to allocate funds to the Uganda Land Commission for it to identify and acquire those properties and thereafter give them out to ministries. Short of that, we may be committing an illegality and allocating resources to entities that are not supposed to own those properties.

My other point is on the mission of the ministry which I deem to be inclusive of the aspect of social development. A previous speaker, hon. Kasamba, has talked about Nsamizi Training Institute. I occasionally have the opportunity to go and address them on matters of law and others but I feel hurt to see an institute which should be actually a child of this ministry completely neglected. I even have a feeling that this particular ministry does not know where Nsamizi is situated now and even what it does. We have very many health problems in most areas that would actually not be occurring if our people were trained on aspects of sanitation, infrastructure development and the like. 

I have been impressed with what Nsamizi does from private resources. Because it is only relying on private students and the wonderful work it is doing to produce social doctors. If this ministry was to take it up in liaison with the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Finance for it to roll out its activities, you would not hear of most of these epidemics coming out. The ministry needs to look at this institute as its child and an institution core to its mission and support it with all the support it needs.

As a person who comes from an area that has never had kings and traditional rulers, my people are concerned about the taxpayer, me inclusive, funding traditional and cultural leaders where they are. I have no problem with them but in future we may have to also come up and ask Government to give an equal grant like the one that it gives to these cultural leaders that seem to be mushrooming in those areas that do not have them for equity to prevail. 

I am also worried that there is no enabling law under which these benefits are being paid. You cannot use a constitutional provision that Government shall give benefits and whatever and rely on it to make payments. I call upon the ministry to come up with a law and ensure that areas like Kigezi which will never have kings are catered for while allocating those resources -(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: I also want to be clarified because I saw in the report they are even building residences for the queen mothers. Are we going to build for all these queen mothers because we are going to have about 50 kings? Are we going to have Queen mothers palaces including that of Busoga? I don’t know whether they are also entitled to having those palaces. That is the clarification I wanted.

MR NIWAGABA: That is what makes me find this report unacceptable in some aspects because when you look at the definition of a traditional ruler under the Constitution, it does not include those mothers and wives. The ministry should come up with a legal framework to avoid mushrooming of kings and rulers. If not, it should look at giving an equal grant to those districts, counties and sub counties that do not have those traditional rulers -(Member timed out)

7.32
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin on the same note of cultural leaders. I get disappointed most especially when you look at today’s papers. The headline is about the Kyabazinga. If you looked at today’s New Vision, the Kyabazinga is in a terrible way and is scaring everyone. Today’s Monitor is reporting the same but when you compare what is entailed in the report, there is nothing mentioned about the Kyabazingaship. 

I am not demanding for treatment because the President at a personal level has given a lot of support and a great hand towards the treatment, love and care of the Kyabazinga and we commend him for that. However, as government I want to say that I am totally disappointed because last year, we were promised that the palace was being attended to. It was even captured in the budget but you find that cultural leaders are in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development but when they are planning to construct the Kyabazinga’s palace, they say Ministry of Works is handling -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that the government gave a contract to one of the contractors to work on the palace but along the way, the contractor got financial problems and he had to abandon the site. Otherwise, the money is still there and the palace is going to be built. For the Fort Portal case, you all know that that money was meant for the Commission of Equal Opportunities but somehow Ministry of Finance diverted it for that particular purpose. You all know who did it and why he did it. I thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank hon. Byanyima but I am a senior Member on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and I have been there for the last two years. I have been following the trend of events and they are not flowing the way we wish. It is with that view that I should tender in my request that this time something be done. We are being led to believe that either the man should not enjoy his palace before he dies - I am sorry to be quoted over that and I withdraw the statement.

Madam Speaker, on page 22, the National Youth Councils and National Women Councils, they are saying Shs 1.5 billion has been provided for disbursement as grants and they are quoting 97 local governments where 84 are districts and 13 are municipalities. To the best of my knowledge, we have 80 districts but here they are quoting 84. I need clarification on where the four are coming from. They are saying that they have been getting - but we have only 80 districts in Uganda so where are the four coming from?

The other issue is on page 11, 8.2(b). There is an office block that is in the process of being procured. For the last two years, this issue has been appearing in the policy statement that the ministry is planning to get its own home. When will it be actualised? It seems as if it is just becoming a story. We better be serious over that.

Lastly, there is the issue of a national library and community libraries. I commend the ministry that this time Iganga is being considered among those that are getting community libraries. I pray that this materialises sooner than later. However, concerning the 43 that have been established, we would be interested in getting a list of those that have been established because last year’s report captured the same number. Forty-three libraries were reported in last year’s statement and this year the same number is being reported so we need a list. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, so far 25 Members have spoken but I have noted the five Members who wanted to speak and I will give them an early opportunity in the forthcoming reports. 21 Members have spoken and that is our daily standard. What did you say? I hope you don’t mean what you said that there are better sectors. I think you should apologise. I heard you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I am not talking about the content of the ministry because I know that social services are where people make very specific demands for their constituencies. That is what I was referring to: people talking about classrooms; if you heard the debate today it is about the inadequacy of the budget; very general things but when it comes to schools and health centres, people have very specific demands and that is what I had in mind.

7.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I will begin with some comments and my colleague, hon. Rukutana will follow with most of the other comments. I want to begin by thanking the committee for presenting this good report and the Members for their contributions. We cannot respond to each issue raised here in the interest of time but we promise that where need be, we will provide information requested for. 

I want to begin with the issue of the grants for the poorest of the poor. There was concern here and Members said that we need a paper. We accept this and we will present a paper but I want to assure you- One Member talked about the seven million people. Of course that is about 20 percent of the population. 

There was a study carried out but when talking about the poorest of the poor, we are talking about the economically inactive poor. Whereas you have poor people, there are those who cannot even participate in the government programmes that are existing today such as people with multiple disabilities, older persons – people that even if you brought money for Bonna Baggagawale, they cannot borrow. So these are the people under our Ministry of Gender and under our mandate of affirmative action. We need to cause affirmative action for such people in order for them to be able to participate in the other government programmes. This is the group of people that we are looking at under this programme.

Members have raised concerns on whether we have a policy in addressing the issue of social problems. It is true that we have the social development sector investment policy approved by Cabinet and out of this policy we are taking a few of these issues. So, we have a policy in place. 

In terms of community libraries, we would be able to avail the report about the community libraries that we are targeting. These are not educational institution libraries, but they are under the mandate of community services. We should empower the adults to be able to access information and knowledge. 

On the issue of my colleague the shadow minister, she talked about a select committee in the process of purchasing the building. The ministry is strictly following the legal procedures in place under the PPDA Act and will not divert from this. 

For the issue of the albinos, I want to assure our colleague that we have data for all these sectors and I want to invite you to read the National Policy on Persons with Disabilities, 2006; but you could also read the National Disability Act, 2006. We have properly defined the categories of persons with disabilities under that Act and under that policy we have also indicated the percentages of each side. 

Regarding sending affirmative action of only Shs 30 million to the councils - and there is this general attitude including the leaders at the local governments; they think that the Shs 30 million is the only amount of money meant for women or youths. But the point here is to enable women to be able to benefit from other mainstream government funding. So the point that we want to emphasise in this matter is that it is not only the monies that are sent for councils that are meant for women, persons with disabilities or the youth but for them to be able to participate in the programmes. 

I also want to emphasise that this affirmative action is not only window dressing. I want to assure you that when you look at your legal framework, this country has one of the best legal frameworks for the marginalised groups. When you look at the sign language policy, Uganda was only second to the other Norwegian country and to South Africa in coming out with the issue of sign languages. 

But we could also evaluate the effects of these policies, like the gender policies and the legal procedures we have. Women are now fully participating in politics. I think this is not only window dressing. When you count from 1986 to date, you look at Members of Parliament, local council representatives, permanent secretaries, ministers, and there is that increment in the number. But also, when you look at other laws like the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, that affirmative action in education can also be counted. So there are many other examples that we can give but given time. We cannot really give each and every achievement that has been reached.

On the issues of rehabilitation, I want us to understand the rehabilitation we are talking about in the 2000s. In the 1960s when rehabilitation started in this country, there were centralised issues. Today we are talking about rehabilitation that is in transit. They only train you to be able to go back to the community. In the ministry, we have what we call CBR, the community based rehabilitation programmes. So unlike in the 1960s when we had centralised institutions, which persons with disabilities would easily use, the move now in the world over is to ensure that people are not isolated from their own people. They are only translated; they are kept there for purposes of putting them back to their original community. 

Finally, on the functional adult literacy, there were many issues raised here but I want to say that when we talk about 80 districts, it is also upon the districts. The district might not have covered all the sub-counties within the district. This is what we have noted that we may have reached a district with the FAL programme but they have selected sub counties. So, you really need to find out what takes place. We are sorry that we cannot take more than this time. I now want to allow my brother here to continue making other comments. Thank you. 

7.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the hon. Members for your comments and concerns regarding our ministry. 

Hon. Members, you will appreciate that we have been sitting here since 10.00 O’clock and it is now towards 8.00 O’clock and the laws of diminishing returns have set in. So I will not address each Member’s concern but what I want to say is that while I was seated there, I captured each and every concern and submission raised by honourable members. We respect your concerns, we take them seriously and we shall definitely handle those that we can afford. Where we are supposed to come back to you, we shall come back and debate again on how best to tackle the business of the ministry. I will now take a few thematic areas, where Members consistently raised concerns. 

The first is the employment policy. Members consistently said that we do not have an employment policy. Honourable members, it is true that as we speak, we do not have a paper called employment policy but definitely as a country we have had an employment policy. Our policy is private sector led growth. Once we fulfil that strategy, then employment is catered for. Whatever we do in a document called employment policy revolves around private sector led growth and of course government has been putting in place so many measures to fulfil the strategy of making sure that we empower our private sector to be the lead –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: I thank you, hon. Minister, for giving me this opportunity. Just get us to know: are you suggesting that Government has no intention of putting in place a document called the Uganda Employment Policy? 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I thank you very much. I was coming to that. I was saying that whereas today there is no such document, we have been revolving around that policy but what I want to say is that we are in the final stages of concluding what we shall call the employment policy. However, as I stated earlier, it revolves around the strategy of private sector led growth. As I talk, we have a draft policy which we have submitted to the NPA for NPA’s input. Actually, it was formulated a number of years ago but every year that passes, it is overtaken by events. When some of us joined the ministry, we found that we had to revise it. We have done the final revision and we have submitted it to NPA for its input. It will soon be tabled before Cabinet, after which it will come to this august House. 

I wanted to clear the insinuation that we do not have an employment policy. Of course, we have been employing people. It is true that our unemployment rate is still very high, but that advent is not because we have not had a policy. Of course, as I said, once we put a document on paper, we hope that it will address some of the concerns of the members. So, the policy is a draft and it is coming.

The second thematic area was the minimum wage. It is true that there is a law on minimum wage. The minimum wage is Shs 6,000. Of course, it has been overtaken by events. Sometime back, I think in 1999, we put in place a Minimum Wages Board. That board made recommendations but before the recommendations could be implemented, they were overtaken by events. Why are they being overtaken by events? The recommendations and the figures that are suggested every time are overtaken by events because of our levels of unemployment. In our situation of rampant unemployment, it would be idealistic to imagine that we can put in place a minimum wage and it remains relevant. So, government thought that it was important, first and foremost, to work on a strategy to create more and more jobs so that you can be able to employ more and more people. 

As one honourable member noted, Ugandans are now ready to work for anything as long as they can get the next meal -(Interjections)– yes! It would be idealistic for us to set or to try to regulate a minimum wage before we put in place sufficient numbers of jobs that will - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister is explaining why it is difficult to implement the minimum wage and he is giving you the circumstances that have caused that. That is all he is saying. He is only explaining why his ministry has not been able to implement that minimum wage.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. That notwithstanding -(Interruption)

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to start talking about the limitations of a minimum wage yet the law talks about conditions as well as looking at the wage? There are certain conditions under which Ugandans are being subjected to, which are inhuman. How does the minister now take a position that the wellbeing and the livelihoods of Ugandans are not important and yet it is in the law? This law specifies in agreement with –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Akena, the minister was addressing specifically the minimum wage. He had not yet come to other conditions. Give him time, please.

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, the law is on the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and the Minimum Wage Council’s Act and it covers aspects apart from the monetary payment. So is he really in order to just concentrate on the monetary terms? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think allow him to explain the way he knows. 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Madam Speaker, as I stated, the country has passed through turbulent times especially due to the mismanagement of the economy by the past regimes. Those past regimes eroded the economy; they made sure that it was not possible to do proper planning. Now the country is really getting on its feet and since we are now on our feet, we can now think of having in place a minimum wage as we are trying to -(Interruptions)

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to say that past regimes did not have programmes or plans yet the UPC revised recovery programme was plagiarised practically word for word and renamed the Rehabilitation and Development Plan? Is the minister in order to insinuate that previous governments did not have plans or programmes for the economy of Uganda? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know who plagiarised what but I think there were plans. I think every government has plans.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not engage in that debate but the truth is known and it is on record.  

The ministry is planning to put in place a Minimum Wages Board which will take into account all the prevailing circumstances and come up with proposals for a minimum wage.

Another thematic area was employment of Ugandans abroad. Honourable members, when this issue to externalise Ugandans to work abroad arose, it was a windfall for the country. However, it was a windfall not only for Uganda but for all countries. So, what we did as a county was to put in place a legal framework. We immediately enacted what we call the Employment (Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulations in the year 2005. Those regulations have been guiding us. We put those regulations in place so that there is an orderly manner and so that government can have a say on how Ugandans are deployed abroad, though this is strictly a private enterprise. Under those regulations, my ministry licenses Ugandans to externalise labour. We oversee these companies. We decide with the companies on the basic terms Ugandans should be employed upon. 

As I said, much as it was a windfall for the country, it became so competitive not only in Uganda but the world over. At first the pay for each Ugandan was US $1,300 per month, but because of the forces of demand and supply both within this country and other countries, the wage has gradually come down from US $1,300 per month, to US $1,000, to US $800 per month to US $700 per month; and only a few weeks ago, I authorised companies recruiting to employ at US $600 per month. I know that we shall even go as low as US $500 per month because other countries out there are ready to send workers to work for as low as US $350 per month. In making that decision, I looked at the broader picture. Considering our levels of unemployment, is it realistic for us to say that we should stick to say, US $800 or US $700 and have 8,000 Ugandans returned? I am asking this because the other companies can outsource from other countries –(Interjections)– they tried to.

MS NAMAGWA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I am seeking clarification but I also want to inform the House that the minister has taken us very far; he has diverted US from our concern, which was about the issues that were raised by the people who are there but got their employment under the old contracts. If you are talking about contracts that you are going to sign today or tomorrow, that is not the issue. The people who complained are those who got employment under the old contract terms of say US $1,000 but are now stuck there. If you agreed to change the terms of employment, then maybe you need to explain to them. Otherwise, they are crying for your assistance so much. So, please do not divert the House. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Thank you. Maybe, let me first clarify on this one because it is a very good observation.

I am not insensitive to the plight of Ugandans working abroad. My letter of authorisation was conditioned on the following: One was that the authority to start at US $600 was not to affect the running contracts where higher amounts had been agreed upon. 

Two, the recruiting agencies were to negotiate with each and every worker and ensure every worker goes abroad while knowing that the pay could be US $600. 

Three is that written contracts stipulate those amounts and my ministry is supplied with copies of those contracts to make sure recruiting agencies do not get a higher amount and state a lower figure for Ugandans. Lastly, that this was just a beginning pay and that those Ugandans who excel would be promoted with the figures revised upwards.

To answer your concern, honourable member, that figure does not affect the contracts that are running. Where any of the companies attempts to do that, we will bring such a company to book because contracts remain binding until they expire. The only problem is that sometimes contracts expire and the worker applies to be recruited. When a person applies to be recruited, then there has to be fresh negotiation. It is a question of negotiation and it is up to the worker. If he sees that he cannot take the US $600, he is free to come back home. However, to be realistic, how much do we pay to our soldiers when they are deployed abroad? Where would we get jobs to give to our people if I remained adamant by not approving US$ 600 and had 8,000 Ugandans coming back? Where would we employ them?

MR PAJOBO: Is the minister in order to say that Ugandans must be slaves because there is unemployment here? What it means is that Ugandans can be employed and treated anyhow because there is unemployment in this country. Is he, therefore, in order to say that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, this is not a government programme. I think it is a private programme. What the minister is saying is: what would he have done, given the fact that he was competing with the whole world for the same jobs? There are countries willing to take their people there for less. He says he cannot place conditions on those jobs because there are others willing to do them for less.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not labour so much on that point –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek from you is that yes, we need minimum basics while we are out there; but are our soldiers being given all the necessary facilities that are basic to enable them survive to earn the US $600? For example, do they access medical services, accommodation and so on? 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Thank you, honourable member. That is a very good question and I am happy to say that the US $600 pay is actually the net pay because the contracts negotiated include the following: full feeding and accommodation on the part of the employers; and provision of full protective gear. 

I would like to take this opportunity to respond to a question, which was raised by one honourable member to the Minister of Internal Affairs while I was not in the House. The question was about whether we have a policy to protect Ugandans. I would like to inform the House that these contracts that Ugandans have are specifically meant for non-combat guard jobs. Ugandans are not supposed to be deployed in the war zones. 

The contracts are also signed stipulating that the recruiting agencies will provide full protective gear. Every Ugandan working in Iraq has a bullet-proof jacket, bullet-proof helmet, bullet-proof boots –(Interjection)– yes, that is a fact. Also, there is provision for full treatment in case of injury at work. There is insurance in the event of death, and this is the same insurance that Americans are entitled to.

To demonstrate that the protection is so good, in the four years we have had over 8,000 Ugandans working in Iraq and only two have died. One died form natural causes and the other by accident. Only three have been wounded. If we are to compare how many Ugandans have died while in Uganda in those four years -(Interruption)

MS NAMAGWA: Madam Speaker, I beg your pardon because I consider this to be a very dignified House and I consider the minister, who is a lawyer, to also be a very dignified Member of Parliament. Is the minister in order to mislead us? The question, which was on the Floor, is very different from the story, which he is telling us. If the minister wants to tell us about the contracts he is making, he should make a special paper and bring it here. We raised a very different question. We should not be taken for granted as if we do not understand the issues at hand. Is it in order for the minister to think that we do not understand?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister did not just wake up and start speaking. You are the ones interrupting his contributions by asking more questions. That question he is answering was asked by hon. Nandala. Minister, you conclude.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think these are the thematic areas that I want to address. I want to conclude by thanking everybody. If there are any unanswered questions, we are ready to provide answers at will. I would like to say that most of the concerns raised by honourable members are contained in this document. If members can take time off and read it exhaustively, they will find all the answers. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Gender and Social Development. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have noted hon. Oleru, hon. Masiko, hon. Rwakimari and hon. Kagwera for tomorrow. I will give them an early opportunity tomorrow. The House is adjourned until 10.00, tomorrow. Thank you, very much.

(The House rose at 8.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 August 2008 at 10.30 a.m.) 


