Thursday, 25 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.

The Council was called order.

QUESTIONS

Question No.21/94

MR OBINA OKUMU (Nominated): To ask the hon. Minister for Natural Resources: 

1. In view of the current Government Police of liberalisation, what steps does the Minister have to allow private entrepreneurs generate and supply electricity in areas where Hydro Electricity Power is non-existent?

2. Is the Minister aware that such a move would avail citizens with cheaper electric power and curb the unnecessary and inefficient monopoly of the Uganda Electricity in the entire country?

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to apologise, I have a bout of cold and cough.  So, I beg that the House will bear with me. 

The current practice of liberalisation which Government is following in all sectors, is also welcome in the Energy sector and it electricity generation and supply; just that we have had few people or organisations applying for permission to do so.

Currently, we are holding negotiations with two companies who or which, if luck has it, maybe able to come here and start equally large projects like the Owen Extension that is being funded as power Three. So, there is no monopoly as such, on the part of UEB we welcome everybody and all organisations that can generate electricity in this country.  

Now, whether that electricity will be cheap, is difficult to say because; it is difficult to say at the moment it all depend on factors of supply and demand.  The only advantage they would have, which is a big advantage, is the power to sell their power to the national GRID which has been established by UEB and therefore, avoid the expenses and so forth which cost a lot money in the development of infrastructure.  Certainly, this is to introduce competition and competition is a healthy thing and I have no doubt that these would provide a challenge to UEB and end by making it more efficient. (Interruption)

MR ELYAU: Point of clarification.  May I know from the Minister regarding the electricity line which leads to Soroti up to Kaberamaido via Kalaki.  Ever since in this House, in 1990, the Minister whom he succeeded told us that they were going to repair Kalaki and Kaberamaido line. Up to now, as I am talking, we have a problem for our students who are in Schools; like Senior Secondary Schools, they cannot read.  People want to take enterprises like Grinding Mills, but they cannot take them up.  May I know what is wrong; because we are about to end the Interim period and since 1986, we cannot see light?  Can the Minister tell us what is happening; is there anything at all in the pipeline?

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I believe the hon. Member is referring to the Soroti – Lira line. Some short remedial work is being undertaken.  It will be appreciated that that line lies in the bush; well it is fairly inaccessible; and this makes it very difficult to repair when problems arise.  Many of the lines that we talk about - that we know go by the road, that is, if there is a fault, it is possible to detect it and have it repaired quickly.  In case of that line, there is always problems; because if there is a fault, it does take sometime before it is found and since that area or part of that area -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, I rise to this point of order to the hon. Minister.  Is he really in order to refer to the line that takes electricity from Soroti to Lira as being in the bush, when there is clearly a road from Soroti to Lira via Kaberamaido where the posts are?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Maybe, the hon. Minister meant to explain a little more.  If you could explain what you mean exactly hon. Minister. Order, please.

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. What I meant is that bulk of that line does not follow the normal road. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAJURA:  Yes, a good deal of it does not. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.

MR KAJURA:  May I continue?  And a good deal of that area was affected by insurgency.  So, for sometime, the area was inaccessible and a lot of installation was removed.  So, a lot of work is going on in trying to put that line to order and it is taking sometime, but everything sis being done to have it repaired. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I rise also on a Supplementary point; while the electricity bills are going up, illegally being increased by UEB without our authority and while we keep quite about that, and while the various schools that are scattered all over the countryside are going at night in darkness, is there a programme by the Minister and his Deputy Minister Mulondo? Are they are thinking about introducing another type of power which is not so expensive like solar, to enable our children to read at night?

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, there is no doubt that the performance of UEB has been improving since 1990 and the extent of shed loading or load shedding has been decreasing; the extent of interruption has also been more and more contained.  So, I would like the House to note that indeed there has been progress - UEB has been making progress in providing power on a steady basis; the situation is not yet perfect, but we continue to work on it as it continues to improve.

Now, as to solar energy, what Government has done, is to remove Import Duty on all the equipment that is involved in solar; it used to be 54 per cent.  That has been removed to make it easy for wanainchi to gradually - those who can, to gradually move on to solar energy, particularly those who live in rural and those institutions that are located in rural areas. (Interruption) 

MRS KULANY: Mr Chairman, I seek an explanation from the Minister concerning electricity to Kapchorwa. Last year, there was a survey, which the people of Kapchorwa were very eagerly waiting for the results.  Up to now, they have not heard anything from UEB. Can the Minister explain?  Thank you.

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, there are negotiations projected for later in this year for the funding of line to Kapchorwa, to Olwenyo, which will lead to Nebbi and then Arua. Another line will go to Adjumani and then Moyo.  So, this will be 66 KV that will take power to Kapchorwa.  So, this matter is being pursued.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.   Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the Minister in charge of the Natural Resources to clarify to us on that Kapchorwa line, because I have looked at the Budget of UEB for this year and Kapchorwa is not included in the budget of UEB 

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, I have explained that negotiations are scheduled for later this year with the donors.  So, this is something which we will not have put in the Budget, because wee have not yet agreed with the donors, we submitted our applications to them and these are going to be discussed.

MR OMADI (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Chairman in view of the serious statement made by hon. Karuhanga, that UEB is increasing tariffs illegally.  Is the Minister prepared to inform this House where UEB gets the power to tax wanainchi illegally?

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, UEB is a public utility; it is not a tax.  You do not have to use electricity; you can keep away from it as many wanainchi do.  They do not use it.  So, it is not a tax.  So, the element of taxation does not arise. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: order.

MR KAJURA:  It is not a tax.  So, that is a misnomer.  Now, Mr Chairman, I have explained here before that UEB is not subsidised by Treasury of any taxpayer.  You know I have asked you time and again to go to some subsidy for power, which has never happened.  So, all this money has got to come from the internal sources of UEB to service the loans; it had to put down $.30 million dollars as part of the extension to Owen Falls which should have been put down by Government; it has got to undertake the entire rehabilitation work out of the same resources and do whatever is possible in rural electrification again using the same resources. 

Now, some people might think that selling Shs94/= per unit is very high.  Well, it is very high because the Uganda shilling is weak.  As and when the Uganda shilling improves, the amount of shilling that will have to be provided will decrease. Now, by this I mean, Shs94 is less than 1 per cent, 19 per cent of a dollar -(Inaudible)- comparison one tenth of a dollar, it is -(Interruption)-

MR ORYANG: Supplementary Question: Thank you.  Mr Chairman, noting and aware that the Northern line starts from below Tororo it goes all the way to Gulu, always breaks down either before it connects home or during dry season and UEB has been incurring a lot of expenses repairing and the people in the north suffering with no power, no small-scale industries.  Is there any plan, the Minister can tell us to alleviate this type of problem by providing maybe -(Inaudible) along that line?

MR KAJURA: Mr Chairman, the ideal support for using of transmission would have been pylons but they are so expensive.  This is why we have continued to depend on the use of eucalyptus poles.  As and when the situation improves, we shall work as fast as we can to provide these more durable sustained to electricity in that area.  The hope had been that the tarmac road which has been surveyed between Soroti and Lira would be constructed because when that line was laid, it was the expectation that that road would be constructed and that would have made maintenance easier.  At the moment, we are doing whatever we can to improve on that line and the information I have is that the supply of power to Gulu and Lira is improving.  It is not yet perfect but it is improving.

MR ONGOM: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Hon. Omadi did raise a question, which I thought the Minister did not answer.   Will the Minister now clarify to us whether Parliament has a right according to Uganda Electricity Board Act, to approve tariffs for that Board and if it has, what or where has the Board been getting that power? 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Although I am aware Mr Chairman, that the UEB Act allow the Minister to revise the tariff and on the understanding that this has been a public outcry even the week or some two weeks back, people were reacting on the same thing, will the hon. Minister now take it that it needs to be revisited by the whole House so that this talk of illegal increases should not occur? 

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, arising from the what the Minister of Natural Resources says, to say that the UEB does not tax for them, that it does not tax within the frame work of these rates, would the Minister, please tell the House how effective he utilises his powers under Ugandan Electricity Board Act 135 so as to make the UEB and the country utilise electricity as a commodity for helping productivity in the country and for progress and economic welfare.

MR KAJURA:  Mr Chairman, the job of UEB is to provide electricity to the people of Uganda and the cheapest cost.  I have explained time and again that UEB at the moment has a lot of expenses to undertake both rehabilitation and expansion.  Now we are facing the future and we would like to continue on this path of expansion.  Now when you talk of growth and expansion, it means you have got to spend money.  

So, I would ask you to bear with UEB Now, you may say the rates are high and I am saying that in terms of value, they are not all that high because 94/- per kilo watt is only a tenth of a dollar in comparative value.  It is not so expensive and as I have explained, as the Uganda shilling picks up strength as it is doing, the number of Uganda shillings required because when we are servicing our lines, we have a commitment to calculate this at the rate of 7.2 cents.  Now, for the last six months, the number of shillings wee have had to produce to service the loan has been decreasing as the Uganda shilling has been improving.  So, I can see some hope that in future there will be some relief.  

On the question of power, it is not true that Parliament is the one that has the right to increase the Rates.  The position is that there used to be a council in UEB composed of consumers which about 15 years ago was dropped.  This Council was represented or it was representing the interests of the consumers and so was the Board of Directors and it was agreed that the Board of Directors should continue and that council should be dropped.  So, the powers of the council or which the council used to exercise was transferred to the Board and it is the Board that has the authority to increase or to decrease the tariffs.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Thank you, Sir. Question No.24 of 1994.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to give assurance to the House and to the people that use this route that the military in the north is carrying out constant military patrols to protect the road users on this road and we intend to continue that until the danger or the threats disappear.  Measures to protect and ensure security for Sietco Construction Company which has been given the contract to work on this road I think Gulu, Atyak, Moyo have been finalised and to this end, a meeting has been held between political leaders local military commanders in Gulu with Sietco Company.  This was on 11th August this year and Sietco was assured of protection and security by the National Resistance Army.  

In the same meeting, it was agreed that Sietco would start construction or would start the repairs after two weeks.  I do not know if it has done so or not. If it has not, I hope it will do so quickly or soon. Lastly, I wish to also mention that military escorts for relief convoys are being provided and this followed the attack on WFP food convoy which is mentioned in the question and these convoys have once again become operational. Thank you. 

MR OGWANG:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like the Minister to tell the House what steps his Ministry has in place to check on the inflow of weapons coming from a neighbouring country which really one of the factors which is leading to the increase of instability in the north?

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, in the recent past, there have been reports in the local Press that a neighbour who is supposed to be a friendly country to this country that is the Sudan, is involving in arming the insurgency causing these skirmishes.  Being a good neighbour, Ugandans feel perturbed and they are being represented here at ambassadorial level.  I would like the Minister to bring to this House what steps, what consultation he has been with the Sudan offices in Kampala because if we are friendly and we have the ties at that level, I think we need further information as to what is happening whether are they friends or they are not friends.  Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to start with the last question from hon. Marwas and simply to say that, I think it is directed at the wrong office and I will forward it to my Colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs whom I hope, will provide the answer.

On the question of steps taken to check thee inflow of weapons, I would like to assure the country that we have deployed enough forces to check the movements of rebels across the borders. Of course it is not possible for us to man the border inch by inch.  It is absolutely impossible.  No one can do that. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the Minister of State for Defence to dodge and pass the back on the question raised by hon. Marwas when he says that, he will pass on that question to his colleague when he is collectively responsible here since the matter is so obvious; has he taken this matter to his colleague and what answers his colleague told him?  If he has not, can he say, that he had forgotten to do it so that we know that he did not address the matter? (Laughter) So, is he order?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is clearly under the principles of collective responsibility that the Minister has agreed to pass that information to his colleague.  So, he is perfectly in order.  Please go ahead to answer the question.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I was saying that we have deployed enough forces on the border.  It is not possible to have a tight or waterproof closure of the border.  We have not closed the border.  But I want to assure the country and this House that even if they continue to get these arms, the National Resistance Army is well poised and well prepared to handle them.  

I would like to inform the House that, of the arms that, recently entered Uganda, we have captured approximately in our physical possession 50 per cent of them. That means of course there are others that you do not get; so which means that these arms are about to dwindle to zero. We have since then got these arms, engaged the rebels and approximately as I speak today, we have counted causalities among the rebel forces of about 90 dead.  

So, I would like the House to be assured and the country that, the National Resistance Army is well prepared to handle this situation effectively as I assured you, I think two weeks ago or sometime ago when I answered a similar question and we have started discussions with some political leaders in that area from the north, especially, from Kitgum and Gulu District to see how political effort can be started to supplement the military one.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Will the Minister comment on reports that these rebels have started planting mines and is government taking action on this rather very serious development and the insurgency in that area? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, it is true that the use of mines has been introduced in the north but again I would like to assure the House that we have the means and the capacity to neutralise the mines because we have mine sweepers. Thank you.

MR OBWANGOR: Mr Chairman, the Minister of State for defence knows that there are land mines and he has told the House that 50 per cent of the insecurity weapons have been reduced.  What is his problem? Can he tell this hon. House what is his problem entirely about the question of these rebels spoiling the peace of the country.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, I have no problem whatsoever, We are moving at good speed and at this speed as I assured you earlier on, I do not expect this problem to last for long.  Thank you.

MR KAMRON:  Mr Chairman, I would also like to know from the Minister of State for Defence whether he is aware that there are armed groups who are infiltrating the country in the east particularly from the Republic of Kenya to invade Bukwa sub-district and kill people and get away with livestock. Thank you very much.

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, arising from his reply to the effect that rebels will soon be no more. Could the Minister, please, tell us why he is not stopping insecurity by existence of such rebels now?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, on the question of infiltration of rebels from Kenya, we do not have -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Kamron. Can you take your Seat first? Hon. Minister, please, answer the question, which was put.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very Mr Chairman.  I am sorry if I made a conclusion.  I did not intend to put words into your mouth but the question of infiltration of rebels into areas of Bukwa and the East generally is a question that has been in the air; a question that our security services are very closely following but I do not have any definite answer to give you at the moment. 

On the question of why we cannot stop the rebellion now, we are fighting these people.  We are at war with them; if I could round them up in one day and bring this to an end, of course the army would do so but as you know, in fighting war, there are no fast and hard rules.  I just said that at the rate at which we are defeating the rebels in the north at the moment, at the rate at which we are capturing arms which they received recently, if that rate is continued.  I do not see this rebellion persisting for long and that is all I can say.  Thank you.

MR BWANIKA BAALE:  Mr Chairman, question No.37/94

DR MAKUMBI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am very glad to the hon. Member because he has raised this question. It is not only important for Katikamu Constituency or Luwero Triangle for that matter.  It is important for the whole country because if we were to institute a successful expanded programme of immunization and we also ensured adequate sanitation and safe water as well as good nutrition to our children, we would save 70 per cent of our bed occupancy.  So, this is a very pertinent question and when I talk about a successful programme of immunization, I am talking in terms of attaining at least 85 per cent coverage.  

Now turning specifically to Katikamu and Luwero, it is important to appreciate that right from the beginning that measles, vaccine efficacy is not 100 per cent.  That is, if you were to vaccinate 100 people, ten of them would not necessarily convert and have the antibodies; whether you are in Uganda or London or Lengrad or you mention it. This is an established scientific fact.  

Consequently, ten per cent of the children given measles vaccines will not convert and still succumb to the actual infection after vaccination.  It must also be pointed out that to interfere with measles transmission, a country or a district must have reached 85 per cent coverage or more.  To effectively control measles at community level consequently, you need to have covered 85 to 90 percent of the population. Should a district maintain a lower coverage as stated, occasionally increase in measles cases maybe, seen afterwards as it has been seen in some districts.  

Consequently, for the case of Luwero whose survey coverage of February to March 1994 was only 61 per cent leaving 39 percent of the children unprotected.  It means that if Luwero after a period of time will eventually have a big reservoir of susceptible under fives and these will facilitate an outbreak of measles as it is being reported.  There is another epidemiological factor, which we Ugandans have got to live with.  That is, over 20 per cent of our infants catch measles less than nine months of age, which is the World Health Organisation recommended age of vaccination against measles. To change the policy would result into high a vaccine failure rate among the immunised.  

We recommend immunising after the age of nine months because it is assumed that during those past nine months, the baby has got immunity from the mother but our experience here in Uganda has shown that up to 25 per cent of our babies really get measles before the age of nine months.  If you were to give vaccination below that are, of course, for those who are knowledgeable with immunology would be playing in a field where there is an interplay of the maternal antibodies as well as we trying to excite those of the baby.  So, the situation is not easy.  To change the policy would result into high vaccine failure as I have said.  

It is, therefore, recommended that a child who is immunised earlier than 9 months, vaccination should be repeated when the child eventually attains the age of nine months; but this is difficult to enforce, as a big number of mothers may not turn up a second time, which has been our main problem. Measles is a disease, which is very difficult to rid of; even in the developed countries you still get a few cases of measles, especially among the disadvantaged communities.  However, in our country, measles is aggravated by number of factors such as malnutrition, accuse respiratory infections, chronic diarrhoea, etc.  All these problems are rampant in our villages.  These factors are also compounded by other factors whose solutions are not necessarily in the domain of the Ministry of Health.  For example, raising the socio-economic status for all the homesteads.  

My Ministry has created a strong infrastructure in every district for the community to use and to protect their children. The vaccines are available in every static unit regularly: On disease surveillance, my Ministry has set up a net work of monitoring episodes of disease with a view of accelerating control activities where problems are found.  Members can have a look at some of these sites and disease picture that is emerging.  For the convenience of educating some of the Members in the House who are not only in the Medical sphere, I have circulated round graphs showing the effect of vaccination in the country.  I have specifically chosen different areas.  

For example, I have Rubaga Hospital in Kampala monitoring measles.  I have neonatal tetanus in Kamuli Mission Hospital.  I have measles admissions in Kisizi Hospital, Rukungiri.  I have measles patients from Matanye Hospital in Moroto District. I have measles admissions by the months in Kolonyi Health Centre, Mbale District, as well as measles admissions in 1983, May to May 1994 in Nyakibale Hospital, Rukungiri District.  For those who have had - I must apologise that my resources are not big enough to print enough of these copies to cover all the Members.  I could only afford hundred.  But I wish they could be shared among those who have them.  

The impression which we get is that, although, we have not attained 85 per cent coverage all over the country, the trend is downward.  So, the basic problem is that of sustenance and attaining a higher level of coverage.  What the hon. Member can do to assist their people, is to mobilise the community to utilise the services provided in their midst.  The logistics and setting up of systems and making them operational is my role and my ministry but you are responsible as Community leaders to make them fully operational in your places to mobilise the people and give them direction to have their children fully immunised and on time. 

I would be rather hesitant to legislating, vaccinating all children under five because clearly, as we know the logistics, there are areas which we cannot reach and it will be unfair to expect them to perform at the same level as those who are easily reached.  We have gone out of our way, to ensure that each district has got a radio call.  So, we are at least in contact; but when you go to these districts - for those who have traveled around, you must have noted the difficulty in the feeder roads; even to get to some villages - it is a problem and this is being attained sometimes on bicycle by the health workers.  

I wish all of you to join me and my Ministry to be vigilant, that whatever funds are allocated for Health Care, are spent in Health Care.  I have a few sad examples to point out.  Some vehicles of recent, have been handed out for the districts.  I am aware of three districts here where the District Executive Secretary is still sticking to these vehicles meant to carry out the exercise of immunisation.  These are Nebbi, Apac and Moroto.  I wish the hon. Members and I am told there are even others, our vehicles are clearly marked - UNEPI or Ministry of Health.  I want you to joint me, to Police the whole country to make sure that the few resources which have been given to us by the Donor Community and which we cannot sustain at the moment are maximally utilised.  I understand -(Interruption)

MRS OPOTI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am glad that the Minister of Health has raised the issue of these vehicles, which have been misused in the districts.  I would like to request the Minister, in future and all other ministers that when such facilities have been sent to the districts; at least the political leaders in those districts get informed.  

We took time to try and investigate how these vehicles was taken to the district, under whose care and who was supposed to be handling over by UNICEF, through Local Government and how health came in, nobody knew exactly.  So, it is important that such information is given to us so that we are able to follow up where you got stuck.  (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER: Additional information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  May I also inform the Minister that, his very District Medical Officers are driving these vehicles and not doing the work they are supposed to do.  Last month, District Medical Officer, Luwero, drove this very vehicle, knocked a person dead; even when he did not have a driving permit.  So, he pushed the poor driver to go and make a statement.  Thank you.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, the two points that have been raised are equally important. First of all, turning to the first information that was availed.  By formulation of some of these projects, the Ministry of Health comes in a bit late.  The entry point of some projects is through other ministries and we come in on a supervisory level. I wish to point out that all of us have got to be very careful especial when we are moving towards decentralisation.  When districts are, indeed, expected to manage their own affairs.  I hope that the line ministries, which know better, will be listened to, when advice is being given and I hope that messages will come through to the ministry as quickly as possible when problems arise.  

Now, turning to the abuse and misuse of vehicles.  I do not want my message to sound as though I am protecting any doctor or even a specialist or a consultant.  These vehicles are the property of the District and Ugandans.  Even I, as a minister, should be questioned if I am seen misusing these vehicles.  So, I would call upon the hon. Member to pursue this issue through the legal instruments that are available to ensure that the individual is brought to the book. As far as the Ministry is concerned, we are still waiting to get a full report of what might have transpired.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR MATOVU: Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the Minister, looking at the graphs; the measles prevalence.  There seems to be a significant drop in the prevalence between 1988 and 90/91. I am just wondering what the factors were - that were responsible for this drop there and to whether those factors can be applied now to deal with the present outbreak?

DR MAKUMBI: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I did not have time to go into detail of what could have transpired but sometimes when see such a reflection, it could be pointing towards the flow of resources.  Another problem, which I have not pointed out, is that sometimes the people who are meant to carry out this immunisation - the Health workers in that case, are not being paid.  The hon. Members probably from Luwero, will allow me to point out that I was there and I spent two days visiting the units.  I received complaints from some workers who have not been paid since March this year.  This is a serious problem because even if we are availing the vaccines in place, once the Health workers are not adequately remunerated, as we want ourselves to be remunerated, then definitely they are not going to deliver.  So, this is a multi factorial issue the hon. Member has pointed out.  We are going to look into it but we are already seeing some of the problems. The first one; diversion of vehicles and second, non-payment of the Health workers who are expected to deliver, and the resources have been shrinking.  When donors notice that their resources are not being maximally and efficiently used, they react by shrinking them.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MR PINTO:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. While, I thank hon. Bwanika Bbale for bringing this question and the Minister’s clear explanations I would like to ask the Minister of Health in particular, that also to refer to government in general, that is view of the complaints that have been raised by the Members here which seem to be wide spread, now that we are heading for decentralisation, what machinery is being put in place in terms of co-ordination of ministries at central level with the Local government and ultimately at district level?  Because maybe, he says, people did not know how these vehicles came about.  They came through the Ministry of Local Government.  The Local people and the local leaders do not seem to know quite well enough of the government programmes.  What kind of co-ordination can you put in place; in the Ministry of Health, in particular but also for government in general to ensure that there is adequate co-ordination because what is happening in Health could also be replicated in Agriculture or any other ministry.

MR MAKUMBI: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  That is a point which has worried me in particular because when I first paid a visit in Luwero Triangle, I found as many as 50 Non-Government Organisations operating in the Health Sector and yet when you come down as to what has been attained, then it is only a handful which turn out.  So, I feel that it should not only be government but we, community leaders to make sure that whoever poses as working in the Health Sector or any other Sector - we are mindful of what is being done.  

As I said at the beginning, the entry point for example of this programme of immunisation was such that while we are expected to distribute the vaccines to the various districts, it is the districts to distribute these vaccines further and pay their health workers.  Now, as far as support funds are concerned, these are also flowing through Local Government.  So, you can see a situation should have to be examined probably when we negotiate other projects. This weakness, definitely I must admit is there and we have to correct it. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR OTENG:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to ask the Minister, I hail from Erute County, in Lira District.  The population of the people there is 127,000; which is more or less equivalent to two counties. Now, there is only one Health Unit or Health Centre. This Centre was renovated sometime last year by the Germans and we were supposed to have got a doctor there but now that we know that measles is a dangerous disease and under the current diagnosis, there are other diseases that look like measles.  Can hon. Minister assure me whether I am going to get a doctor or not in that Centre?

MR LATIGO: Thank you Mr Chairman. The hon. Minister has done so well in explaining and also assuring me that he has handled very successfully the preventative part of our health.  Now, as the hon. Minister is aware, that in a Refugee camp such as the one that existed recently in Rwanda displayed off diseases like measles and cholera very fast; such would need immediate Mobile Hospital established there.  Indeed, this is done by the UNA relations dispatching.  The hon. Members can be informed that when you UNA relations team going over there, is basically a mobile hospital by doctors on operations.  We have  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Put your question.

MR LATIGO:  We have silent refugee camps in this country, particularly in Kyoga where all economic refugee people are collected.  Many outbreaks like this take place.  The hon. Minister is he aware of the following; that there is no centre of control because Kyoga is 100 miles away from the unit.  The present Health Centre has not been rehabilitated.  There is no transport, there is no ambulance at all and that people are dying.  In the case of an outbreak like this one, even if preventative control is there, but there must be a curative part to ensure that those people who are sick are treated. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  I wonder whether the hon. Member is in order to term Ugandan Businessmen who may be engaging in fishing in Kyoga, economic refugees.  Is he in order to call Ugandan Refugees in whatever capacity within Uganda’s borders?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Latigo Olal is the one who represents Kyoga.  So, I suppose he knows what he is talking about.  Hon. Latigo Olal, will you, please, put your question?

MR LATIGO:  Mr Chairman, I have explained, I will continue by concluding the following: the hon. Minister, decentralisation has come, as my hon. Friend has said, now he is following it.  How is Kyoga going to get a hospital?  Can you tell me? The other day your Deputy told me that I must mobilise the people.  If my people, each one of them had 400 cows like he has, I would have but now we do not.  Now, hon. Minister, when are you going to Kyoga? This is the only question I want you to answer.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, I would start with the question of starting of Health Units.  I wish to reiterate what I always say that, before you ask for medical staff, make sure that you have a House. I have had so many officers posted in various areas to go there and find no houses. So, let us make sure that the houses are there, and I would also request you to put your needs in writing, I do not know whether you have written to us, asking for a doctor to be posted out there; it becomes a bit difficult to know the requirements of various areas.

Now turning to Kyoga; I am living apparently - I am on the Southern part of Kyoga, in case the hon. Member does not know; so I know what is going on out there.  I think that, the community, as my Deputy said, should be mobilized.  I have seen many initiatives in other districts.  People have mobilized donor support to put health units.  We all know that, Government has to borrow money from the World Bank to rehabilitate hospitals, which are already in place.  So, trying to find funds to build hospitals is becoming even more difficult, because the strategy now is towards Primary Health Care and we are promoting building health centres, which is not too big an initiative to be undertaken by the community.  

I would suggest that, out of the levy system, I am quite sure when those business people, I will not call them refugees, re attracted to go out there, there should be a system to levy some charges, so that the district starts building up some resources, and we come to your assistance. 

 I would like to report to the House, that there are many private initiatives we have assisted to furnish with medical equipment, and even supply with drugs to start them off.  So, I would like that example to be emulated in Kyoga, while we are looking out, for any donor facility which is likely to come by, and we think about putting up by a health unit in Kyoga.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAWS (REVISED EDITION) BILL, 1993

(General Debate continued.)

MR BAMBALIRA (Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Bill, which was presented by the Attorney General, but before I do that, I have some general remarks.  We say that Justice delayed is justice denied.  The Minister of Justice has to some extent been unfair to the people of this country, not only in delaying to reform the laws, but even refusing to approve bye-laws, which have been made by some districts.  Since we came here, I have only seen bye-laws from one district, which were approved, these was bye-laws from Nebbi.  Many other districts submitted bye-laws, but up to now, those bye-laws have not come out.  

One other issue about this Bill, is that there are some laws which actually, are not good, by now; for example, there laws which are in the churches or which are in government, say for example a law which says one man, one wife, according to church -(Interjection)- yes, according to the Christians, it is one man one wife, that is a legal marriage.  To me, that law should be amended, because you might get a lady who does not produce -(Interjection and Laughter)- yes, that law should be amended, because in marriage, one of the important thing is that you should have some children. I would appeal to the Law Reform Council to contain that law and try to amend it -(Interruption)

MRS IKOTE: Point of clarification.  I seek clarification from the Member on the Floor vice-versa is he suggesting that if a man cannot produce the wife should get two husbands -(Laughter)

MR BAMBALIRA: Mr Chairman, with due respect to the hon. Member, I would like to inform her, that in marriage, if there is consummation, a marriage cannot be successful.  If the man cannot produce, or if he is somehow weak, it may not be possible to that marriage to survive, but the question is that in marriage there are two things you aim at, either you can aim at being together comfortably or you should have procreation; procreation is very important.  If I marry a lady who cannot produce, I think, I should therefore, get another, I cannot stay like that -(Laughter and Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor, is that, in marriage, there is no agreement to get children.  In fact, the children are a blessings from God, and there is, I hope I am talking to married people, and at least, some of the hon. Members are married, and I see them with this ring here, and in that marriage, there is a contract, there is an agreement, and each party agrees, on what to do, and having children is not part of that agreement and lack of children does not in any way null a marriage. 

Secondly, on a more serious note, I want to tell this hon. House, that in most cases, or many cases, if not all, especially, in developing countries like this one, it is just concluded on no evidence at all, that it is the woman who is not getting children.  In fact, it is only women you meet in hospitals, you meet everywhere trying to get tests and be proved to not to be barren.  The men just think, that they are there; that they produce children, and in fact this has caused many women not to produce children, because once your husband is sterile -(Laughter)- once your husband is sterile or even at worst impotent, because some of them are partially impotent, and they cannot fulfill their duty well -(Laughter)- then, the poor woman is unfairly condemned to barrenness. Therefore, that point -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order.  Would hon. Matembe practically substantiate the allegation that some of these husbands are impotent? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.  Hon. Members, I want to appeal to you, to really exercise restraint as you enjoy the Debate, and hon. Matembe, please make your point of information very short.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, before I was interrupted by the hon. Abu Mayanja to give me that information, which he called an order, I was concluding my statement by saying that, unfortunately, many women have been condemned to barrenness,  -(Interjection)- yes, even to unproductive life and prevented from fully realising their womanhood, simply because the men who are sterile do not even go for examinations because they think it is just women who do not deliver.  That is the information I was giving, and it is crucial.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Bambalira, please, proceed with your submission.

MR BAMBALIRA: Mr Chairman, while I support this Bill, I would like to inform the Attorney General, that there are some cases, where the management of justice is not proper, especially, in even cases, some cases in villages which are being handled by RCs going ahead to handle cases of arson, I witnessed it in my place, until I had to come in to advice them. They were handling a case where someone had burnt a house.  There is a need to educate the RCs again; some of them are tending to forget where their powers lie.  

Another issue, is that even in court, as one hon. Member has mentioned it here; the delay of cases, in courts as one hon. Member has mentioned it here; the delay of cases, in courts is also a very big problem to the wanainchi.  You hear of files getting stolen, files missing.  I think, all these are tricks to do some injustice to the common man.  I do not know for how long we shall continue experiencing such kind of life.  

I would like to request the Minister of Justice to tell us, what came out of the report of Justice Porter, I remember there was commission of inquiry which was instituted to look into the management of Justice, I hope it exclude hon. Member here, hon. Elly.  We would like to have the report read to us, because many people have been crying about the injustice, which is being caused by some magistrates, the corruption which is there.  This is very crucial because many people have been subjected to unfair judgement, sometimes because of lack of money, what has been happening is that those with money tend to win the cases, even is they were guilty, I hope we are not using the law of other countries, here in Uganda we say everybody is innocent until he is proved guilty. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  I wish to inform hon. Bambalira that, the Commission of Inquiry he is talking about, did complete its work on time, did write its report on time, and then did present its report in the full view of the public to the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General who appointed it from time, and the report has been received and I am sure he is receiving its attention and maybe a White Paper will follow, if need be, but that is not a business of the Commissioner any more, ours is closed, we are having a party on Friday to celebrate our victory.

MR BAMBALIRA:  Mr Chairman, it is my pleasure that the report comes before 25th January 1995. Another issue is that the question ignorance of the law.  There is a stronger need to educate the masses on the law.  This question of saying ignorance is no defence; I think it is very unfair.  You cannot tell me, I have committed an offence, when I was not educated on it.  Some of them do not know hat offenses they are committing, and they do not know the punishment, if the society is properly educated, maybe they can learn, and try to desist from committee certain crimes, but if you live them in darkness, like that, they will be shooting in darkness and eventually find themselves in problems. It is very important that the mass are educated on the contents of the law.

Finally, while I support this Bill, I would like to appeal to the Attorney General to provide us all Members of this House, the Decentralization Statute.  The Central Government representatives and Chairman RCV have these copies; we passed this law here, but there is a need to have this Statute with us, because it is very important, whether it means buying it, please, let us have it, because it is a very important Statute for this country.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS IKOTE (Women Representative, Pallisa): I stand to support the Bill as a very good and opportune one, at this time, I would just like to make a few observations about laws in Uganda, how they are mode and endorsed and practised. Now, there is a very sensitive subject of rape and defilement, currently in the country; and we did pass a Statute on rape and defilement, but the old saying goes, that, ‘train a woman you train a nation, and train a man, you train him only’.  

I say, this because, after passing this Statute, knowing very well having been trained, that children at a certain age; girls are too young to conceive - to have babies and you pass the age of 18 years old to be the minimum age, we get very highly educated men afterwards like for example, hon. Elly Karuhanga saying that the age of defilement should be brought down to 14 years old.  (Laughter) Mr Chairman, I think  -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, that unless the Attorney General can bring up an amendment to the law we passed in connection with defilement, we may find some of our citizens especially, before they know what goes on in the sense that sex is sometimes one of those things which becomes accidental, and as a result, it is an instinct. Because I was with Prison Officers, not so long ago, and here you find a 17 year old defiling another 17 year old. (Laughter)  The girl is out of prison, but the 17 year old is in prison.  Now, there is a problem. The youngest of a girl of 17, may go on up to Makerere, this other one may be put on the gallows.  So, unless something is done, either by inviting the Uganda Law Society, women organisations, Prison officers and Police officers, there is a problem on our hands which must be addressed.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, these ideas although there are attributed to me, there are not basically to a monopoly of mine. In the Commission of Inquiry which was et up by the hon. Attorney General, we received memoranda, one from FIDA, from women groups, read by their spokesperson, in the name of Justice Kikonyogo; a Justice of the High Court, and a judge of the High Court.  Their recommendation as FIDA was to reduce the age of defilement to 16.  We received communication from the Chief of CID, the Director of CID.  The evidence, which he had gathered around all Police stations, was to the effect that the age of defilement had been raised too high. We received information from other people, and we made recommendations in our Commission to the Attorney General, recommending the same.  Obviously, I think that there is an outcry in the country for this to happen, and I am sure that, it is going to receive reasonable attention.  

Over the weekend, while I was in my Constituency carrying out mobilisation aspects, I got an invitation to attend a wedding of a relative of mine who is going to be married at 17. I advised that, this is really very wrong, and they told me, looking for school fees is very high, children are no longer going to school, do you want me to keep this girl in my house until she gets problems and AIDS? In any case, the mother is about to die, but wants to leave this child with a family.  Now, you are interfering, you Karuhanga; you are unrealistic, and you are following these laws you get from Parliament too strictly.  What do we do about these matters?  So, I think, hon. Wanendeya’s point should be taken.  And much as we want to crusade for certain issues, let us not get out of hand.

MRS IKOTE: Thank you, hon. Members for that information, the parties that you talked about had reasons for saying that they are saying.  But my concern is that, children who are getting raped, who are getting defiled, are all below the age of 13, five years, two years, three years, and yet the delusive remarks about this Statute which was initiated by women are from our male counter-parts and so, and yet the most disturbing remarks about this Statute, which was initiated by women, are from our male counterparts.  

Secondly, on records about defilements, I think I have the voices of many women behind me when I say that I hope by the time we have the next revision we have brought here a Bill and passed it which incorporates the ideas of hon. Miria Matembe on the issue of rape and defilements and that is that persons who rape children should be relieved on that - or rather castrated.  We are physically abusing our children and so they have no right really to continue to have this ability.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ELYAU MIKE (Kalaki County): Thank you Mr Chairman.  As I arise to support the Bill, may I draw the attention of the Attorney General that may be the Laws we are passing in this Parliament since we came here are not really respected?  I also would like to take you back.  The other day when I was informing the House, unfortunately the Attorney General was not here.  My real daughter was defiled by an LDU last year when I was away. The man was using a gun with a magazine and he threatened the girl that if she had refused he would kill her.  The following day, this man was rounded up by RCs and was taken to Police - taken to Soroti and remanded for nearly 400 days. But to my surprise, at the beginning of this week, the man has been released on cash bail.  So, you can imagine; where is the protection? To make it worse, this man is threatening my small girl that he will kill her.  Where is the protection in this country? 

So, I hope these Laws should be taken very seriously because as we are going to re-edit these laws we make sure that these laws practically make justice - analyze justice.  This is a very serious matter because unless these laws are practically useful, we are wasting time to make them here.  (Interruption) 

MR OGWANG:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that in cases where rape and defilement is evident, there is almost in other parts of the country - cases where there is completely no daughter and no medical examination is done on the victim.  So, it becomes very difficult for the Courts to prove the evidence that the victim has been raped.  

MR ELYAU:  But in this case of mine the girl was taken to the doctor, duly examined, there was a form signed.  I am wondering  - I was asking the Police why the man was not imprisoned.  They said, no, the matter is already in Court; the man agreed on the case. I was even wondering one time that may be the prosecution was weak.  Last time, I told you that may be the Police Prosecution has not been very good so that the judge in the case cannot be convinced.  So, these areas must be examined.

On the side of the appointment of the Commission. I am really surprised to see that the - Rule 3, sub-section (2) which says that whenever it appears to the President that the Commissioner is unable for any cause to perform the function of this office under this Statute he may be not - by notice to publish the gazette appoint another person to be a Commissioner of such a period. I was wondering, how can the President note the inability of the Commissioner before the Attorney General?  Will the Commissioner be under Attorney General or under the President?  I was trying to find out.  This appears very strange because you appoint the Commissioner and before you finish the matter he publishes the position and then replaces him. I was asked to clarify that one.  

Also, these decrees, especially made during Amin, are still very active.  Does it mean that they are all very important?  Because I was surprised to see some decrees, although they were not done in the interest of this country.  Can the Attorney General whether these decrees are really alive and are useful so that they are still there not amended.

Lastly, areas like -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr Chairman, on the question of decrees, that have been made ever since 1971, I think we as legislators are aware that because of a military type of Government, that took place the hon. Minister of Justice - the Attorney General - the Mover who was with Amin. (Laughter) So, to me to be normal, naturally what he advised Amin may be still appearing in the hon. Mover. Whereas we as a House, we ought to reject such decrees because they are illegal.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much for the information, hon. Obwangor.  I now talk about our areas Kaberamaido.  You see during the war, the people run away and then you find that the type of judge you may be having there, it is very rare to see Judges.  But of recently during elections when I saw some Judges trying to appear. I was trying to find out from the Attorney General. What can we do for areas like those ones where you find very few policemen and the Magistrates are also very few.  That is why the laws are being ignored so that most of the cases are handled by the RCs who are handicapped by law itself.  

So, we are having the problems where you could find that instead of Police arresting people, LDUs are being used in some cases to arise the wanainchi in case they are found with bullets or guns. So, these are terrible situations where we are asking for your guidance, so that the LDUs are declared also as people who should be officially used during the crime because when they take their statement, the police deny the statement even the courts.  So, we are finding the problems in areas like Kalaki and Kaberamaido where we have few facilities, especially, as far as Judiciary is concerned.  I thank you hon. Chairman.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Abubaker Kakyama Mayanja): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like at the very outset to express my profound gratitude to the House for their constructive contributions and general support for this Bill, which has received as far as I could gather, unanimous support of all the Members who chose to contribute to the Debate.  This is good; the Bill is not controversial and as I said, it has no policy content; it has no financial implications; it is technical, to enable the revision of our laws to be carried out.  

I am grateful for the advice which I have received on various matters and I would like to assure the House that I have listened and taken note of all the various points that have been moved. With due respect, a great deal of them are not really related to the law that we are making and I may not respond to them.  But that does not mean that I have not taken note of them.  

Delay in revising the Law was due to logistical problem that were explained.  Many attempts have been made in the past.  I think sometime they were appointed somebody who is a Professor at Makerere to be - the work had to be abandoned because there was no money to continue with it.  Then they appointed somebody else.  Then the work had to be abandoned when they had reached the high stage because there was no money to do the printing and so on.

Simplification of the Law.  In spite of some misconception, it is now the trend in modern times to make the law as simple as possible -(Applause) - and to interpret the Law in accordance with the popular usage of the words.  So, if hon. members would like for instance, look at this Bill which is very, very technical, but even then it is very simply written. The President shall, on the advice of the Attorney General, appoint two people to be Commissioners.  

Now, anybody who understands the English language can understand that.  Now whenever somebody cannot - supposing one Commissioner becomes ill or resigns or whatever or anything like that, then the President can appoint somebody else in his or her place.  They say the revised edition shall contain the independence act(s), decree statute and so on and so forth.  It is very plainly, simple, and straightforward. The old way when we used to write is no longer part of the modern draft, which is in one place logically and properly arranged, but also made clearer for people to understand.

The question of making the Law known to the ordinary people clearly and honestly; this is not the function of the Ministry of Justice.  This is really a matter of general education.  This is a question of mobilisation; this is a question for hon. Members, this is the question for all thee cadres of leadership.  This is a question to have been done without mchaka mchaka and things of that kind.  When you say that ignorance of the law does not excuse you, from the consequences of breaking the law, we do not mean that you are supposed to know the law. Even Lawyers; even you Mr Chairman; eminent lawyers do not carry all the law in your head, and that whenever you are about to do something, you look up and act and say - people do not behave like that.  The whole point about the Latin maxim, ignorance of law, is that if you did not speculate that, but you allow the people who have broken the law to come and say, but excuse me Judge I did not know that that was the law, then it would be impossible to administer law at all.  Everybody would come and plead that ‘Oh, I am sorry.  Did I commit a crime? I did not know whether I did it.’ So, law can only be administered on the basis that everybody is assumed to know it.  

But having said that, it is our responsibility and I hope that - I am reading to play my role, by me I mean the State Attorney, the magistrates and so on and so forth.  There is need to sensitise people about the Law.  Practitioners of the Law themselves require that kind of sensitisation.  Even judges, magistrates, lawyers, the State Attorney, and prosecutors; all need seminars, updating courses and things of that kind.  

When funds become available and I am there to solve - the Government is actively considering and plans are well under way for making funds available to do that sort of thing. But it is a general process. All that I am appealing to the House is that, especially with regard to RCs it is I pray hon. Members the appeal to all the House that Members should take upon themselves - for each hon. Member to acquire a copy of the RC. Statute and few such like things and go and explain it to his people. Even donate it to RCII, RCIII as a donation from himself so that people know or even help in the translation.  We are coming with some organisation as we have been trying to do work on this.  But it takes a long time to cover the whole country.

We hope that when funds become available and we are in the process of mobilising some of these funds, we shall computerise.  We are hoping that after this exercise we are going to computerise and when we have computerised them people who steal files, it will no longer be profitable to steal files because files will be on the computer.  Cases will be on the computers.  Lawyers will be able to plug in and decide cases in the Courts on the computers.  So, let us keep our fingers crossed. Hon. Karuhanga informed you that they may steal disks but may be we shall find the way of dealing with that kind of thing when we come to it.  But the next step will be computerisation.  

Now, I have tabled a long list of amendments and I do not want hon. Members to be concerned.  They should not be deterred by these amendments.  Because they are just trying to make this thing as inclusive and as refined as possible. There very nature is just to make so that when the commissioners start to work they will be armed with all the powers; with all the responsibilities and with all the ability that they need to do this exercise properly.  

So, I think I need to answer one point.  I think that it was a bit unfortunate, there was hon. Obwangor.  But I would like to inform him that from 1979, when Idi Amin retired, there have been several Governments and there have been quite a number of Attorneys General.  Hon. Kanyeihamba twice; hon. Mulenga, under the NRM Government; but there were others; hon. Ariko.  There have been - and hon. Sam Kutesa and some of them did not or as hon. Kanyeihamba of course, and some of these decrees, actually, which were passed long after I had left the government of Idi Amin because hon. Members may know that I left - I was kicked out of the government in November 1972.  I was there for twenty months.  

But hon. Members may - we used to do that.  Some of these decrees are good ; they were well drafted, they were not drafted by Idi Amin, they were drafted in the Attorney General’s Chambers by Lawyers.  And you take the Income Tax Decree, after this exercise it will cease to be called a decree, it will be renamed act. But you find that several successive government have come up, it was very well conceived, and very well written, and all that really you can know is just to go and make certain verbal things are meant - are mainly meant to change rates but the general frame work of the law is really - it is one of the rally decently decrees, Mr Chairman.  The indictment decree as a matter of statesmanship - I mean draftsmanship is a very nice piece of legislation, very good. So you do not simply throw out a thing because it was done during the time of Idi Amin.  (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the Learned Attorney General on the Floor never served as Attorney General in the Amin’s Regime, that in fact I worked in the Attorney General offices during that time of Idi Amin, and probably we had the abreast Attorney General and draftsmen that this country has had.  With due respect to the current Attorney General because he is doing a wonderful job; but the late Mathias Matovu who should be single without formation, really did a wonderful job as Attorney General, and the theme that he had at that time, was really very competent and very well qualified.  I must add that. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Very briefly because I know we have got to go to Committee Stage but I want to talk briefly about the complaint about miscarriage from Justice delays about judges making wrong or magistrates about the hon. Elyau’s daughter.  I want to say this, that as hon. Members may have noticed, we are doing everything possible, we have got to tackle this problem root and branch.  They are three branches of government involved, especially, in the administration of the criminal law.  The investigators, the prosecutors and the Judges.  Now, we have started at the question of at least the Judges and Lawyers, as the House knows we are now - the government has agreed and is now in fact, has started paying a decent, not just a living wage, but a reasonable wage by any standards.  (Applause) And we hope that in this way, the temptation on the part of anybody to take other things, will be not removed but will - should be reduced, and if not that now, we have got more applications for the first time, we have got more people wanting to join the Attorney General’s Chambers as state Attorneys.  We have got people who are the Upper Class, Upper Second Class degree wanting to joint the Attorney General’s Chambers.  And we could not even accommodate all of them.  

So with this sort of development, I can see light at the end of the tunnel.  I see things becoming better and better.  But we must - the price of liberty is permanent, internal vigilant.  We must not close our eyes, we must not relax, but we must keep on these people. Hon. Members must also be prepared to defend us when we are sometimes attacked. For instance, the giving of bail is the responsibility of the Courts, and I would be interfering with the sacred principle of the independence of the Judiciary.  

Of course, if there was a clear abuse, it would be my duty to - sorry a thing like that to the Judiciary, to bring to the attention of the Chief Justice or the Principle Judge as the case maybe.  But I cannot reverse or I cannot - I can only fight - and I am glad this was mentioned, because when these things become public, also members of judiciary who also, incidentally are part and parcel of the general population of Uganda, who are not operating in a vacuum, who are providing a service to the people, they should also know, they get to know that there is something wrong in the State of Denmark. And it is good that some these things should be known.  But we should also, when we are blaming, we should know where the responsibility lies. 

As I was saying, we have started with improving the salaries of Judges and Lawyers.  We are going to do a great deal about legal education, we are working on a big project for capacity building, not only in judiciary, not only in the Ministry of Justice, but in other areas of government.  We are looking forward to a time when prosecutors will also be looked and they will know the law.  So, this process in the course of time and we hope it will be sooner than later, we should be able to deal with the problem. 

Mr Chairman, with those remarks, I would like to move that the Laws Revived Edition Bill, 1993 be read a second time.  Thank you.  (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAWS (REVISED EDITION) BILL, 1993

Clause 1

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the Attorney General has the interest that the two Commissioners who are going to be appointed are going to function concurrently. Or one is going to be administratively senior to the other one to organise the administration of no revision. If that is to be the case, it will therefore, be better to have a Commissioner, one Commissioner and various Deputy Commissioners.  Because if you have two Commissioners who are of the same rank, it may be administratively difficult to see - to have the one who is going to relate himself to the Attorney General and to b the one who is going to signify the Law which is revised for the Attorney General now to have it gazetted and so on.  So, would it not be better administratively, Mr Attorney General, to have a Commissioner and various Deputy Commissioner, and if you accept then I would put in the amendment.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Actually, I have not seen hon. Omara Atubo’s Amendment, but they are going to work concurrently, they are going to be both Commissioners, and their Lawyers.  Actually, I think one should inform the House that wee are appointing one Commissioner as a Ugandan one Commissioner would be an American.  Because of the need to work quickly, we -(Interruption)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 4, sub-Clause (2) be amended by deleting the words “numbered conservatively and.” The purpose of the amendment is to allow commissioners to leave some gaps so that when subsequent laws are enacted, they can be inserted.  They arrange them in groups, we can have those dealing with criminal law, you can have those dealing with property, you can have those dealing with the family, and you can have those dealing with children.  Now when they do this, if they leave a gap from say, if the law doing with the family ends at 9, the next one should not be 10 they can leave  -(Inaudible) and at 12 so that they leave a space for subsequent laws to be inserted in these gaps.  That is purely a matter of arrangement it has no problem, just try to make it better and to follow modern trends.

(Clause 4 sub-clause (2), as amended, agreed to.)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move also that Clause 4 sub-clause (8) on page 5 be amended by deleting ‘enact after 1964 and insert which came into force after 1964.’ Really if you just take a note on that, which came into force is wider, a law might have been enacted prior to 1964, but came into force then.  That really is the purpose of that.

(Clause 4 sub-clause (8), as amended, agreed to.)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 4 be amended by adding Clause 10 after Clause 9 or rather sub-clause (9) which will read that not withstanding the provisions - as it is stated, not withstanding the provisions of paragraph (b) of sub-section (1), the Commissioners may omit from the revised edition any act decree of statutory instrument which is in force on the 31st day of December but which is repealed before the coming into force of the revived edition.  The purpose of this is that, during their work the Commissioners have powers to repeal certain statutes which have run out by a flax of time and so on and so forth.  Therefore, they should be given power to omit from the revived edition such things, which they have repealed, and again that is the purpose of this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 5

 MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 paragraph (a) sub-paragraph (x) on page 6, be amended by deleting that paragraph and replacing it by the new paragraph 10, which is shown on my piece of paper. Sorry, I beg your pardon. Clause 5  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can you move that one you want to move?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Sir, I want to move that paragraph (a) sub-paragraph (2) page 5 that we should insert the ordinances after statute.  That is nearly to make it or inclusive, in other words that all these whether are act still ordinances, statutes decrees, can be dealt with by the Commissioners.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Now paragraph 10; the new paragraph 10 is really - the original one was reading that, this is the power of the Commissioners to omit - have power to omit 10 was all legal notices to the extent, omission is approved by the Attorney General by statutory instrument. And now it says that all statutory instruments which the Attorney General has by statutory instrument to testified as incompetent with any enactment repealing and re-enacting the enactment under which the statutory instrument was made.  

That is highly technical and it is made necessary because of the requirement of section 12 of the Interpretation Decree 1976, which preserves statutory instrument made under enactment repealed but read enacted, provided the instruments are not inconsistent with the provisions of the law re-enacting them.  I assure the House that this will give a necessary power to take care of some statutory instruments, which it may be necessary to get rid of.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move also that Clause 5 paragraph (a) page 7 be amended by inserting sub-paragraph 13, the following new sub-paragraph 14 which deals with the laws of East African Community.  Some of the laws of the East African Community, I think they are part of the laws of Uganda, and where necessary they should be dealt with just as the laws of Uganda have been dealt with.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, Sub-Clause 14, an amendment as moved by the Attorney General do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Abu Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended by deleting Legal Notice - since there is no Legal Notice which deserves to be redesignated as an Act, the amendment is necessary.  Therefore, reference in Clause 5 (a) to Legal Notices be deleted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended after paragraph (c) by inserting a new paragraph (d), which reads, ‘to redesignate any Legal Notice as a Statutory Instrument’.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Sir, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended in paragraph (d) after Act to add Decrees, Statutes, Ordinances, Statutory Instruments and Legal Notices.  That is to make it all comprehensive and all inclusive.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 paragraph (e), page 7, insert after substitute the words, ‘to the nearest reasonable unit.’ The purpose of that is a little semantic but they are changing British standard measurement into metric units and it cannot be exactly converted and so we are saying that they shall convert them to the nearest convenient units.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL  (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended, paragraph (n), page 8 after ‘necessary’ by adding the words ‘or useful.’ It is just again to take care of anything because technically the word ‘‘necessary’ can be read very restrictively. So, the words ‘or useful’ are added to that so that the Commissioners are facilitated in perfecting of the Revised Editions.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman the job we are giving to the President should be taken by the Attorney General in Clause 10 because really this is the Attorney General’s job.  In the Constitution of Uganda, the one now being debated and the one, which exists, the Attorney General is the Legal Adviser of the Government, the Principal Legal Adviser.  He is the one whose job it is to do these things.  Now, why are we putting them to the President to do? I was even not happy only that I had just excused myself with us passing the contents of Article 3 but I will come back to that if we can deal with this one, using our Rule 64 to allow me discuss something that has been passed.  Rule 10 reads, ‘The President may by Statutory Instrument approve the Revised Edition or any volume of it and order that it shall come into force from such a date as he shall, in the Instrument appoint.’ Why can’t the Attorney General do this?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Chairman, I appreciate the concern of my hon. and Learned Friend but you see, this is to give the matter the importance it deserves.  It is really like enacting.  When we have enacted a law here although the President is not around but eventually it is signed by the President and these laws which will contain a little bit of new matters we have given here, altering here, changing words, changing this, to say that they are now the Laws of Uganda would require the act of the Head of State, the man who signs the laws after we have enacted them here.  

So, I think it was considered more appropriate - the Attorney General will be quite willing to do it and indeed the Attorney General will advise the President that the Revised Edition has been properly done in accordance with the Statute which we are not passing and that everything is proper but it should be a question of the President bringing it into force to give it the force of law.  It is the same thing like he gives the force of law to Bills when we have passed them here, Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I support the amendment moved by hon. Karuhanga.  But if we have to drag the President even to subsidiary legislations then it defeats reason. These subsidiary regulations are instruments made by Ministers not by the President.  So, it is not fair.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, in fact, what happens, I would like hon. Members to understand this clearly.  The laws that are coming have already been assented to so that question of assent is completely out of question, and it is immaterial.  Secondly, the Commissioner is not allowed to do anything that would change the law, they are only revising, putting the language simple and harmonising the laws and aspects.  Now, the person who can read and approve this would be the Principal Legal Adviser of the Government.  To ask the President to assent in a certain instrument is reading the matter a bit too far.  Secondly, the President is going to actually assent to this Bill which we are passing giving his power to the Attorney General to see and do his job.  So, now why then would you want to rush back to the President?  It is the same kind of reasoning which was in Section 3 that, ‘the President shall, on the advice of the Attorney General, by the Statutory Instrument, appoint two suitable persons for the Commission of Law Reform’.  It is not fair.  We are not serious about what the President’s job is.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Attorney General and oppose hon. Karuhanga in that this is an important exercise, it is going to be the refined law of the land to which everybody is going to refer.  It is a special case and it looks absurd if the Attorney General advises the Government and then at the same time approves this document.  Somebody else has to approve, either this House or the President.  For that matter, I would like to support the Attorney General.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members you cannot say “aye” and the say “aye” or “nay” after.  I now put the question again.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 15 be amended by changing the Section to be Section 11. The Section which we are referring to is Section 11 of the Law Reform Statute not Section 12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16 agreed to.

THE TITLE

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and that the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that a Bill entitled: The Laws (Revised Edition) Bill, 1993 was considered by a Committee of the whole House and was passed with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE LAWS (REVISED EDITION) BILL, 1993

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr A.K. Mayanja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: ‘The Laws (Revised Edition) Bill, 1993’ be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title settled and Bill passed.)

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN:  I now adjourn the House to Tuesday next week at 2.30 in the afternoon.

(The Council rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned till Tuesday, 30 August 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)
 




