Thursday, 20 August 2009

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I apologise that we have started late because we have been involved in the Appointments Committee with some nominations which we have been processing, and actually we are continuing with others. That is why I am a bit late.

In the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kalongo Girls Primary School represented by Hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, Leader of the Opposition. You are welcome teachers and children. (Applause) I am sorry that your representative is not here because he is carrying out parliamentary business in the committee, but he attends to his work. (Laughter)

2.59
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national significance pertaining to the people of West Nile and Arua District in particular. Over the years, West Nile has requested the NRM regime for electricity and power, and this has been provided in a hypothetical manner. 

As I speak, the people of the entire region are in darkness. Before I went on maternity leave, I was assured by the Minister of Energy that before I would have my baby we would have power. Indeed, power came shortly before I had my baby, but now that the baby is born, there is no power again. That makes me believe one thing. Is he suggesting that the people of West Nile and those that I care for deeply in Arua are allergic to electricity? 

This is because we have been given deadlines for the Nyagak Hydro Project that would otherwise have supplied West Nile region without interference or breakdowns. We have survived on thermal power ever since creation. We have been given five deadlines and they have all expired. I have talked to the minister personally on several accounts, but still power is not delivered to the region. 

As I speak, our blood bank is in a crisis; we cannot trust the content of our vaccines, so we do not know what vaccines and of what quality are going into our children because the temperatures under which they are supposed to be controlled cannot be ascertained. Also, the functionality of our theatre is questionable. This situation is getting more desperate than ever each and every day.

Aware of the current famine situation in the country, and particularly in West Nile region, you know for sure that the limited food items that people are trying to procure at the moment are coming from the service sector, and this service sector is certainly power dependent. We had power for only three months and now people who are trying to procure food for their starving families and for a starving region have had their businesses collapse. 

As I speak, we have a double-pronged tragedy that has befallen us. One, we lost production in the last season; and secondly, the service sector cannot thrive because we do not have power. What is the Ministry of Energy going to tell me this time round, to go and tell the people of Arua District and to tell the people of West Nile; because it is two decades and six years since we were promised electricity; what is always delivered is darkness. I thought that supplying electricity to the people of Arua would mean lighting up Arua, but instead, the Ministry of Energy is supplying darkness in the name of supplying electricity. What is the problem?

Mr Speaker, we have had laws that have been approved here, and I am looking at a scenario where in the short-run we will have to ask the Government of Uganda to try and fix us on the national grid so that we can be at par with the rest of the nation. What can the Minister of Energy tell me to tell the people of Arua?

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for raising this issue. We have as much as possible kept this House informed about the problem of power in West Nile. The last time we came here, we said that we had difficulty with the operator who had run out of money, and we reported here that Government was going to take over the supply of fuel to the power station in Arua. This has now been done and Government is supplying fuel to the thermal station in Arua.

If the honourable member has not been following, we have made announcements on the local radios in the West Nile region that there is an overhaul of this machine in Arua, which has been overdue for some time, but it is not true that the place is in darkness. There are two generators which have been installed which will be temporarily used for two weeks, because the overhaul of the equipment there will take two weeks. One generator is in Nebbi for the people of Nebbi and Paidha, and the other generator is in Arua. It is true that these are not operating on 18-hour basis, but instead on 14-hour basis. Mr Speaker, it is, therefore, not true that the place is in darkness. I thank you.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, it would be good for the Minister to acknowledge that something is wrong, and it is indeed unfortunate that even the power that is supposed to be generated from the small hydro plant in Nyagak is actually at his backyard. It is so disheartening that he will lie to me that this is what is going on. That is incorrect and it is in fact untrue. I came from Arua not less than five days back and there is no power there. He is talking about two generators; where are they situated at the moment? What is this overhaul he is talking about?

Mr Speaker, I just plead with my Minister here that it is not for fun that we request for electricity; it is for the good of our people. You vividly remember and you were in the Seventh Parliament and possibly the Sixth Parliament, when we were told that the construction of the road from Karuma to West Nile was economically unviable, and today the road is bent. You know the justification properly. It would be unfortunate as a son of the soil to come and tell me and the people of West Nile that this is the scenario, when this is complete deceit.

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure this House that I am a minister for the whole nation. So, I do my job professionally, and five days, Mr Speaker, is a long time because I have just been talking to the manager in Arua. As I said, and I want to repeat it, that it is true that instead of giving 18 hours we are giving 14 hours because the generators that we are using are light diesel generators. They cannot be stretched for 18 hours. But one week in the overhaul is over and I think honourable members you have seen how big that engine is; it takes two weeks to overhaul it. One week is over and in the next one week, the overhaul will be over and you will go back to your 18 hours. 

With respect to Nyagak, when we came here last time to give the situation report on power in West Nile, we indeed stated that because of mismanagement of the current operator, that project has delayed. Government is doing something about it. We have had to send there the Auditor-General. He has finished his report. We are now looking at this report, and in the next one week or two, there will be resumption of construction on that site. What is left now is the dam, but everything else is well advanced. It is just the dam that is not yet completed, but we will be coming here to report. 

THE SPEAKER: What we can do without you again standing here is that we will require you in two weeks time to update us with your position, because you said that within two weeks you will have finished. So, in two weeks time, please come here without her prompting you to make an update report. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.09
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

I would like to present a request to authorise Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 66,900,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund project, NUSAF. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee take up this request and report promptly because of the special need for this programme. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 76/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.10
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I put the question, for purposes of putting the record right, it was indicated on the Order Paper that I am a member affiliated to FDC. It should be the Democratic Party. 

“(i) Would the minister explain to the House the circumstances under which Government allocated part of Entebbe Comprehensive Secondary School to a private developer, namely; Cavendish University of Zambia?”

ii) What plans are in place to improve infrastructure at Comprehensive Senior Secondary School, for example, classrooms, teachers’ houses, playground, to accommodate more students given that it is the only USE school in Division ‘B’ sub-county?”
  
3.11
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kawuma Mohamed, MP Entebbe Municipality, asked the Minister of Education and Sports the following questions and I have the response to those questions.

The NRM Government is implementing a macro policy of liberalisation where private investment is one of the strategies for service delivery and accelerated development. 

The Cavendish University of Zambia, headed by H.E. Kenneth Kaunda, the former President of Zambia, made an application to the Government of the Republic of Uganda to establish a university in Uganda. The application was made in 2006 and the application was granted. 

I want to add that investment in education is one of the areas of priority to achieve equitable access to education at all levels. Allow me - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at this juncture, in the gallery we have members of Parliament from the Parliament of Zambia who entered here timely - (Applause) You are most welcome, honourable members, to Uganda. They are members of the Local Governments, Housing and Chiefs’ Affairs parliamentary committees in Zambia. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is my brief response to question number one and I am happy that the members from that country are here. 

Question number two, what plans do we have as a government for the school in Entebbe? The response is that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, plans to provide the following facilities at Entebbe Comprehensive Secondary School:

•	12 classrooms;
•	one library block;
•	one multi-purpose science room;
•	five stance pit latrines; and
•	four teachers will be recruited to that school. 

So, those are the plans in the pipeline, starting with the financial year 2009/10, and more will come in the medium and long-term. 

But probably what I want to emphasise here is that the information we have about Cavendish University is that it is one of the networks of universities throughout the world where the standards of education are very high. And again, the quality of the disciplines offered have been accepted in many developing and developed countries and it is an opportunity for Uganda to share such facilities and institutions, which have already been earmarked as leading institutions in the world. 

The second question or set of questions were raised by Hon. Denis Obua.

THE SPEAKER: No, maybe first finish this one. Are there supplementary questions?

3.16
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to find out from the Minister what the size of the school land was before part of it was given out and how much was allocated. 

Secondly, the land area we are talking about was previously seating a primary teachers’ college and the tenants then, in about 1996, were stopped from operating there in a bid to compensate them and put a Government facility. To date, to the best of my knowledge, there has not been any compensation nor have the tenants been allowed to carry out any work on the land. My question, therefore, is: “When are these tenants going to be appropriately compensated? 

Lastly, as you are aware, Entebbe Municipality is a former capital city of the country; so, the standards bar the digging of pit latrines, and yet in our future plans, we are planning to put pit latrines, and considering that this is a USE school actually taking on students even across the waters. Thank you.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you so much for those additional questions. It is a historical fact that the school is now running at premises which were once a teacher training college. But in an effort to improve the quality of teacher training colleges, many of them were merged. We merged them from 94 to 64 and now we have 47 teacher training colleges to avoid spreading very thin on the ground without achieving the quality. So, that teacher training college at Entebbe was also covered in the merging of teacher training colleges. 

About the land size, the survey is about to be completed and when we establish the size, then we shall –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, it is very absurd that they have allocated land whose size they do not know and the first communication the Minister of Education made to the head teacher of the school was that they were allocating 10 acres of the school when actually the land size of the school is nine acres. Now it turns out that the land was allocated but the survey is still going on. This is the problem we have been talking about in this country. In Entebbe Division B Sub-County, other secondary schools rejected taking on USE programmes except Comprehensive Senior Secondary School. There is no land to accommodate even the classrooms that are being talked about here. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you so much for the further clarification. We are establishing the size of the land and then we shall be in position to see how best we can divide the land between the school and the university. The survey is also intended to get the title - (Mr Kawuma rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Does it mean that you know the answer yet you are asking for the answer? (Laughter)

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, I actually do not know the answer. 

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes you ask in such a way that you provide the answer. You are the one who said they are carrying out a survey; if they are carrying out a survey, then the area will be known after the survey is finished. I think the question should have been, “When are they completing the survey?”

MR KAWUMA: Thank you. If I heard the Minister well, and that it is on record that the land was allocated, what exactly was allocated out of the land, which is being surveyed? They made two communications.

THE SPEAKER: Then you should have asked, “When are they completing the survey?” That is when you would know the acreage.

MR KAWUMA: This is why I was seeking guidance on this matter. The survey has not been concluded but they have allocated. Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion on this subject, for Parliament to resolve stopping the allocation of this land pending the survey.

THE SPEAKER: Parliament cannot do that. That is not our function. I think what you do is to ask when the survey is going to be completed. Subsequently, on completion of the survey, you will know the area because allocating could be about giving one that part of the tree, an anthill, and so forth. It is only when you survey that you can get the answer. But you cannot move a motion just now in the middle of the answer.

Can you complete your answer then we move another.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you. I am meant to understand that hon. Kawuma was the headmaster of the school and he has the information. So, he should have come and informed the minister about what was happening and this is what I require to know. I thank you. (Applause)

MR KAWUMA: It is not true that I have worked as a head teacher in that school. So the information the Member is giving is false -

THE SPEAKER: Can we deal with the next question? But the owner of the question is not here and I see it is in the name of Hon. Obua Denis Hamson. Is he here? Next item then. Yes, hon. Ekanya?

MR EKANYA: I wanted to seek for your permission to raise a matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us first finish this item. I shall give you time.

MR EKANYA: Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates 
for the fiscal year 2008/09

ii) The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue 
and expenditure for the fiscal year 2009/10

(Debate continued.)

3.27
MR JAMES KIIZA (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): I rise to debate the motion on the Floor basing my contribution on the discussions held by the Tourism, Trade and Industry Committee of Parliament, which I chair. I also debate as an MP for Bugahya County in Hoima District. 

Mr Speaker, the area I represent is very happy about the road between Busunju and Hoima, which is about to be completed. It now takes about two and a half hours to travel from Kampala to Hoima. (Applause) The people are confident that very soon the road from Kyenjojo to Kigumba via Hoima and Masindi, connecting all those districts, will also be tarmacked. 

The members of my committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Finance has increased the share of our sector in the national Budget. However, we note that many officers in the ministry are in acting capacity and so many posts are still vacant. The committee would appreciate if the vacancies are filled and those in acting capacity confirmed. Otherwise, a lot of funds were not utilised in the last financial year because the officers meant to get that salary were not there.

We have interacted with a lot of people who are connected and concerned about trade, tourism and industry. The importers and exporters are happy to hear the government saying that we shall have an alternative route to the coast and water transport on Lake Victoria. However, they would want this implemented sooner than later. 

Having one route through Mombasa - they remember what happened when there was chaos in Kenya after the elections. It is not that we think there may be violence again, but because the traders really want another route to the coast. We are sure and believe that Government will find the necessary funds to have this route more viable than it is. (Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I stand to be corrected, but I am not following this debate properly. I have been here together with you for a number of years, but the way we are treating the Budget is quite different from what we have been doing. I think the onus of this Parliament is to scrutinise the proposals and the policy statements so that we come here and debate, because we have two months up to the end of October to finish dealing with the Budget. 

When I see the Chairman of the Trade and Industry Committee talking about trade without a report and then we see another one of Gender and another one of Finance, I think I am at a loss. 

I need some guidance because I sat in my Committee of Physical Infrastructure and I would like to share with the Committee of Social Services where I never had a chance to attend so that we can debate and have a good budget. But the way things are going I do not follow and I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: What is happening is a general debate on the motion by the Minister, for this House to dissolve itself into a Committee of Supply, and after we have disposed of this general debate, we shall sit as a Committee of Supply and scrutinise the figures allocated in the Budget. So, this is a general debate and, therefore, I think the Member has decided to talk about specific areas within - yes and he is entitled to.

MR BYANYIMA: But let us guide each other, Mr Speaker. I would have thought that we would follow the usual system of looking at each report which Members took almost three weeks-

THE SPEAKER: We are not dealing with the report yet. We are dealing with the general debate on the motion moved by the Minister on Budget Day that this House dissolves itself into a Committee of Supply. This kind of debate is similar to when you are debating the State of the Nation Address. 

MR BYANYIMA: So, we shall have time to debate the report?

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you.

MR KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the guidance. I am not surprised. I had the same problem when we started.

THE SPEAKER: No, you continue with your debate. (Laughter)

MR KIIZA: Mr Speaker, as far as trade is concerned, it is mainly transporting either goods to or from. As we work on the major roads, the committee feels that feeder roads need more attention if trade is to be facilitated better. So, we need more funds for feeder roads.

The committee I chair is also in charge of the Export Promotion Board -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, what I am speaking about are issues I have discussed with my colleagues. I am part of them. No. Not finally -(Laughter)

I would like to talk about the quality of goods in the country and those exported. As an individual and on behalf of the committee, we are not satisfied with the quality of many of the items on the market currently, especially the ones from China. 

The National Bureau of Standards tells us that they do not have enough staff at the border points through which these goods come into the country. Therefore, these goods easily come into the country and many Ugandans are losing out by buying items which cannot last. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable member for accepting this point of information. While we are talking about the poor quality of goods from China, I would like to inform the honourable member that it is not only China. In Uganda today, most of the people live on sub-standard goods.

If you take the area of clothing, out of every 10 men and women you see on the streets, 9.8 are wearing second hand clothes which are commonly known as kunkumula, and there is no way we are going to go about that. Even here, we members of Parliament drive second hand vehicles. So, what are we talking about? It is not only China. These poor standard goods actually are what make us what we are. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Trade. For Uganda Bureau of Standards to say that they need staff at the border in order to deal with the poor quality goods, is partly true but is also partly a scapegoat. 

If you look at the Finance Bill, the codes of goods that are supposed to enter the country are all detailed, and before URA imposes tax, they have to look at the codes. For example, in textiles, it has codes for the standard, the thread and all these specifications. So, I do not think we need Uganda Bureau of Standards to be at every border point. What we need is the partnership between Uganda Bureau of Standards and specifically Uganda Revenue Authority to be very serious not to tax goods that are not allowed according to the codes that are provided for in the Finance Bill. 

In other countries like Rwanda, you cannot take sub-standard goods which have not been passed in the code in their Finance Bill and RRA allows you to enter. The problem in this country as we speak is that, Uganda Revenue Authority has changed the policy of clearing in that now people can clear their goods and pay tax at the point of destination. 

So, even if you have imported substandard materials from China or South Korea, and you have a store in Kikuubo, that is where you pay your tax and inspection takes place. That gives opportunity for people who are bringing substandard goods into the country. 

In other countries, goods inspection is done at the border, but because URA is trying to fight the dry Port of Tororo - they are trying to make the border unproductive – that is the consequence. Thank you. 

3.39
MR JAMES KIIZA (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Mr Speaker, the point is that Ugandans should not have substandard goods. People should get value for their money when they buy items. The traders we have talked to are concerned about the threshold of PAYE which stands at 130,000. We are informed that this limits the purchasing power of Ugandans; an increase to Shs 250,000 should be considered. 

The minister banned polythene bags because of their environmental hazards but plastics are more dangerous than the polythene bags. What is the alternative to the plastic bags? For the paper bags, there are items which cannot be wrapped in paper bags. Traders would want more clarification as far as this ban is concerned. The minister should set out clear guidelines and tell those people who had already imported their merchandise about the alternatives they have.

Lastly, we are spending a lot of funds on industrial parks, but going by the example of Mbarara, it seems there was not enough consultation with the stakeholders. Before we spend more money on constructing these industrial parks, there should be more consultations. Even the industrial parks seem to be placed in the wrong ministry; they should go where they belong. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.45
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering under this motion; year in, year out, the budgets are read, but what intrigues me, they do not tell us about the balance. We always start from zero. Are we comfortable that they use all the money that we appropriate in this Parliament? The Minister should come out and tell us the balance they brought forward. It is not a matter of looking at the activities and looking at what they did and then we start passing the Budget. 

I think it is high time they told us about the balance. It is common knowledge – I see hon. Nankabirwa shaking her head – even when you send someone to buy you something, they first give you the balance before you give them more money to go and buy other things. So, I think it is high time we looked into that. 

MR OKECHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member. Over the last two and a half years, we have been imploring the Ministry of Finance to inform us of what is there in the Consolidated Fund account, and up to today, we are still fighting for that information. We have just requested the Ministry to avail to the Committee on Finance how much was outstanding in the Consolidated Fund account by the 30th June this year. They promised to give us this information within two weeks; but we do not know if it will come.

Secondly, we have requested the Ministry to tell us, by the end of September 30th, the amount of money that may have been returned by the spending agencies which were caught up with some funds which they could not spend, to enable us call those funds balance carried forward. We hope that will come, but last year it never came. It is really important that that issue is taken seriously by the Ministry of Finance. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you very much, hon. Okecho. I think that is why we should upgrade our capacity to spend that money. During CHOGM, you saw how much Parliament appropriated therein; it was a lot of money. But when you look at our capacity to absolve all that – it was taken away very fast, but the impact is questionable.

Again, we are borrowing a lot of money - agricultural sector, transport – but the capacity to use that money is also questionable, and I think that is why we are incurring a lot of penalties on these unutilised funds. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, doesn’t the Budget Act provide for periodic reporting for loans and what they have done?

MR SEBULIBA: We have everything, but most times, it remains ink on paper; compliance is questionable. When it comes to Ministry of Works, for instance, we are all aware that we appropriated Shs 1.1 trillion. We should come out on this; if you look at the impact of that money vis-a-vis the activities it was supposed to carry out, it leaves a lot to be desired. Here we are again ready to appropriate more money when what is on the ground is questionable. 

I think it is high time they came out specifically and told us that this is the kilometre edge we have been doing and this has been the shortfall before we continue giving this money. Otherwise, we should take this money elsewhere. Look at the network of our roads now. Look at the quality of the roads. Look at where they are supposed to enter into other sectors like Agriculture because every time we talk about the poor performance of Agriculture and the money allocated, they tell us that they give even other sectors money, and when you look at all that, it seems that we give Agriculture a lot of money when actually Agriculture is given less money, and when you look at the other sectors which are given more money, they do not measure up to what they are supposed to do. 

Therefore, honourable members, I think we should look critically at the impact of the money and even the amount; otherwise we are going to continue appropriating money, year in, year out. I have been talking to some of these local governments. They appropriate money for drainages, but when you look at the flooding in Kampala, year in, year out, there are no drainages. Why don’t we reach an end and say we have finished this component; let us go to component (b) with the Central Government? 

Let us try to look critically at the way the ministries, particularly those which are involved in these bigger budgets of Shs 1 trillion are performing, and the way they deliver their services. 

Going on to Prosperity-for-All, I do not know, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Sebuliba, I have many times informed the committees that the supervision of their sectors or ministries should not stop with the passing of the Budget but they should continuously monitor the activities of the respective ministries to know what is going on. I am sure that if this is done by the committees; that they continue to monitor rather than stopping at passing of the Budget, they would be in position to know what is going on and inform us as a House. Therefore, I am encouraging the committees to continue monitoring the activities of the respective ministries.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am one of the people who advocated for the return of multi-partyism, but we have a problem. Under the old Movement system where committee chairpersons were elected, committees were very strong, but under the current arrangement, I want to be very honest with you. Committee heads are now appointed by Cabinet, so when we sit in some of these committees -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Ekanya is a long-serving member of this House. He participated in passing the Rules of this House; he is also very familiar and conversant with the way and manner in which leadership of committees is determined and how chairpersons are put in place. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Ekanya to come here and mislead the House, and above all tell a blatant lie in broad daylight?

THE SPEAKER: No, maybe he is not aware. The best solution would be to provide him with the information as to how things are done. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since we returned to the multiparty system, and the structure of the current committees, when some committee leaders and members try to be tough, they receive telephone calls from ministers and from Government and their re-appointment is threatened. This has weakened the committees very much. Some ministers come to committees – (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Geoffrey Ekanya a Member of Parliament, to run away from his responsibility of monitoring and raising any matter before this august House on any Parliamentary day, under the item which we use after communication from the Chair, to raise a matter of urgency to this House so that the whole House can monitor? Is it in order for hon. Ekanya to mislead this House that your hands are tied and you cannot do anything because committee chairpersons are weak? Is it in order for you to tell everybody that you cannot, therefore, continue being here because you are weak?

THE SPEAKER: I think what he was saying is that he prefers the Movement system to a multiparty system. I think this is what he was saying.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, as you authorise amendment of the Rules, I would think that one of the areas that this House needs to consider is for the members of the committee to elect a chairperson. That will make a committee strong and the committee will be more vigilant, and there will be more monitoring.

What I am saying is true. For example, the chairperson of the Budget Committee - and I am a member there. For the last one year, we have been asking Ministry of Finance to comply with the Budget Act by submitting the quarterly report but the Minister of Finance said, “I will respond.” When we tried to put our feet down by blocking a certain item on the Vote-on-Account last time, because Shs 15 billion could not be accounted for, which money was going to Quality Chemicals, members were intimidated. So, I want to beg that you see how we can strengthen committees so that we are effective in serving this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what you should know is that currently, the Committee on Rules is reviewing the Rules. You rather go there, present your views so that maybe Rules are amended to be more effective. (Mr Sebuliba rose_)

Before hon. Sebuliba resumes the floor, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Apere Primary School. You are welcome.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I want to add my voice to what is being discussed. When you talk of monitoring, for all of you to monitor, means to leave Kampala and move in the rural areas, and this is the oversight role. We would want to do it, but how do you expect a Member of Parliament to sit in those old coasters - and even the new ones that Parliament bought are very uncomfortable. We would want to be treated like members of Parliament. Let the Parliament buy good vehicles that suit members of Parliament so that we can do the oversight role. Otherwise - look, when you go to this parliamentary compound, every Member of Parliament has a four wheel drive; a comfortable vehicle. We try to do it, but for Parliament to continue hiring these old coasters is unacceptable to us really.

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, you can see the problems we have. Yes, I think one of these days you should organise a sitting where only members of Parliament are there just to bring out their grievances and we see what is limiting us from being very efficient in our oversight functions. 

Hon. Ekanya and hon. Byanyima have brought it out and many other Members could have a lot of sentiments about our performance. I think you should organise a kind of retreat for members of Parliament only and then we bring out the impediments that are hampering our oversight functions. 

As I wind up, yesterday the Minister of Health came and talked about issues of hunger, and somewhere also the Minister of Education talked about the increment of school fees in tertiary institutions. I think, why we are not getting out of the vicious circle of poverty is because we are not addressing issues well. 

If you look at the policy on NAADS vis-à-vis what we have now, Prosperity-for-All, these came out of the fact that our people are poor. Much as there was this economic growth as brought out by the Minister of Finance and Government, they came out with those noble ideas because the people were seen to be wallowing in abject poverty. 

However, it defeats the purpose when we are trying to fight poverty, with all these dogmas provided by Government, while at the same time, before we even pass the Budget, they are increasing school fees for the tertiary institutions by about 40 percent. It is impacting greatly on the people who don’t have money. The poor people we are trying to raise above the poverty threshold are the very ones who are being affected. Therefore, if we continue milking society, especially the wretched of this earth here in Uganda, they are not going to actively participate in the development of the economy of this country. 

Therefore, when you talk about these increments and we bring about these policies in finance, we should be aware of the impact they are going to have on our society. That is why I was surprised by my colleague hon. Mallinga, when he said that if you suffer from a head injury and you die, for us we conclude that you have died from a head injury, yet if you look at those areas that have been hit by famine, the people there are taking AIDS drugs but for those drugs, you are supposed to eat. Therefore, a doctor cannot come and say you have died from AIDS. That will be treating the symptoms as you would have died of hunger. 

What am I trying to say? Let us come out with policies that are favourable to our people, and that will help the people of this country get out from where they are in the poverty doldrums and elevate them to a threshold where they can actively participate in the economy of this country. Otherwise, the base which is being taxed will continue to constrict and become narrower while we sit in Parliament, especially the ministers, and continue purchasing heavy vehicles amidst all this hullabaloo. The people will feel that we are not in for them and the budget will continue to rotate around the higher class, and it will be seen for only the members of Parliament, particularly the ministers. 

Therefore, I appeal that when you are bringing such motions and such policies regarding financial matters here, we should look at all the dimensions of the economy of this country, but particularly the people who are paying taxes and the wretched of this earth. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us stick to the time we gave. We agreed on six minutes.

4.01
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will talk about two items, which were emphasised during the Budget Speech by the Minister. 

One is about our national referral hospital Mulago. In my considered opinion, I greatly defer with what was stated in the Budget Speech, where they informed us about public-private partnership, when it comes to Mulago Hospital. By public-private partnership, I understand that this is where Government is planning to co-partner or is planning to have a kind of arrangement where other private partners are going to be involved in the running of our only national referral hospital. 

My view is that, since it is the only national hospital that we have, and we have been borrowing a lot of money and funding various sectors, I believe that this country can do enough as a Government without involving other private partners to run our only national referral hospital to the best standard. This is because if we involve other partners then it means that everybody going to Mulago will have to pay. 

As we speak, when you go to Intensive Care at Mulago and spend a night there, you pay a minimum of UShs 400,000. This is before it goes to PPP. In my opinion, I greatly believe that our Government can do more to facilitate Mulago Hospital so that it remains our only national hospital. 

Furthermore, other national referral hospitals in other regions should be treated with the urgency that they require, especially in terms of funding. I believe that no country can really prosper without looking at its health sector. If we continue funding other referral hospitals in other regions, definitely we shall go a long way in ensuring that we have a healthy nation. I believe that the government can be in position to do that if we prioritise our needs.

Secondly, when it comes to agriculture, we all know that it is the backbone of our economy, and there is no doubt that almost 80 percent of Ugandans get their living out of it. But when you scrutinise the Budget of 2009/10, definitely the agriculture sector has not been catered for to the greatest expectations.

Since we are aware that 80 percent of the population depends on agriculture, and right now we are crying of famine across the country, I would have expected the Ministry of Agriculture to come with a well specified programme for irrigation schemes in our rural areas. We are requesting for a loan so that we can put in place a system for people in rural areas to have access to irrigation schemes. There is no way we can depend on rains; it is high time we thought of having a lot of money for irrigation schemes in the agriculture sector.

Finally, Prosperity-for-All. I believe this arrangement must be redefined so that we try as much as possible to sensitise the public about what we mean by Prosperity-for-All.

Because in our various local languages, if you speak about Prosperity-for-All, then you are kind of telling everybody that you are going to become rich tomorrow or the other day. If we, for instance, ensure that our health sector is perfect - not only in having structures, but in terms of staffing and having drugs. If we try to assist farmers, especially by extending irrigation schemes and other facilities to them, then we are trying to ensure that everybody is prospering and I believe that should be our target.

Finally, on behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, allow me extend my best wishes to you, honourable colleagues and the entire Muslim community, as we start the holy month of Ramadhan, which starts either tomorrow or Saturday. Thank you very much.

4.08
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is my strong opinion that it is in our own interest in the Opposition, to ensure that the NRM keeps a very strong and vibrant economy, so that by the time we take charge, we do not inherit a bankrupt economy as they did in 1986. Trends show that Uganda is not doing as well, when compared to the countries neighbouring us. Uganda is not doing as well as Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania. (Interjections) Yes, whoever has got information to the contrary, can lay it on Table, but I am speaking as a very informed and well travelled Member of Parliament.

Our economy would have been one of the best in the region after 23 years of relative stability, but one of the biggest problems we have faced as a nation is that we do not seem to be following a clear economic development model. For a long time, Government has largely depended on experiments. [Ms Nankabirwa: “I am seeking clarification”] I will not grant it to you. You will have your time to contribute; or if you have something useful to add, you will seek opportunity from the Speaker to contribute. (Laughter)

This economy has largely depended on so many experiments, and whenever we experiment, the country loses a lot of resources. All of us know and I do not want to get into that, the story from barter trade to privatisation now. I have heard the President himself making statements regretting the advice given by the World Bank. You know for sure that when we decided to adopt Structural Adjustment Programmes, we opened our economy and we swallowed all those policies hook, line and sinker, and at the end of the day, we are not doing as well as we are supposed to be.

I would now like to talk about the Energy sector. All over the world, serious and patriotic governments cannot allow their energy sectors to be developed by private hands, because you know that the sector needs big and long-term investments. 

A private investor in energy wants to make quick money and quick profits and, therefore, cannot meet the requirement of developing a sector like this one. And, all of us are aware that Energy is the engine of development; electricity is the engine of the economy. Today we are facing a very serious crisis in our Energy sector because in the first place, our policy on that was about experimentation.

I would like to say that along the way, in due course, I will be bringing to Parliament a Private Member’s Bill urging Government to pass a motion to reconsider re-nationalisation of  particularly the electricity sector. We need re-nationalisation of particularly the Energy sector, and with most regard to electricity because there is no way we are going to leave this important tool of development in private hands, who are charging exorbitantly, and are who are not contributing to investment and development of that very key sector.

Mr Speaker, our economy would be doing better were it not for corruption. Even in his speech during Budget Day and during the State of the Nation Address, the President admitted that corruption is a cancer and it is the remaining war that the National Resistance Movement has embarked on. 

Corruption has led to a decline of the economy; corruption has led to building a very big gap between the rich and the poor in Uganda today; corruption has contributed to building two worlds in Uganda today. In Uganda today, we have got the so rich and the so poor and when you investigate the filthy rich, you will realise that these people have had a connection to either the government or the army, or they have got a very long-term record of having been in the bush –(Member timed out_).

THE SPEAKER: This is technology -(Laughter) 

4.16 
MR HARRY KASIGWA (FDC, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague hon. Oduman for presenting a well-thought response to the Minister of Finance. I would also like to reservedly thank the Minister of Finance for ultimately discovering that to transform the population in Uganda, we have to develop and modernise agriculture. I say ‘reservedly’ because it has taken 20 years or so for the NRM Government to realise that four out of every five families live on agriculture. That is stated by the minister in her speech on page 14 when she says “…a recent research discovered that four out of five families depend on agriculture.” 
	
That attitude of not giving agriculture what it deserves has had serious knock-on effects – negative at that – on the sector, and these include and are not limited to: 

•	There has been little investment in research and development and that is a fact.
•	There have been very insignificant levels of mechanisation of the sector, because if you asked how many tractors we have in Uganda today, I do not think the Minister would tell you how many they are. But I do not think there are more than 500 tractors in this country, yet we are an agricultural state.
•	It has led to land fragmentation. 
•	It has led to poor rural work ethics. When you go to the villages – for those who represent rural constituencies – you will realise that people basically depend on handouts. They are basically politicking as a result of us neglecting the agricultural sector. 
•	There has been a total disorientation of the minds of our peasants, but above all, it has led to landlessness. 

Where I come from in Busoga, youths are selling their valuable land to go and buy boda bodas because we have neglected the sector. They are being duped into building small houses in the urban centres, and they are selling off the land because they do not know the value of that land.

When I looked at the proposed initiatives that the ministry intends to put in place to address the inequities in the agricultural sector, I discovered that there is a huge problem. One is that these initiatives that are mentioned are not new. They have been implemented, but in varying proportions, and that explains why our agricultural sector only grows by 2.6 percent per annum. It is ridiculous that it can only grow at that rate yet our annual population growth rate, I think, rose to 3.6 percent. I think we are sitting on a time bomb.

The other observation I would like to make is that the budgetary provision that has been made for the Agricultural sector of Shs 169 billion, if put against the proposals that the minister is making in this budget, there is no doubt that the result would be very insignificant and there will be no strides and you will not realise your “Prosperity-for-All” propaganda.

Having said that, I would like to propose that it is our duty to help Government; it is our duty to help the Ministers of Agriculture and Finance. I would like to propose that the ministry comes up with a detailed statement of the proposals for us to debate and chart a way forward on how to develop the Agricultural sector. Yes, the resource envelope could be very limited, but I think we should try to steer our resources in a direction that will help us. 

In addition, I do appreciate Government’s efforts of setting aside Shs 30 billion for lending at 10 percent for the agro-processors, but we have seen this happen; we have had billions of money set aside to no avail. So, the question is, how are we going to equitably access this money across this country? I think as a matter of policy, we should debate that. How is a man in Busoga going to access this money here? Isn’t it going to be retained amongst the Madhivanis, the Mehta’s and the Sudhirs of this world, because we should realise that banks in Uganda are lending against cash flows. How do you expect a man in Adjumani or Moyo to have built those cash flows to be able to access these monies? (Member timed out_)

4.22 
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech and the responses that were given by the Shadow Minister for Finance. I limit myself to two things, the first being the welfare of the civil servants in this country. I look at the teachers and the Police officers in terms of accommodation, and I look at the prison quarters all over the country and my heart bleeds. Some of the Police officers are residing in what remained of the toilets of the good old days.

Each time we allocate money – I do not know whether it is an oversight or for whatever reason – the Police have never been thought of, just as accommodation for teachers.

How about the female teachers in rural districts, who ride ten miles to go and teach in schools where they have been posted just because they cannot get accommodation there? What does Government think about this? At the end of the day, left and right, we see Government land being sold. It is time Government put its priority on the civil servants. How can a teacher get a salary of Shs 200,000 when tuition fees at universities is over Shs 1,000,000 with over Shs 460,000 for HSC for one child to be in a credible school, which can enable it get good grades for Government sponsorship? 

How about the nurses? Every time you go to a clinic, your minimum bill will be Shs 40,000. I would like to say it is time Government thought about the welfare of civil servants. We are not going to continue milking the cows that we do not give water or that we do not feed, yet at the end of the day, we expect something from them. No wonder that is why there is rampant corruption. When a civil servant gets a chance of laying feeble hands over any money, they make sure they eat a frog and bet me, they land on a juicy one.

That takes me to the second issue, which is corruption. In both the Budget and State of the Nation Address, the issue of corruption was vehemently brought out. However, how Government intends to tackle that corruption is a debate for another day.

In discussing this issue, I will restrict myself to the district that I represent; it will be in relation to the distribution of food, an exercise that has just ended.

In the 7 August 2009 Daily Monitor, the Office of the Prime Minister released the distribution of Food Aid, part of which was supposed to go to Kaberamaido. That food was supposed to have been given to 97 primary schools with Government claiming to have released 1738 bags of 100kgs of maize floor. 

However, when I talked to the district chairperson, I was told that Kaberamaido District primary schools received only 260 bags of posho. I was also told that over 1478 bags were stolen. This distribution was supposed to have gone on the 23rd and 30th of July – the Prime Minister’s Office is one of the most respected offices in this country. But if we have this vice at that level; think about the lower offices. At the end of the day, people continue to die of hunger. Food leaves Kampala, but does not reach the intended beneficiaries. 

While that goes on, Government claims to have spent Shs 9,927,360,000 on buying this food. Where is the food? Kaberamaido received only two consignments with not more than 200 bags of beans, posho or flour. Where is the food? We cannot continue stealing from even the people who are dying of hunger. Are we doing justice to this country? This has to honestly stop –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ibi. I have stood up because I am touched by her presentation. In supporting her, I would like to suggest that this issue should be investigated. If food was procured, we have to make sure that food reaches the beneficiaries, because Government does not sit to buy food for others to steal it. 

This issue should not stop here. The IGG or any other responsible office must take it up urgently given the fact that people are dying of hunger. How can Government spend money on such an important programme and the food just gets diverted. How can Government divert money from other programmes to save our brothers and sisters by giving food - if what she is saying is true, that only 200 bags reached Kaberamaido. An explanation has to be given with investigations conducted. (Applause)

MS IBI: I rest my case, Mr Speaker. Thank you, very much.

4.29
MR LOUISE OPANGE (Independent, Palisa County, Palisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me, in contributing to this motion, to raise certain issues that will hopefully make the budgeting process very effective in this country.

The policy of education in Uganda is one of the best in Africa. However, there are issues that are trying to affect it through the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

When you look at the seed secondary schools that were tendered from the central government, you will realise that in most of them, construction has been abandoned by the contractors. When we did an investigation in Pallisa after visiting some of the sites, we were told that all the money for the construction of seed secondary schools had been paid out to the contractors. Our further inquiries showed that the contractors who took up the tenders have already left the sites.

So, my question is, if for example, the seed secondary school is going to be constructed in a rural setting and there are companies in that area that can do a good work, why not to let such construction companies take up the tender to guard against contractors running away from the sites?

Mr Speaker, when you go to Pallisa, you realise that most of the contractors are actually key people in Government; some of them are presidential advisors – it is now a shame that some of them have abandoned construction sites like the one at Gogonya S.S.S. where two blocks have not been roofed, yet all the money was released to the contractor. In Apopong S.S., two classroom blocks have not been roofed – you might find that in the Ministry records they could be saying the schools have been completed.

The other thing is the issue of -(Member timed out_)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Opange for giving way. I want to seek clarification. You have asserted that there are presidential advisers involved in construction projects in some areas in the country, and that they have abandoned work. 

The clarification I would like to seek is that is it possible for you to provide more information on the uncompleted works and those behind these projects so that as Government, we can be in a position to follow up on this? Thank you.

MR OPANGE: Mr Speaker, to provide information is the mode of transparency in this country. But I feel, for purposes of security, I would provide this information to you and to the Ministry of Education so that you follow up, and if you do not follow up, I will definitely come and give the information to the committee of Parliament so that they do the needful.

The other thing is that, Ministry of Education entered into partnership with private investors for purposes of providing Universal Secondary Education in this country, and these private investors have done a good job. Unfortunately, the release of funds is not forthcoming. The other term has ended without some money being released. 

Most of these private schools do not have any source of funding, except the revenue from the Ministry of Education and the private students. So, it is necessary for this Parliament to take it as a priority to see that Ministry of Education is facilitated so that they give effective services to this country.

Also regarding that sector, is that most of the community secondary schools are now asking what has happened to the policy of grant aiding of these community schools which people are ready to give to the government -(Interruption)- possibly, you will respond when it is your time. Now my time is running out. 

So, we need the issue of grant-aiding of the community schools because the community members are ready to give the schools to the government, and managing a community school, they feel, is very expensive for them. 

The other issue concerns the health sector. We have to be serious in this country. We should not be shy to talk about these health issues. Health is a public good and must be invested in heavily by the government. 

I urge members of Parliament to help this Ministry to get the money so that the hospitals - when you go to Pallisa the electricity is not there; the electrical wiring is faulty; the toilets are blocked and when you are admitted, you go with a tadooba. So, this one should be addressed such that we get good things for these people of Uganda.

Also, the issue of electronic voting in this Parliament must be taken seriously. We have to look for money as soon as possible to get electronic voting in this Parliament. The advantage of electronic voting is that it is more objective than subjective. Because, if, for example, there is a contentious issue in this Parliament and there is electronic voting, you will definitely get quality results other than this suppression from the Chief Whips. So, we should actually identify the funds so that we look for these machines and install them in this House so that we get efficient service. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.36
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for ICT from whom we received a letter promising that we are going to have computers in some of our secondary schools, and that we should be in charge of launching them. That gives us political mileage. 

I want to call upon all the other ministries that when you have a programme, involve the members of Parliament so that we take charge, and help us to monitor these programmes. So, I want to thank, Hon. Aggrey Awori, for this initiative. 

I want to make my statement in form of questions. We passed the National Forestry Authority Act, but to my surprise, about three years ago, the President issued an executive order suspending part of the Act, and that has affected the National Forestry Authority in terms of accessing donor funds, and in terms of tree planting in this country. I want to know, when will that executive order be lifted?

Secondly, sometime back, in the last Parliament, we passed a loan for the computerisation of land registry and building offices, but most of this activity has been abandoned. I was in Mukono about a month ago and the contractor abandoned the work. We were supposed to have a land registry in the East, but nothing is going on. What is happening?

Regarding the commercial laws, the Minister of Finance in the Budget Speech, promised that we were going to have some of the commercial related laws introduced. When shall we have these pieces of legislation so that we pass them on time?

The petrol sector: I would like to know from the Ministry of Energy, who is in charge of licensing petrol stations. If you move in this city, you find most of the petrol stations’ pumps are by the roadside; in front of people’s doors and in front of people’s homes. They are blocking roads. 

One time, somebody told me that if this was the era of Amin they would have used their trucks to knock some of these petrol pumps off the road. And, it is unfortunate, according to intelligence, that most of these petrol pumps which are by the roadside are owned by foreigners. If somebody lit one of them you would find that the city would be on fire.

So, who is in charge? When will the Minister publish the licensed petrol stations and the pumps which are supposed to serve the public so that we get to know those illegal ones and they are closed? When will the ministry in charge of this sector do that?

On the issue of railways, last year, the Ministry of Works and Transport provided money in the budget for rehabilitating the railway network between Tororo and Northern Uganda, and between Kampala and Kasese. What has happened with this programme? How far has the work gone and when will the work be completed?

Governance 

In the Political Organisations Act, there is a provision for the Minister of Justice to bring a regulation on how political parties can interact. When shall we have that regulation here so that we discuss and provide for a framework for political parties to interact and discuss issues?

Still on governance, why is it that the government has provided very little money for the Electoral Commission for preparation for the elections of 2011? How shall we have a free and fair election if the money is not being provided?

I have also seen in the statement of the Minister that the Cabinet is coming up with a policy on public and private partnership. Can we receive a copy of the study of this new reform because as we speak, we are still paying money to Mehta as a result of the public-private partnership of the Obote Government. Recently, during CHOGM, we advanced money to Munyonyo investment – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Ekanya for giving way. In Mehta, there was no public-private partnership; what was there was that Government of Uganda was supposed to get some shares in that company. Unfortunately, it never took the shares. So, these Indians went and costed the shares of 1980 at the exchange rate in dollars of 1980, yet the company law says that, “If you give shares and somebody does not take them you forfeit them”. So the public private partnership with Mehta, UGMA Cable, is generally a criminal thing. People are siphoning money in the name of it. 

MR EKANYA: Exactly, we were involved in investigating that matter. Recently, we were in the US and a British expert said that the concept of Public and Private Partnership first started in UK, but because the government lost a lot of money, it was abandoned. Why is Government going to this dead monster?

I want to call upon the honourable members of Parliament that we should endorse the banning of plastic bags and fridges; it is something that is overdue. 

On the issue of domestic arrears, last year Government provided Shs 500 billion to cater for domestic arrears. I see that in this Budget, there are domestic arrears of Shs 729 billion that Government is still talking about. Who is building the head of this monster? (Member timed out_)

4.43
MAJ GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this motion, as we prepare to talk about the different budgets, I would like to appeal to members of Parliament that in our supervisory role, we start from this fiscal year as members of Parliament because we are the ones who have the details of the monies that are going to be distributed to every ministry; to every local government. We are privy and authorised to question anybody, and bring them to book when they do not do as planned in our budgets. 

Mr Speaker, it has been established that much of the corruption starts at the budgeting stage. It has been established that the next step in corruption is at the planning stage in the districts. It has also been established that it goes to the implementation stage in the lower areas, by democratising and spreading money around to reach every corrupt pocket. In the process, you find there is no impact on the ground for the work that was meant to be done, according to the Budget.

I want to take this opportunity to appeal to members of Parliament that we are the ones with the responsibility of supervising all those governments; all those public officials, and we have the capability to supervise them at every stage until the village level. 

I, therefore, would like to appeal that as we look through these budgets, vote by vote, we should disseminate this information to all the relevant people who receive this money, and keep doing it regularly so that people are first of all aware of what they should receive. 

We should also inform those who are supposed to take action that we are not only watching, but that we are organised under the Parliamentary Volunteers Anti-corruption Campaign, to which 165 Member of Parliament have registered, and we meet every Wednesday at 4.00 around Parliament. 

Next week on Wednesday, we are going to receive testimonies of some of the members of Parliament who have fought corruption in their constituencies. I appeal to all of you to attend. You will hear the details of how money is corruptly used in the different areas at different levels. 

Mr Speaker, my second point in relation to our plans for this year is about strengthening our funding towards very urgent issues, especially Malaria. I will bring it up when it is time for Ministry of Health. But I would like to alert you that I have seen nothing to that effect; in line with the resolution we passed in Parliament here that Government should ensure that we put aside money for Malaria, which is now killing from 320 to 350 people per day while we are seated here enjoying ourselves. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.47
COL.TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just to add on the same motion – fortunately, the Minister for Education is here. I have been looking at the Budget and I have not found any scholarships for Ugandan students to go and do rare professions outside the country. 

The President in 1986/87 sent a few students outside the country to study especially subjects related to oil exploration. The students were not from Nyabushozi; some of them may have come from Elgon Region. 

However, the Japanese, for the last 40 to 50 years, send students every year to the UK and USA for the first degrees to learn the languages and the rare sciences, which the Japanese don’t have. Even the Arab countries themselves, do sponsor students for the first degree, not Masters or Post-graduate studies, but first degrees. The government spends money to send students to developed countries so that they can acquire knowledge and expertise, and when they come back, they become very useful to their countries. 

I do not know why all students doing first degrees have either got to be sponsored by their parents, on scholarships or to be sponsored at our universities and study here. Why can’t there ever be a deliberate programme by the Ministry of Education and Uganda as a country, to send young Ugandans, about 1000 per year, to different countries outside, and sponsor them fully so that after five or six years, when these students come back, they have a lot of knowledge in the new sciences; a lot of knowledge in new subjects, and they can be useful to this country. 

I have been scrutinising the Budget and could not find that kind of opportunity to be given to the young Ugandan students. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I don’t want to waste your time, but thank you, Mr Speaker. The money is hidden under the State House vote. Last week, there is a boy who came to me and said, at least me from Eastern Uganda, I have also got a State House scholarship. He is doing a course at Soroti Flying School. But he told me that there were ten students who were given funding from one part of this country. So, let us be honest.

MS NANKABIRWA: You are the people who made these rules, don’t forget. Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Ekanya to deliberately misunderstand the good point the honourable member, Tom Butime, is making, telling the Minister of Education to make a deliberate policy to sponsor students who are doing courses of first degree nature elsewhere where he has mentioned. He said that that money is hidden in State House. He is misleading this House. Is he in order, knowing that the State House arrangement is not what hon. Butime is suggesting? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, the concern of the member on the Floor was about the absence of money in the Ministry of Education supposed to cater for this. But you will be free, at an appropriate time, to talk about the Vote of the State House. 

MR BUTIME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Of course, it is obvious that you have understood my point far better than hon. Ekanya and that is expected. 

There has just been a very short drought. It is still going on but it is about to subside. People in the Western region who keep cattle have really been suffering because others have had to go to the Ministry of Works or go to National Water and purchase water for the survival of animals. You can imagine buying 5000 litres of water, literally paying cash to take it to a farm and keep 100 animals alive.

If the Americans and elsewhere in the United Kingdom and other countries can subsidise the farmers, why should the Ugandan farmers have to reach that level of purchasing water for the survival of cows? I hope such money can also be put in the Budget. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have made my two points.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Baba Diri wanted to make a contribution.

4.54
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech and also to thank the Shadow Minister of Finance for his comments. 

I would like to comment on a few areas. One, on agriculture: This hunger, starvation or famine, which befell Uganda has really taught us a lesson that we must put a lot of emphasis on agriculture, since we have our fertile soil, except of course the climate which changes from time to time.

I would like to find out from the Minister of Agriculture. What plans does the Minister have to ensure that we have water for irrigation, seeds in time and mechanised agriculture so that we can avert this problem of hunger?

The honourable Minister has been telling us that there is money in NAADS for food security and that money is Shs 13 million per sub-county. But when I went to my sub-county, that money is not there. The financial year ended June 30th and if that money was there, it was already used. 

We have just started this year and not yet passed the Budget and yet we need the seeds now. Can we have a supplementary budget so that we boost our agriculture and not suffer again from this hunger? My people of Koboko want me to go with seeds. I cannot go there because I am now fearing as they want the seeds. Yes, they say, “Please come with beans and maize.” Some even went to the extent of planting the maize and beans that were given for consumption and they never germinated. This shows how difficult the situation is and how desperate the people of Koboko are. They need the seeds now, not tomorrow, because this is the only planting season we have. Very soon drought will come in December. 

On health, I am aware that in each sub-county we must have a heath centre IIIs, which is functional with a maternity ward and midwives to assist the people, including women who are expecting. 

Mr Speaker, in Koboko we have been having five sub-counties. Since I entered Parliament, they have been telling me they will build – now we have got additional two to make seven sub-counties. Even in these first five sub-counties, we have only two functional health centre IIIs, that is, Arundre in Ludara, and Lobule, but they are not fully facilitated. For the remaining ones, they have been telling us that they are going to be built. 

So, I would like to find out from the Minister of Health, when you are building, let us say, a health centre, do you give money in bits so that the whole work is left pending for the next financial year? Because what I have seen on the ground are just walls. The buildings are not completed and yet we need them. 

Women, especially expectant mothers, are dying because these health centre IIIs are not working. Mr Speaker, Koboko is at the border and we get some patients from DR Congo and Sudan. Though our population is now 169,000, the people who come for our health services are more than that. Koboko deserves a hospital. When shall we have a hospital? 

I know the benefits of having a hospital. Once you have a hospital, there will be more doctors; there will be more nurses and more drugs will be sent to help the people. I do not know when we shall have it. Otherwise, that is the biggest problem we have in Koboko. We need a hospital; we need those health centre IVs to function and also the Health Centre IIs to function.

Now, I would like to find out –(Interruption)

MR OLENY: Thank you very much hon. colleague for giving way to this information. Mr Speaker, the information that I would like to give the Member is that Koboko is one of the three together with Katakwi Health Centre IV that the Committee on National Economy - while we were scrutinising the loan to support the health project - that we recommended to be upgraded to a hospital. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you for that information. According to your plan, when will it be effected?

THE SPEAKER: The Minister is standing up to tell you?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you hon. Baba Diri. I would like to give this information on the Floor that when you look at the strategy and the policy statement, and the Budget of the Ministry this year 2009/2010, we are going to address specifically those non-functional health centre IVs, IIIs, and IIs. They are going to be fully equipped and functional when we pass the Budget. And, for those major hospitals which are along the highways, we are bringing a loan. 

I would like to request the members to support it because this budget year we are going to fully address the infrastructure and non-functional health centres, and we expect that Koboko is part of our strategy. Thank you. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. I am very hopeful that before 2011, it will be started because that is my goal to ensure that we have a hospital during my time, so that I can ask for the next term. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to emphasis the issue of reproductive health of our mothers. Women are dying. In fact this morning, I was shocked when my shamba boy told me that his mother died in Mityana Hospital; and the situation is very sad. 

What happened is that we learnt about her being in the hospital last night, and from reliable sources, she delivered the first baby, but the second baby could not come out because of obstruction. I do not know how true this is, but I am told that the doctor saw that the first baby had come out and he told the patient that he will return tomorrow to assist her. And, of course before tomorrow, the woman died. I really felt bad. There is negligence as well among the medical personnel. You have seen that one child has been delivered and the other one is obstructed and you cannot even assist her. So, I call upon the medical personnel to not neglect mothers and they die from such negligence as this. It is very painful. 

So, I would like to see that we have a budget specifically for midwives and for reproductive health in the Ministry of Health. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

5.04
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you. I want to thank the Minister for her Budget. I have one concern. As women of Uganda, knowing that the Ministry of Finance now has three ministers who are female; it has aroused our interest. We think that this is the time that the women of Uganda are going to benefit to the maximum.

I, therefore, wanted to see in this Budget Speech things that specifically involve women. One, when you talk of reproductive health, especially regarding maternity wards, I think this Budget should have enough money for constructing maternity wards in health centre IIIs and even in health centre IIs so that we stop our women from dying. If we miss this opportunity, we may miss it forever.  

In the Budget, the Minister said that out of five households, four are involved in agriculture. And, when you go into details in analysing that statement, the family members involved in agriculture are women. When you go into details to talk about NAADS, out of the six members selected to benefit, four are men. So, it is a very big problem; it is a concern that must be solved. 

We very well know that in terms of development; in terms of putting things right; in terms of less corruption, it is the women we should involve more, and am sure about this. If these women are empowered economically and socially, we shall have a better Uganda.
 
Mr Speaker, (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I just want to get this point clearly. Under pillar No.1 of Prosperity-for-All which my colleague, Huda, is talking about. About production and productivity - NAADS selecting beneficiaries - the policy I have talks about six homesteads in a parish not individuals. But she said that when you see the six individuals, four are men and I –(Interjection)- We are not talking about individuals, we are talking about households. 

The policy talks about households and I am genuinely bringing this out so that together we can go out and correct this. If there are communities that are selecting individuals, six people in a parish, it is wrong, unless we are talking about female-headed households and male-headed households. This is missing in the policy. We generally talked about households assuming that in those households, there are girls and boys, women and men.

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Minister for the information. That is why I started by saying that five households out of which four households participate in agriculture.

But now, when you take the evil of AIDS, we have many female-headed homes in this country, but are they considered? And even within the households that are considered – we are talking of households, but when you go practically on the ground, for example, if you go to Yumbe, they chose to give goats, but these goats are given to the men because the man is the head of the family. And in the end, they use those goats to marry other wives. (Laughter)

I would like to talk about AIDS. We very well know that AIDS is something that is not going away (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us use six minutes.

5.10
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much for this opportunity. I would like to comment on the performance of this Budget as stated in the Budget Speech and I will concentrate on the sector performance just to give my colleagues a picture of what has been going on.

There has been great commendation on the performance of agriculture where it is stated that it grew up to the level of 15.1 percent. But I may say that the contribution of 15.1 percent of agriculture to the GDP is also worrying to many of us, because it appears contributions of other sectors is much less than that, and that is not what is expected of a  growing economy.

I have heard, since yesterday, many of our colleagues talking about this as something very good. But if you find that over 70 or 80 percent of the population in this country is dependant on agriculture and its contribution is 15.1 percent to the GDP, then there is reason to worry. If we plan to create an industrial society, this percentage should be failing.

When we look at another sector, that is, the industrial sector performance, it did what was not expected. It declined from 9.1 percent to 3.8 percent and this was attributed to only one sub-sector of construction. This to me could have been an understatement of sorts because just one sub-sector performance cannot cause a decline of 5.3 percent; and that is stated in our Budget Speech.

The services sector which we thought would be rising very fast to counter the contribution of agriculture to GDP, also declined from 10.2 percent to 9.4 percent, a decline of 0.8 percent, and this has been due to a significant decline in some sub-sectors, most especially trade, transport and communications, which we thought would be rising at this stage in our economic development.

When we continue and look at developments in the monetary and external sectors, of course we saw there was a marked decline in inflation from 14.8 percent to 12.4 percent. This could be commendable since it is showing that there is good monetary management. But when we look at the exchange rate, there is a decline of the Uganda Shilling against other currencies, and it showed the great vulnerability of our currency. This decline is attributed to deteriorating terms of trade, lack of confidence in the Government of Uganda securities, and decline in remittances from Ugandans abroad and also NGOs. 

How does the government intend to avert this worrying trend? Of course, there has been, as recorded in the Budget Speech, balance of payment problems as well. There was a decline as at December 2008. We do not see any strong measures being mentioned in the Budget Speech to avert this trend, and even financial sector developments are not very good.

In view of all these sectoral declines and kind of mismatched increments, especially in the agriculture sector, where does one stand to say that the economy is doing very well? It is something which we have to know from the Ministry of Finance. That, Mr Speaker, is what has been causing me problems all through since we had the Budget read, and we are now trying to see how we can pass the various volumes of funds so that at least something can be done; but this is the problem. I thank you very much.

5.16
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech, however, I would like to find out from the Minister why every year we allocate money for pension payment but the pensions keep on accumulating. 

I know that very many people retire every year and those are already budgeted for, but you will find that the people who have been scheduled for payment are recurring in the next year. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance is aware of that, because they are doing the budgeting for the same people year in, year out. 

Another issue is about the PRDP funding. The PRDP areas have had their place lying fallow for so many years. I would like to know from the Minister of Finance whether money is going to be released early enough to enable these people plant early, because this is expected to be a food basket for this country since the land has been lying fallow; so, it must be fertile. I know that the land can be given the opportunity if they are given money in time. Can this money of PRDP be released in time from the Ministry of Finance? 

Regarding rural electrification; we have had these projects going on, but the tariffs have not been addressed. How are the tariffs going to be addressed to enable the village person who is going to get this rural electrification pay for the service that is required?

Another thing that I noted from the Budget is about the minimum wage. Countries all over the world have minimum wages. Why can’t we address this issue? We are always dilly dallying and yet they say we have been given a 5 percent increment. What is this 5 percent increment on? Let us have a minimum wage so that people know and they can budget accordingly, because without a minimum wage, you will not be able to budget adequately. 

Every year, we used to know that the month of May was the month for announcing the minimum wage or increment for a wage for civil servants; this has not been the case for a long time. Can Government do something about the minimum wage?

In the Budget Speech, I did not see anything to do with restocking and yet they are talking of carrying out vaccination of cattle. My place has had no cattle for a long time, because most of them have died from Nagana. Can we have the restocking done so that we can have the vaccination done? I do not see what you are going to vaccinate in Tororo. Thank you.  

5.21
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thank our ministers for the Budget and maybe because the policy statements came in like rain, I have not had the time to really focus on the Ministry of Education policy guideline. 

Mine is more of seeking information from the Ministry of Information, in regard to the emerging levels of unemployment, and the information I seek is about technical or vocational schools. I do not know whether technical schools in this current Budget have been prioritised, because many people are getting educated but not skilled, and that has resulted in a lot of graduates on the streets. 

I do not know whether as members of Parliament, we can be privy to a list of vocational schools in Uganda, or a geographical map of both private and public vocational schools. That would help us to educate our youth and tell them that much as they are getting degrees, they need vocational training, and going for a certificate in a vocational institution is not a crime. 

Many educated university graduates should be trained and told that in this world where Government only employs 300 workers as public servants, and who are not about to retire because they are retraining and reading more, we need a vocational kind of approach to most of the graduates we take out there in the field. 

So, I am seeking information from the Ministry of Education, whether they can geographically place these institutions and give the information to members of Parliament.

The other issue is about the cry by members of Parliament when drought hit Uganda. Most of them are talking about irrigation, but I think this is a dream which is not easy to achieve in the medium-term. Because when you talk of irrigation, that would be like causing artificial rain, but when the source of water is very far, you cannot even start talking about irrigation -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Sebunya for allowing me to give him this information. Sometime back on the same Floor of this House, I did share an experience with the entire House and more particularly the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and this is from the experience of Israel. 

We know that half of Israel is a desert; the desert covers the entire Southern part of Israel, and what makes life possible in the Southern part of Israel are irrigation systems which originate from the North, where you can only find these biblical lakes that you have heard about in the Bible and places like the Red Sea which are so far away. For an honourable member to come here and say that it is far-fetched would actually be making the front bench of this House sleep and go home, and say all is okay. So, please, it is possible; even if the permanent sources of water are far away, it is workable. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much. I know hon. Kasule is a son of a farmer. Mr Speaker, I was part of the delegation that went to New Delhi to source for companies that are going to help us do irrigation.

We are aware that Uganda does not have enough natural sources of water. So, part of the project for irrigation includes water harvesting. Uganda receives heavy rainfalls, therefore, part of the irrigation system starts from the creation of water. It is possible because we receive heavy rainfalls. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries –(Interjections)– I am not holding the Floor; I just borrowed some time from the honourable member on the Floor. So, I do not know whether the point of order is directed to me or the person holding the Floor. 

Anyway, the issue is, I am part of the group that is trying to ensure we implement what Ugandans are crying for. The issue of not having enough water sources in Uganda should not arise. We receive heavy rainfalls, so we should begin harvesting water by creating water reservoirs like dams and so on to help –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Ssebunya for bringing up an issue that is worth debating. I would like to confirm that Uganda is one of the most endowed countries in Africa in terms of water sources. The problem is that we have always taken water for granted because we always think it will be there, and if rains delay, the women will carry it to our homes. However, as of now, it is dawning on us that water is no longer something to be taken for granted; it is a resource that we have got to harness. As members of Parliament, we have to explain that to our constituents. 

Water harvesting is not a new technology. Every home and culture practices water harvesting. The only thing we have got to do is to modernise it now. My ministry and that of agriculture are soon coming up with the simple technology of ceiled plastics to help create a base for harvesting water, especially in sandy areas where we cannot otherwise harvest it by just digging a pitch. 

I will tell you that in my home district, some people are now excavating water sources next to their homes and putting polythene paper of 1000 milligrams, which holds water and can help a lot in water harvesting. What we need to do is only to sensitise our communities to look at water as a resource. In my ministry, we have a slogan which says “every drop of water counts.” So, always count every drop and make sure you utilise it. We have just enough water to take us through even without resorting to Lake Victoria or River Nile.

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, hon. Ssebunya. Mr Speaker, I would like to help hon. Ssebunya by informing him that a technical study has been done by a group of technicians from Israel. A report from that study, which has been sent to some members of Parliament, indicates that it is easy and possible to irrigate the bigger part of Uganda cheaply and affordably. You can access that report from me, if you want.

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you. I would like to say that just yesterday I sent off a delegation from Israel and a new delegation will be here on 2 September 2009. We will be taking them to Karamoja for one week so that they can see how to start irrigation in that region. You can see how we are working with partners who are willing to support us.

I would like to inform you that we also have an Indian group that has already designed dams to do multiple damming on all the streams that we have in Uganda. That group also had identified Karamoja, but I have chosen to divert them a bit. I know where to take them.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you can see that members have confirmed my statement - it is still a dream; everything is to be done in the future. 

Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, the pictures of animals dying that we have seen on television do not show that there is water harvesting in the country. They do not show that there has ever been work done. My question is: does the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness have plans to secure things like water tanks to help in the preservation of water to be used when drought hits any part of the country?

I would like to welcome the minister’s intervention. I want to also say that I will take time off and look at the study report. However, allow me inform members that water harvesting is very crucial. We should harvest water in our homes and let us take this information to our people in the rural areas too. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.34
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County, East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for her maiden budget. 

On page 9, the Minister talks about promotion of the banking sector. She goes on to say that there is money that is secured to ensure that so many banks get established to reduce on interest in the near future. However, I notice that even though we have quite many foreign banks, the interest rates have remained high. I would like to call upon the Ministry of Finance to do something. Even if we have a liberal economy, there is need for us to have some kind of stake that you regulate. The borrowers are losing a lot of money because of interest rates. So, something must be done by the ministry. They should not just allow the forces of demand and supply take their own course.

The Minister also talked about the mid-term development framework, and one of the issues is to promote Prosperity-for-All and employment. I have noticed that we, Ugandans, do not have targets. We cannot say that perhaps in the next three years, we want to have reduced the unemployment rate by such a percentage; it is just blanket. We do not have strategic interventions to check whether the unemployment rate has been reduced.

There is need for us to set targets. Ministry of Health could say, for example, “We would like to kick out Malaria or maybe in about three years we would have gone to 99 percent immunisation.” This is something that has been lacking in the Ministry of Finance. I have always asked about the unemployment rate in the country, and I have not got the answer. So, there is need for the ministry to style up in that area.

On modernity of agriculture, I think Hon. Kibirige Ssebunya is being - I do not want to say that he is pessimistic, but there is need for us to reemphasise the issue of irrigation. There are some people who have had a notion that when we begin irrigating, we are talking about only River Nile and they are scared about Egypt. There are other water sources. 

When you go to a hill or when you go to Mbale, there is need for us to have small irrigation schemes. I am sure we can have three seasons in a year. So, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Agriculture should have a policy of allowing irrigation schemes in this country. That is how we shall fight famine. We are talking about famine in Northern Uganda and Teso, but even in parts of Busoga we are likely to have famine because the weather is very unpredictable.

The other issue is about roads. In as far as this new budget is concerned, road construction and maintenance is reaffirmed. Now, I would like to direct this to the Ministry of Works: We passed the Roads Authority Act 2008 where members of Parliament and the local councils were supposed to chair the Road Maintenance Unit. Also, up to now, we have not seen anything operationalising this other Road Fund that we actually catered for in the Budget. So, Ministry of Works, where is the Road Fund and where are the committees? Why haven’t you operationalised them? I need an answer.

Another issue I would like to comment on is rural electrification. On page 21, the Minister enumerates all the districts that will benefit from rural electrification and Bugiri is one of them. Bushenyi and Iganga are the others, but I do not see Mayuge and yet Mayuge has been going hand-in-hand with Bugiri, even when it came to the Wakawaka line that started in 2002. Up to now, there is no mention of the same, yet there is a lot of economic potential in that place - fish, maize etc. So, there is need for us to have a lot of affirmative action as far as rural electrification is concerned in Mayuge District.

On petroleum development, they have told us how many wells have been discovered. In the previous budget, we were told that come 2009, we shall have the first oil hit the market. So, when are we going to have the first production of oil? When are we going to use oil from Uganda or from Hoima? When are we going to have this oil on this market? There is no mention of it in this current budget, and yet they have been talking about 2009. So, when shall we have the first oil hit the Ugandan market?

On tourism, it was mentioned that in order to promote tourism, Shs 2 billion has been set aside as a way of campaigning. Here, I would like to begin by campaigning for tourism, especially in Mayuge District. We have the Kyando where Bishop Hannington was killed. We have a place in my constituency in Buwaya where Gulu is believed to have been buried, based on the history of Kintu, Buganda and Mbale. So, there is need for us to emphasise so many historical sites and tourist attractions in this country.

On education, as the Ministry of Education constructs teachers’ houses, there are incomplete structures that were started by parents both in primary and secondary schools, and these structures have been left out and new structures are being constructed. There is need for Ministry of Education to have a policy to complete structures that were begun by parents because some of them are very useful.

In addition to that, when are we going to eliminate asbestos roofs in this country, especially in schools, given the fact that asbestos causes cancer? Ministry of Education should tell us when we are likely to get rid of asbestos roofs in schools.

5.40
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech. 

I will go straight to the water sector. I would like to remind this House that water is life and as a result of climate change, that has affected our rainfall pattern, many areas have been affected. As we speak, right now in Kampala a litre of milk is Shs 2,300. This has affected very many families in this city and outside this city. I am beginning to see a problem of malnutrition setting in, in our communities, due to lack of animal protein. This has not only affected animals but it has also affected crops. A kilo of beans as we speak is Shs 2,000 in most markets and yet this was an alternative source of protein, mostly for our children. 

To talk more about water, I come from a constituency where 70 percent of the population keeps cattle. As I talk now, many of our cattle have died in Ntoroko County and we do not even have a single dam. Yes, we can talk of rain harvesting, which we all know about, but very few families can afford to dig their own dams. There are some areas of this county which have got valley dams but in my constituency, we have never seen a valley dam. Last financial year, Ministry of Agriculture promised to construct at least two valley dams, but none has been constructed till now, and we are still waiting. 

Besides crops and animals, even water for human beings is very inadequate. In the Budget, there is a design for water supply in my constituency. I do not know how long that design will take so that water is supplied to the people. 

A lot has been said about health, but I want to make one comment. As we talk right now, there is no single medical doctor in Bundibugyo District. Recently, we recruited five medical doctors but they have all left the district after six months. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have to attract them to stay. 

MR ASIIMWE: The local revenue is very little in the district. We depend entirely on the funds given by the central government. We have one old medical doctor who is also on leave. So as we talk, no emergencies are being handled in the hospital. We have to travel to Fort Portal Hospital for treatment. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, honourable colleague. The retaining capacity of doctors has been a challenge in this ministry, but we are going to recentralise the posting for doctors. Right now, the local government is the one supposed to recruit and they have no mandate in the ministry. So, I would like to say that once we bring that amendment to recentralise doctors, the ministry will be able to post doctors to these areas. 

We are also trying to give more allowances for hard-to-reach areas so that doctors will be posted countrywide. Before we do that, the retention of doctors in rural areas is still a challenge. However, I want to assure Parliament that after amending the Local Government Act and the Constitution, every centre will have doctors. Doctors cannot go there because they have a point of entry but no point of exit.

THE SPEAKER: Even previously, during the colonial times, there was what was called inducement allowance. In some areas, like in Karamoja, they would give allowances for that. If one can stay in Kampala and lose nothing, there is no way you can take them away. So, you may have to decide on an inducement allowance to attract people to places which cannot be reached easily from the capital. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give this information to the Minister of Finance. The hard-to-reach allowances are so little that they cannot induce someone to go to those areas.

THE SPEAKER: Those are the details, but once the principle is established, then you can consider something workable. You are talking about a detail; I am talking about a principle. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, there must be a change in the policy of Ministry of Health. That ministry has reduced on the production of clinical officers. They are focusing on doctors who are more expensive and who put them at ransom. If they can produce more medical assistants, these clinical officers can stay in the villages. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Byandala, whereas we can have the clinical officers, we still need the doctors. 

MR ASIIMWE: Mr Speaker, you can see the problem of doctors and other health workers is still very big. I would like to inform the Minister of Health that even if you give the 30 percent increment, doctors will not be attracted to these hard-to-reach areas. We have to address the problem of the living wage, whether we like it or not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If it is about a living wage, then the wage you give a doctor in Kampala is the same you will give to a doctor in Bundibugyo. The question should be: If I can stay in Kampala, why should I go to Bundibugyo? That is why you need the inducement allowance we are talking about.

MR ASIIMWE: On top of lack of doctors and other health workers in these health facilities, we also have a problem of drugs. Lack of drugs in health centres is still persistent and National Medical Stores has not done a good job as far as giving drugs on time is concerned. I am informed the Ministry of Finance remits this money to National Medical Stores, but the drugs are not delivered on time. As such, there are a lot of stock-outs in these health centres. 

On education, I would like to say something about tertiary institutions. We have heard of late that universities have increased fees. This is not only at university level; even middle institutions have got the same problems. Government in-take is so small. The number of students admitted in government institutions is so small that the whole burden is left to the parents and yet many of the students, especially those who finish S.4 and S.6 in rural areas, do not make it to the university. These students would be admitted to these institutions, but parents cannot afford. 

I do not know what Ministry of Education is doing as far as sponsoring more students after S.6 is concerned. Many of them are loitering around. Some have left for employment outside the country. Many have ended up as security guards in some countries - you know and many are still around. It is such a big problem; Government is not training enough students after S.6. For those who go to university, even the parents are more burdened now that fees have been increased.

Lastly, concerning NAADS, we have a very big problem. We have made statements in district councils and talked to district officials regarding procurements in sub-counties and parishes. Procurement and corruption is still a big problem. Animals and chicken are being purchased at a very high price –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I am wondering why on Tuesday you could not make these contributions because all the contributions you have been making are relevant to the motion, but on Tuesday we had to adjourn prematurely. I do not know why.

5.52
MS MARY TUUNDE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to thank the Minister of Finance for having come with those very good thematic areas like education, health and salary increment of five percent for the workers. However, I would be doing a disservice if I did not say the following for Mother Uganda.

We talk about human resource development, but I think we should look at it from all perspectives, looking at all the branches. It seems that in our Government we talk a lot about education and not training and development. When we talk of training these days, we are thinking of workshops and seminars. To me that is not training. In the past when you used to talk about training, you would really get a lot. Since I came to Parliament, for example, I have never had training; I have had seminars and workshops for two days. What I know is that you get a lot from training. For workshops, if there is an allowance, I can choose to come or not; but if it is a training, at the end of the day, I expect something as a result of that training, say a small certificate, which I will add to my C.V.

Secondly, when we talk of education and more so UPE, it is as if it has double standards or is a double-edged sword, because of the policies that we put in place. We talk of people not failing, that everybody should pass, but at the end of the day, we are getting pupils with 36 points. Private schools take up these pupils, but when they do ‘O’ Level exams, they ask for a certificate and most of these schools do not even have the certificates. So, I think that we should look at monitoring and evaluation if we are to have a policy which is very successful.

Another issue is development - where we have people replacing others. We train people, educate and empower them to take up posts, for example promotions and so on. 

As regards health, we are looking at public health and general health, but in Uganda we have had several violent conflicts and at the end of the day, we have so many people who are traumatised. Some people are suffering from post traumatic stress disorders. This has not been handled by the health sector. There are so many people in those affected areas that need help. So, Ministry of Health should also take part in research and find out which people are suffering from this.

We talk about petroleum or oil exploration; this is God given. We should guard that oil jealously because it was given by God. Many countries would wish to have it but they do not. We should not leave that oil to the investors as we have always been doing. We leave investors to take our things and at the end of the day, we do not benefit as people of Uganda. 

We have anti-riot police, anti-smuggling units and so on. So, I think we should also have petroleum police in place so that they keep our oil. We should not just leave the investors to go there. We are even getting rumours that at night our oil is being taken. So, this is a very important issue. 

Another point is that there is what we call political –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Tuunde for giving way. It is true that the country discovered oil and it is true that arrangements are being made so that we can go into production of oil. However, it is also true that no production has started and, therefore, no oil is being smuggled or siphoned, whether during day or at night. I thank you.

MS TUUNDE: Thank you very much for that information.

Another point is that when we look at policies, we should look at framework policy perspectives. I am talking of political framework perspectives where we have to make sure that other people come in and we collaborate with them if we want to fulfil our policies. For example, non-governmental organisations; they have information and money; So, if you want to fulfil some of these policies, we should also use them - collaborate, partner and network with them. 

Malawi, Guinea and Ethiopia are using non-governmental organisations to achieve Education for All (EFA) and they are doing very well. So, we should not ignore non governmental organisations (NGOs). That love-hate syndrome has gone; NGOs are looking at development, not only as deliveries, but also for leverage. So, we should also use them to help us achieve what we want as a country.

For workers, thank you very much for increasing their salary. It is so little, but we thank you for that. This is the beginning because it has kick-started the negotiation process or collective bargaining process in the private sector. So, we thank you for that and we expect more.

Lastly, I would like to say that success is always relative. So, the more successful a person or an organisation is, the more relatives it will have, and it is not very easy to have a state as old as a machine, especially in this environment; we are living in an environment that is volatile, ambiguous, uncertain and complex. Thank you very much.

5.59
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was looking through the Budget Speech, I just wanted to make a few observations. I have looked at the Ministry of Health and sometimes I wonder whether they have stopped thinking. (Laughter) It has very good ministers. The other day hon. Kakooza was in my constituency and he did a very good job. 

However, when you take a patient to Mbale Regional Hospital and you do not have Shs 300,000 cash, you will not be operated on, and yet we have doctors there. The quality of services in our health units is very bad. We have health facilities in sub-counties and health centre IVs, but very few of us take our own patients to these health facilities. (Interjection) I am just starting to develop my point. (Interjection) I will give the other member. (Laughter) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank Hon. William Wopuwa. Honourable colleagues, I want to share with you the very bitter experience that I underwent last month at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

We have got the best equipment at Mulago Hospital; we have got the personnel; and we have patients to be treated. The problem is not about money; the problem is about morals and attitudes. I had to painfully evacuate my daughter from Mulago to take her to Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi. It was not because we did not have the equipment here or the expertise. We have some of the best doctors in the world, but the problem is that the attitude of our doctors is more money-oriented rather than oriented to that professional moral obligation of saving lives. 

So, that is the painful experience I wanted to share with you. The other time the Minister was saying, “Can you put that in writing”. I said no, let everybody go to Mulago and they will experience it for themselves. Thank you.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, when hon. Kakooza was in my constituency, after working till late he visited Mbale Regional Hospital. I am told you went there at night and people knew that the Minister was around, but the patients could not air out their problems because the Minister would soon be leaving. 

Secondly, -(Interjection)- Please allow me develop my point. We cannot address the current health manpower problems in this country using colonial policies. We need to copy a little bit from Korea or from Cuba. We need those short-term solutions that can help us produce results. The current approach of seven years or four years will not work. I used to be a Chief Administrative Officer and I can tell you that the most difficult people to work with are doctors. Whether you increase their salaries by 100 percent, there will still be a problem. 

The other thing I want to talk about is the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education is doing a very good job, but sometimes I get surprised because they experiment so much. Today they talk about thematic teaching - teaching children in vernacular, as if they are going to set exams in vernacular, and at the end of it all, the children do not pass. 

The other day they were talking about subjects. They talked of reducing subjects from 22 to 14, and then I am told that another subject called patriotism has been introduced. (Laughter) Now, why did the Ministry of Education not think about patriotism before the President thought about it? We had thought of scrapping political education until the President, in his wisdom, raised the issue of patriotism. 

We have UPE and USE schools, but many of them have not received their grants. How do you expect them to set exams or carry out curricular activities if the funds are not there? 

On the issue of rural electrification, when I came here in 2003 hon. Migereko was our minister and everybody was saying that power was going to Lwakhakha. It was in the 2000 manifesto and even in the 2006 manifesto, but at the moment it is not even mentioned in the manifesto; it has been removed; so you cannot even talk about it. This is our Government which we strongly support. Now really, what am I going to tell my people in the next election? 

Recently, we were very happy because they gave us some roads and some roads have been upgraded. I got a list indicating some of the roads that are going to be worked on but my road, which was taken on, is not on the list. I consulted and I was told that less than a tenth of the roads that were taken on are going to be worked on. Now, what is the problem? The district will not be working on them and the ministry will not be working on them either. So, what happened to our trillions of shillings? My view is that there is still a problem. We need the Prime Minister to sit down and coordinate our ministries. Otherwise, in my view, we have a problem. The Budget is okay, but are people really getting richer or poorer? 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much for your contributions. As I had said, I wonder what happened on Tuesday. This is what I expected of you on Tuesday, but well it is okay.  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I request that you give me an opportunity. On Tuesday, you know that I was in charge of your guests. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will give you an opportunity because we are ending this general debate on Monday. I will expect the ministers, especially the Minister of Finance, to make concluding remarks then. On Tuesday, we shall start with the Committee of Supply so that we deal with the various votes. We are going to work out the order in which these votes will be considered, so that relevant committees prepare to guide us on these votes. So, on Monday I will give a few of you opportunity to contribute and then the Minister will come in and then we conclude. Otherwise, I am happy that you picked up speed. 

I have a notice here to all members of Parliament. The Chairperson of Parliamentarians Cooperative Savings and Credit Society invites all its members and all members of Parliament to a cocktail party in the Parliamentary Gardens today, 20 August 2009, at 6.00 p.m. Music and entertainment till dawn. Come for the celebration of the end of the successful six years of our SACCO. It is signed by Akwero Odwong Jane, Chairperson.  

As you heard, this afternoon, the Imam, hon. Sebaggala, informed us that Ramadhan is starting tomorrow. I want to use this opportunity to wish you a good Ramadhan. Thank you very much. With this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. House is adjourned to Monday at 2.00 p.m. to continue with the debate. 

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 24 August 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

