Wednesday, 20 August 2003

Parliament met at 10.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated yesterday, it is important that when we start business we start on time. We agreed that for purposes of disposing of the budget within the stipulated time, we shall be sitting both in the morning and afternoon. We will sit at 10.00 a.m. and also at 2.00 p.m. until we dispose of this budget. So, it is important that we all keep time. Do not think that we shall start late. We shall not start late; we shall be starting on time, as I indicated yesterday. I hope this is understood.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/2004

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we will be passing each committee’s estimates so that at the end, the appropriation will be a question of adding up what we shall have approved.

THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. I beg to present the committee report on the policy statement for the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications for the Financial Year 2003/2004.  

Mr Chairman and honourable members, in accordance with rule 154(d), the sessional committee presents its report, observations and recommendations on the sector’s policies and estimates for general debate in this House, and ultimately for guidance and approval.  

While considering the sector’s policy statement the committee adopted a number of strategies: 

(1) We looked at the policy statement itself.

(2) The revised policy statement for the previous financial year. 

(3) We interacted with the Minister and his technical team and undertook sample inspection visits of the Ministry’s projects, to examine the physical performance in view of the released budget.  

The committee inspected both central government and district roads in the districts of Masaka, Rakai, Mpigi, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Kamwenge, Kyenjojo, Kibale, Hoima, Masindi and Apac. The committee also visited Jinja, Iganga, Kamuli, Pallisa, Kumi, Kapchorwa, Sironko, Mbale, Tororo, Busia, Mayuge and many others. It also visited Kalangala to appraise its road network and water transport challenges.  

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I want this House to appreciate the committee for undertaking the visits using personal money.

We have general observations and comments:  

Specific data on value for money:

The policy statement of the ministry was extremely good and exhaustive, but it fell short of the expectations of section 6(2) of the Budget Act. In this area it never reflected specific data on value for money and the extent of achievement on the objective targets of money received and spent. Attempts to provide physical performance under national road maintenance in percentage terms does not answer and comply with the requirements of the law. 

The committee observed that failure to give specific data on value for money denies Parliament the basis on which to demand accountability for public funds. The committee, therefore, demands that the law should be complied with in the next budget process.

Project Budgeting Under the Sector:

The committee observed with concern that most of the activities, if not all, are executed under ministry development projects. As a matter of fact, there are 42 projects profiled under the sector. Most budgeted programmed activities to be contracted out constitute the routine function of the civil servants in the Ministry.  

Mr Chairman, the committee recommends that the sector should rationally and maximally use the available manpower resource in the Ministry.  

Sector Policies, Programmes and Achievements:

In this ministry we have three major sub-sectors: the transport sub-sector, housing sub-sector and communications. I wish to begin with the transport sub-sector.  

The Transport Sub-sector:

This is the core of the Ministry, whose mandate is to plan, develop and maintain adequate and effective infrastructure and facilitate provision of safe and efficient transport services by road, rail, water and air. The sub-sector consumes 98 percent of the sector’s recurrent expenditure.  

Under the sector are the following operational functions: 

1. National roads maintenance 
2. The district, urban and community access roads 
3. Road development 
4. Mechanical services 
5. Training services 
6. Quality management; and 
7. Transport services/regulation of road, rail, water and air transport.  

The committee reports that under the transport sub-sector, master plans have been drawn and others are under preparation to underpin sector investments, namely: 

1. The ten-year Road Sector Development Programme.

2. The Inland Water Transport Programme.

3. The ten-year District Roads Investment Programme. This one is still under preparation.
 
4. The National Transport Master Plan, including a master plan for Greater Kampala metropolitan area. This one still is under preparation and it will be complete by June 2004. 

The Road Agency Formation Unit:
 
The above sector investment plans have necessitated undertaking institutional reforms. For instance, under the Road Sector Development Programme, the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) was created. It commenced operations in September 1998, assuming responsibilities of carrying out the road management functions previously executed by the ministry.  

The Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) as a performance oriented and semi-autonomous organization was meant to be a transitional institutional arrangement. It was meant to pave way for a Road Authority that would improve service delivery in the transport sector and strengthen road sector management capability.  

Mr Chairman, I go to the concerns of the committee on the transport sub-sector:

1. Absence of Involvement of Parliament in the Policy Formulation under the Sector.  

Mr Chairman, it is regrettable that Parliament has not been brought on board via the production and consideration of White Papers in the process of policy reforms under the sector. It would have been appropriate for the Ministry, through presentation of a White Paper, to inform and seek the views of Parliament on the road sector development plans and investment and finance mechanisms.

2. Cost Efficiency Analysis of Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU).  

The committee observes that the institution that was meant to be transitory has more or less assumed a permanent status. The committee recommends that the Ministry should carry out a cost benefit analysis of RAFU, to establish how much it has saved the country since its establishment.

3. Cost benefit analysis of Interventions in the road works.
	The committee observes that one of the strategic objectives of government under road infrastructure is to increase the participation of the local construction industry in road construction and maintenance to 90 percent by the financial year 2005/6. 

While the committee appreciates the government economic drive of contracting out road works, through our field visits the committee was convinced beyond doubt that there is need to slow down on contracting out road works. This is mainly because:

1. The contract rates are very expensive.

2. Road maintenance by contracts is not sustainable. It is important to note that the development budget of the road sector for this financial year is Shs 263 billion, which is 71 percent donor funded.  Therefore, the earlier we boost our force accounts operations for road maintenance, the better, given the resource constraints.

3. The government policy of equipping work stations and local government districts with road units is still on course. The committee, during its visits, found out that the districts were hiring out their new road equipment provided by the Central Government to private contractors. 

The committee therefore strongly recommends that as much as possible the policy of contracting out road maintenance should be minimized except where it is absolutely necessary. 

4. The need to have the maintenance management of the national road network under one authority.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee notes that out of the total road network of 60,000 kilometres, only 10,000 kilometres fall under the Ministry of Works. The 27,000 kilometres are under the districts and then 2,800 kilometres are under urban roads in Kampala City, 13 municipal councils and 60 town councils in the country. 

The committee, through its visits, noted sharp differences in the maintenance standards of these roads. Whereas, admittedly, inadequate resources are sent to districts as conditional grants for road maintenance, the committee noted that there was little to show for its utilization.

Mr Chairman, even the road equipment that has been given to districts is not put to proper use. It is either idle - because of lack of capacity to maintain it - or it is hired out to private operators and the proceeds are misused by the district officials. 

The committee therefore recommends that the district and urban road maintenance reverts to the Ministry of Works, including the equipment and the funds for road maintenance. The Ministry of Works should consequently enhance its regional station capacities. This will streamline national utilization of road maintenance budget and equipment and also ensure consistency in standards and quality of roads under one authority.

5. The impact of the road maintenance budget on the poverty eradication programme. 

Notwithstanding our recommendation to slow down on contracting out road works, the committee would appreciate the contribution of the routine road maintenance budget in raising the incomes of the poor who live along the roads, to be maintained.  For instance, between Shs 40,000 to Shs 50,000 is budgeted for labour/work on each kilometre of the road. Last year’s budget for routine manual maintenance was Shs 5 billion. 

The committee, however, found in the field that businessmen in town, or the well off people, were awarded routine manual maintenance contracts worth many kilometres and were in turn employing the poor at miserable rates. So, Mr Chairman, the local authorities and Members of Parliament should be vigilant to ensure that the locals are awarded contracts for manual road maintenance.  

The committee recommends that manual routine maintenance contracts should be awarded to the poor people who live along the networks, and not parasitic middlemen.

6. Bridges and Swamp Crossings.

Through visits the committee noted a number of sites that would require bridges. In Mbale, for instance, more than ten bridges are required over River Manafa to facilitate communities cross the river. The committee also noted special requirements of the people in mountainous areas like Mbale, Tororo, Kapchorwa, Kisoro, Bundibugyo and many others, who need special ladders or cable cars to climb to their dwellings on top of the mountains.

Mr Chairman, the committee recommends that in view of the budget constraints, (a bridge in Mbale costs Shs 500 million) pedestrian bridges should be considered to ease people’s movements.

7. Sironko-Kapchorwa Road.

The committee chose to carry out an on-spot assessment of the physical performance of the Sironko-Kapchorwa road. The committee sought to establish why this project, which started in 1998, has taken so long to complete. The committee had some few preliminary findings: 

1. The original contractor’s sum for the 45 km project was approximately Shs 24 billion excluding VAT.

2. The project was to be financed solely by Uganda Government from the East Africa compensation funds to Uganda.

3. To-date, 40 km of the road have been completed and 5 km remain to be done.

4. There appear to have been problems with the releases and payments to the contractor, leading to the slow down of the work.

5. A lot seems to have gone wrong with the management and disbursements to the project from the compensation funds deposited at the account of the Uganda High Commission in Kenya. For example, the Auditor General’s Report of 2000 queried an unauthorized withdrawal of US $180,000 from the project account in Nairobi in 2000.

6. As of June 2003, the outstanding payments to the contractor (put Sarajero) and consultants is Shs 6.499 billion. These funds include contractors’ payments, costs being incurred on idle equipment. Mr Chairman, we are being charged US $2000 per day for idle equipment.

7. For the remaining part, Shs 5.154 billion is required to complete the project, bringing the total resources required for the project to Shs 11 billion. 

8. Unfortunately, in this financial year budget, only Shs 1.39 billion has been provided for the project.

The committee therefore recommends that re-allocation of funds be made to the project to save the country from continuous losses.

Mr Chairman, when the Budget Committee met with the Minister of Finance, we agreed that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Works move immediately to Kapchorwa to meet the contractors and ensure that work resumes.

Water Transport:

The committee noted with concern that accidents on the lakes have continued to claim lives. Whereas government intervention through the Inland Water Transport Development Project is welcome, it appears to be concentrating on Lake Victoria. It leaves the other transport systems on lakes Albert, Kyoga, George and many others unattended to.

The committee therefore recommends that comprehensive water transport legislation be initiated as a matter of urgency, to underpin the inland water transport development programme.

The establishment of a multi-sectoral transport regulatory agency is overdue. There is an urgent need for the Ministry, together with the Ministry of Finance, to secure a number of ferries to connect the districts of Bugiri, Sigulu Islands, Nakasongola, Kamuli and Kayunga.

The Housing Sub-sector:

The Minister reports that the Government’s housing policy is to pursue an enabling approach towards overall improvement and development of safe, efficient, decent and affordable shelter for all. But the committee was unable to see the policy document where this policy is clearly articulated.  

Besides, the important enabling legal framework that would be a hallmark of the enabling environment for the housing sub-sector has taken too long to be put in place. The following pieces of legislation have been in the pipeline for too long, and they are worth mentioning. These are: 

• The Building Control Bill 
• The Landlord Tenant Relationship Bill 
• The Registration and Licensing of the Architectural Draftsmen and Technicians Bill; and 
• The Housing Revolving Fund Bill, which is to provide a regulatory framework and guide the operations of the public servants’ revolving fund. These are the proceeds from the sale of public servants’ pool houses, which are over Shs 20 billion.  

The committee recommends more vigilance on the part of the sector. Secondly, the above bills should be expedited to enhance the growth of the sector.

Management and Regular Maintenance of Government Buildings:

Mr Chairman, the committee noted that the sub-sector is also responsible for ensuring well-planned, well-managed and regular maintenance of government buildings.

The committee further noted that one of the important objectives of the sub-sector is to facilitate the increase of office accommodation for government, so as to eliminate the shortfall of 140,000 square metres of office space.  

Given the technical competence of the building sub-sector of the ministry, which is the home of the Chief Architect, Chief Quantity Surveyor, Engineer in Chief and many others, the committee was originally optimistic about the contribution of the sub-sector towards the national economy. However, the optimism of the committee was short-lived because of the happenings on the ground, for instance: 

1. On its field visits, the committee noted the dilapidated state of most of the ministry’s regional stations. Other buildings that belong to the Ministry are also in a dire state of disrepair, including the state lodges upcountry. 

2. Government has a shortage of office space, equivalent to 140,000 square metres, and every government department is presently individually fending for itself in terms of accommodation. However, government is privatising a number of public enterprises, including selling the non-core properties of such properties cheaply, which properties could easily be converted into government office accommodation.  Examples include: Uganda Development Bank building, UCB building, Bugolobi Coffee Plant, National Insurance Corporation building, Crested Towers Building, Uganda Railways Corporation headquarters and many others.

3. Much as the sector has the technical competence in terms of qualified manpower to supervise and maintain national government properties, there is already an outcry from the office of the Auditor General, civil society organizations, the press and Members of Parliament about the colossal sums of money lost through sub-standard work and poor implementation of the School Facilitation Grant under the UPE programme. 

From the foregoing, Mr Chairman, it should be appreciated that there is disharmony in national policy frameworks and policy implementation among government departments in the aspect of housing. It is also evident that there is lack of patriotism in privatising government properties. At least, government departments would not be borrowing to build their office accommodation or spending scarce resources on rent.

The committee therefore recommends to government to utilize, for office accommodation, the non-core properties in the hands of parastatals to be privatised.

Human Settlement and the National Census:

The committee was amazed that no clear intervention was being made in response to information from the National Population and Housing Census.

The committee recommended that the sub-sector use important research and data, like the census, to formulate appropriate government interventions.  

Implementation of Housing Projects under the Ministry:

Mr Chairman, the committee is concerned about the administrative costs, expatriate fees and training costs involved. The committee strongly feels that the local ministry staff could implement the programmes without hiring expatriates.

Privatisation of National Housing and Construction Corporation and its impact on the housing sector and implementation of the Condominium Property Law:

The committee learnt that at the time when the National Housing and Construction Corporation was about to offer its flats to the sitting tenants for purchase under the facilitation of the Condominium Property law, which law is implemented by the Minister in charge of Housing, the Ministry of Finance under Privatisation Unit embarked on the process of privatising the Corporation. Consequently, in June/July 2002 the Corporation was converted into a private company with two shareholders, namely, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation. This is of course as per the PERD Statute –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You said the Corporation was turned into a company?

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: A limited company, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the statute was repealed and then the company formed?  

MR BYANYIMA: No, Mr Chairman. It is in order because of the PERD Statute. Before any company is privatised, it must be turned into a limited company. 

But technically, after turning the National Housing and Construction Corporation into a limited company, the Minister for Housing has nothing to do with the company. And yet, the Corporation was previously in advanced stages of selling the flats under the guidance of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, which drafted the Condominium Bill.

The committee therefore strongly recommends that the Government introduces a Bill, urgently, to resolve the impasse. Also, they should reconsider the necessity of privatising National Housing and Construction Corporation.  

Secondly, government should allow, with immediate effect, sitting tenants of condominium property flats to start paying towards the purchase price of the said flats, rather than continuing to pay rent. Government should do this just for the purpose of social justice, as they sort out the legal technicalities. 

Mr Chairman, charging VAT on the flats makes the purchase price high and uncompetitive. In order to make housing affordable, VAT should not be charged on the sale of flats. Attached as appendix ‘A’ are the valuations and VAT charges on the flats. You can look at the appendixes and see how much valuations have been made and the component of VAT, which makes all the condominium flats very expensive.  

Communication sub-sector:

Through critical analysis the committee observed that the main functions of the Communications Department under the Ministry are presently the mandated responsibilities of the statutory body, the Uganda Communications Commission.  

The committee recommends that the department be restructured to streamline and rationalize its activities to reduce waste of resources through duplication of activities.

ICT Master Plan:

The committee applauds the government for designating ICT  (Information Communication Technology) as an area for strategic intervention. Indeed ICT has the potential of revolutionalising our economy.  

Through interaction with the Ministry the committee got the impression that the sector was spearheading the ICT initiative drive and was at the centre of crafting the ICT Master Plan. However, the committee later learnt that other government sectors and departments were also doing the same thing. The sectors are: State House, Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and others.  

While the committee appreciated that ICT is a cross cutting issue, and the committee had even strongly recommended its funding through a common pool, the committee strongly recommends that the initiative should be spearheaded by one sector - to reduce waste through duplication. This is like having a printer for every computer in every office, instead of having one printer for a number of computers.  

Affordability of Telecommunication Services (Mobile Phones and Internet):

Mr Chairman, the committee notes with concern that communication services still remain unaffordable to the majority of the population. This is in spite of the fact that even the roll out programme, as set in the licenses, has not progressed to the satisfaction of the committee.  

Attached, as appendix ‘B’ is the list of 154 sub-counties, which have been declared by the service providers - who are MTN and UTL - as unprotected and therefore are to be covered under rural communication programme.  

Attached also as appendix ‘C’ is a list of districts that have been connected to the Internet under the rural communication programme.  

The committee attributes high tariffs by mobile phone operators to the less aggressive nature of Uganda Communication Commission, which ironically is supposed to safeguard the interests of the users.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, with regard to the high Internet charges, the committee attributes the problem to the exclusive rights accorded to the two national operators (MTN and UTL) that enjoy exclusive access to the international super gateway through the satellite. The only solution, in the later case, is to wait for the expiry of the exclusivity period, which falls due in July 2005.  That is after five years since the privatisation of the UTL.  

The committee urges the Uganda Communications Commission to be proactive and vigilant in placing tariffs caps in the industry other than letting the market to determine tariffs and interconnectivity charges between service providers.

General recommendations are listed below:

1. The need to further restructure the sector.

There is need to restructure the Ministry in order to refocus the mandate of the Ministry since most functions, especially under Housing and Communications, are in the hands of statutory bodies or private sector, thereby sharpening the policy formulation role of the sector. In this way a lot of resources will be saved.

2. The sector wide budgeting approach under the sector is more of a myth than a reality. The complementality of the Housing, Communications and Transport is not clearly evident. This is shown by the meagre resources the sectors of Housing and Communications receive. They actually get two percent of the budget of the total resources in the sector. This denies the sectors the prominence that they deserve.

3. Mr Chairman, there is also urgent need to re-examine the cost effectiveness of the Transport Planning and Transport Regulation Departments of the Ministry to get value for money.  

4. Parliamentary committees cannot sufficiently monitor the economy without regular on-spot inspections of the programmes of the various sectors. It is the considered opinion of the committee that armchair supervision and monitoring of the national economy is a recipe for disaster. As the eyes and ears of the people, committees of Parliament must move out of Parliament to see where and in what quantities the national resources, the taxpayers money and donor money have been invested.  

The committee therefore strongly recommends that a budget line should be established specifically to facilitate committees to monitor the national budget.

The committee wishes to recommend to the House for approval, the estimates of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications for this financial year 2003/2004. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the recurrent expenditure totalling up to Shs 23.36 billion be approved; and Shs 106.05 billion for development expenditure. I beg to move and I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you very much chairperson and the committee for the good report.

MR GEOFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee and the members for their report. 

I would like to seek guidance and make a proposal on how we can handle reports in future. I am aware that at committee level members evaluate the response of the Minister or the Ministry as regards recommendations of the past year. I would like to recommend that various reports that are tabled to the House also should indicate whether the respective minister complied with the recommendations that the House had adopted. That will give us an insight into whether there is co-operation, or whether whatever we recommend here is swept under the carpet. This will help us to enhance the management of our country.

If that were indicated here, it would help us debate meaningfully, because the chairman’s report is full of serious criticism - despite being diplomatic. I am surprised because most of the Ministries, for example the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications is considered to be one of the Ministries that are delivering. But the lamentation in this report indicates that if you are an armchair monitor or inspector then sometimes you get the wrong impression. The fact that the committee went to the field, looked at several documents and has come out with this, shows that hon. John Nasasira, you need to do a lot.

I would like to recommend, and the committee has indicated in the report, that the Ministry needs restructuring. Most of the time I have heard ministries being restructured using consultants from outside the country. These consultants are not rooted here. In the process of restructuring the Ministry, if the Government would accept, the Members of Parliament, especially the committee members, should be deeply involved in the process such that we do not have restructuring that instead distorts the programme.

I support the motion and I would like to request hon. Nasasira to inform the people of Tororo County, Mbale, and Kapchorwa, when his ministry will build the bridge between Kwapa and Ituba. The committee, led by the chairman seated close to you, visited this bridge and categorically informed the people that this bridge is beyond the capacity of the district. The road is now closed –(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, it is Ituba-Kwapa road, and the bridge is at Apetai. 

The members of the committee, with your technical team, inspected the bridge and they categorically confirmed that the bridge is above the capacity of the district. Therefore, the people of Tororo County would like to hear from you. 

Lastly, the telecommunications sector is a serious one. I think as you advised, Mr chairman, Parliament will continue interacting with the Ministry. I think that is good because the Committee on National Economy where I sit, last financial year passed a loan under the Ministry of Energy, for road transformation. Uganda Telecom and MTN are supposed to benefit from a grant from the Government to extend telephone lines to specific sub-counties. To-date most of these sub-counties have not been served. 

Besides that, you know very well that telephone service providers in this country are charging a rate that is not internationally acceptable. Instead of charging per second they are charging us per minute, and this is quite costly. I would like to commend Celtel that has tried to introduce that kind of charging - per second. I beg to support the motion.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I am concerned because I do not know who is representing the mover of this motion. The Ministry of Finance, which moved the motion, has five ministers who are not represented here at all. It is instead represented by the Minister of Works –(Eng. Nasasira rose_)- I do not know, I can see him standing up. That is one point of concern. Maybe he will answer on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. 

Mr Chairman, pertinent questions that have been raised by the Chairman of the Works Committee have to be answered by the Ministry of Finance. My concern is, why is the Ministry of Finance and that of Works interested in paying US $2,000 per day for idle equipment in Kapchorwa, other than paying the contractor to finish the work in three months?

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your point of procedure? You are even developing another contribution.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: My point of procedure, Mr Chairman, is that I do not see the mover of the motion here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Who is representing the Ministry of Finance?  

ENG. NASASIRA: I am representing the Ministry of Finance. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, hon. Eng. Nasasira is holding the portfolio of Minister of Finance.

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for the report they have given the House. I have learnt with shock that the committee members used their own money to go and supervise the roads in many districts. I believe that Members of Parliament have the role of monitoring and evaluating government programmes. If we are not facilitated to play our role, I think it is very unfair. That we use our own money to perform the function, which actually is given to us by government –(Interjection)- yes, I mean it should be funded; we should find a budget to facilitate us to play our role.

Mr Chairman, I would like to talk about the road sector. We have been having this Ten Year Road Sector Development Plan, and many roads are waiting for that plan to be completed so that areas like Karamoja and West Nile could have roads.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Margaret Baba Diri, before you proceed, what do you mean by “using their own money”?

MRS BABA DIRI: Excuse me, Mr Chairman, unless I heard wrong, the chairperson said they used their own money for supervising.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is that? I do not understand it. Could you explain it?

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Chairman, I said - and I will repeat it - the committee found it difficult to move out of this place in order to do its oversight work. The members were only given the vehicle and at one time we had to get fuel on credit from a certain petrol station, but the maintenance in hotels was paid for by members.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, this is a very serious matter, and I do not want it to be opened up for debate.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much.  I am happy, Mr Chairman, that you have noted that it is a serious matter, which you are going to look into. Regarding the Ten Year Road Sector Plan, I think it has hiccups. It is not going as planned because of several factors. One factor is lack of funds, and we are fundraising here and there. About that I cannot comment much because we are beggars and we shall continue to be beggars.

The second issue is the way we contract our constructors. I have given an example of the Karuma-Pakwach road, Pakwach-Nebbi road and Arua-Nebbi road. I have learnt that when they are choosing from many bidders, they pick those who bid lowest. That means they want to spend little money. But what happens in the end is that the constructors will not have enough money to do the work, which they are supposed to do in a given time.   

I can give an example of the Israelis who are constructing the road between Nebbi and Arua. They had enough money and the road was completed. But the road between Nebbi and Karuma, up to now we are not using it and the Chinese are working very slowly. I believe the funds are not enough. Once in a while they run back to look for money, which is really dragging our plan.   

I would like to give another example, the Fort-Portal-Mubende road. It was started in 1992, I remember when I was going there, but up to now the road is not completed. That means the method we are using to contract our constructors is letting us down.  

Mr Chairman, about maintenance of roads, the committee has explained clearly that government does not think of maintaining roads. We can make roads but if they are not maintained they become a menace. Mubende road is so bad that you cannot feel that you are on driving tarmac road. So, I think as we plan we must budget for enough money for maintaining our roads.  

I would like to talk about the Traffic and Road Safety Act. I remember in 1998 we passed a very good law on traffic and road safety, to safeguard our pedestrians and travellers in vehicles. But what has happened is that up to now this law has not been implemented. As a result we have carnage on the roads; driver’s drive very carelessly, nobody is arresting them and even if they are arrested they are released soon thereafter. I can give you the recent example of Kasese where a driver rammed into soldiers, killing 12 people at a go. That is madness! What have they done to that driver? How are you going to stop these continuous road accidents?  

When we make laws here they must be implemented so that our efforts are seen by the people we represent. We do not make laws to be shelved or to be kept away. In the Traffic and Road Safety Act we mentioned very clearly that traffic lights should have a bell so that a blind person can hear and use the lights to cross when the bell rings. It is 5 years since this law was passed but there is nothing like a bell on the traffic lights. How much does it cost really to put a bell for a blind person to be able to cross?  

We talked about vehicles having racks to transport wheel chair users – the provision would help persons in wheelchairs to enter the vehicles freely. But up to now we are importing vehicles with no provision for physically handicapped persons. I feel disheartened when I see the physically handicapped people left by the roadside because the tax drivers have nowhere to put their wheelchairs, and they cannot afford to leave free seat for wheelchairs. So, I beg this House and the Minister of Transport, Housing and Communications to ensure that this law is put in place so that people with physical disabilities can use the roads with minimum accidents.  

I was shocked when I learnt recently that a physically handicapped person who was travelling from Luzira towards Kitintale was knocked down because she was walking very slowly and nobody could slow down the speeding vehicles. That is why I talk with disappointment because the people I represent are suffering because of the carelessness of the Ministry.

About housing, I do not know whether the committee has talked about planning of the cities and urban areas. Kampala here is just like a village with many houses crowded together. Recently when they were trying to grade the road in Luzira they had to destroy some houses because they were built on the road reserve. Where is the city planner? Do we have city planners here? The city is growing but the roads have remained the same and the people are building houses anywhere they want. They mix commercial houses together with residential houses. Where is the Condominium law we passed to provide proper housing? 

These days anybody can decide to build anywhere. You only have to carry the amount of cement you think of and the timber - and yet this is not our work; not all of us are builders. Let us have a planning authority so that we have the right people to build for us houses and we only buy from them. I was impressed in Kenya when a friend of mine bought a house that was well built. For me I am here running up and down with wood to build a house. It is very embarrassing.

Mr Chairman, accessibility to public houses is a very serious matter. Public houses like the International Conference Centre and banks are not accessible. We still have the steps. I feel that steps are not necessary anymore because when you put up a rump even able-bodied persons use them. One good example here is Parliament Building; I have been counting the number of people using the rumps as compared to those who use the steps. I have discovered that those who use the rumps are more than those who use the steps, and the steps have even become dusty because people are not using them anymore! So, by putting up rumps you help all of us. Why do we not emphasize the use of rumps instead of steps?  

I was really scared yesterday when one hon. Member, Jessica Eriyo became temporarily disabled. The way she was struggling to go to the Conference Centre, I said, “you see, if you joined me we would have a rump here or a lift and you would not have suffered”. So, this is a serious matter. It is not for us disabled persons only. It is for you who will become disabled, together with us that we are working for. So, when we talk about accessibility you should join me and ensure that there is accessibility in all houses.  

We have the universal design, which is now in the developed countries. That means when you are building a house, the house should be accessible to anybody: the tallest person can get around it, the fattest person can go through the house and you can move anywhere. So, this is the universal design that should be implemented here in Uganda.

Mr Chairman, I would like to commend the work done on Workers’ House. Many of you have been to the Workers’ House and you have used that lift. Do you know what happens there? When you enter, you hear a voice saying, “Doors are open, come in”, “doors closed, going up”. I feel so happy when I am there –(Laughter)– I can just move around without a guide because I can tell that the thing is going up or that it has reached –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, conclude please.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, I am about to conclude. Next to the steps in the Worker’s House you have a rump to slide you in. So, I would like Parliament to emulate that and put a person in the lifts, so that I and other blind persons enjoy moving up and down using the lifts. 

Honourable members and the committee, I would like to thank you for the work. You raised very important issues, which I think the Ministry will take very seriously. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.
                                                 
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also want to thank the committee for the good work they have done. My concern is about the Sironko-Kapchorwa road. We were almost celebrating over the completion of this road but we are getting very disappointed just because of a distance of five kilometres. We are equally disturbed that the money, which was given for this road, some people dipped their figures into it. 

I am wondering why that money had to be supervised from the High Commission in Nairobi. I thought this money would have come straight to the Ministry of Finance. We are disturbed now because that US $180,000 was misused. I hope the culprits are in time caught and they face the law.  

Mr Chairman, I hope the Minister will today tell us actually when the Sironko-Kapchorwa road will be completed, because the people of Kapchorwa are very anxious. 

I want to also say that Kapchorwa-Aswam road, as I speak now, is impassable. There are no bridges and the roads are washed away because of the heavy rains. What you saw on television with hon. Wambi is also happening in Kapchorwa. We are saying that if there is no money for tarmac, at least let that road be passable for the time being while you look for money. But as of now, the people of Kapchorwa are cut off. If they want to reach the other side of Kapchorwa, they have to go through another republic to reach their home. So, it is very disturbing and it gives a very bad image to the Government of Uganda. 

I want to say that the people of Kapchorwa have been very slow in responding to this Government and one of the reasons they have remained slow is that road. So, please, do not spoil our relationship with the people of Kapchorwa.

Mr Chairman, on the issue of centralising the roads including the feeder roads, when you travel in Kapchorwa you find that the feeder roads are better maintained than the central roads –(Interruption)- maybe in other places but for us the feeder roads are better than the central roads. For us we are more comfortable under decentralisation. What we need to do is to strengthen the supervision as far as the new equipment is concerned. Because I feel that if you centralise - I do not know. Does the Ministry have the capacity to supervise all these roads in the country? We need a closer working relationship between the districts and the Ministry of Works.

Another thing is to do with the National Housing flats. The law was passed about three years ago but what is disturbing is that this law has not been implemented. Each year the Ministry assures us that they are going to implement the law, but up to now people feel that it is just still stories and this issue may never be solved. So, I hope that in today’s report the Minister will assure us that that Condominium Law will be implemented in due course. Otherwise, Mr Chairman, I am happy with the committee’s work and I wish them the best. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will also add my voice to those of the members who have thanked the committee for the work they have tried to do for this Parliament and the Republic of Uganda. However, I would like to seek clarification from the Chairman of the committee. 

I remember I represented Parliament to a conference in Nairobi regarding the UN Habitat, but I am surprised the chairperson, whom we went with, has not comprehensively captured some of the things we got from that conference. When I look at the report, it seems that even the sub-sector has been under-funded. I thought it would be captured and brought to the attention of the Minister or the Ministry itself. That way more monies would be given to the Ministry to upgrade the slums. 

If you look around most of our towns, especially Kampala, there are so many slums coming up. How are we going to upgrade and bring on board these slum areas such that Kampala becomes a better place to live in? We were together with the chairperson of the committee and in fact I am worried – for instance on page 12 (3.3), human settlement and the national census he says: “The committee recommends the sub-sector to use important research like the census to formulate appropriate government interventions.” 

I would have thought that some amount of money should have been specified here for this area, to help bring the urban poor on board. When you talk about the budget allocated to that sub-sector, I feel really disheartened.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I wanted to see the great north road – I think that is what it is called - that road from Busega coming through Kawempe – the great northern bypass. The people are waiting to be paid and they are in fact giving up. They have got promise after promise, and they have not continued to develop their areas. I do not see it captured here. What is the programme for this? 

When you look at some of our roads today they are very narrow and they could be some of the contributory factors to the road menace and the carnage on our roads. The roads are narrow and on top of that even the shoulders are not well constructed. Some roads even lack the shoulders and the curb stones. Take Ndeeba road: that road was recently constructed but now the shoulders are gone. It is being eaten away at the sides because it is too narrow. They are not taking into consideration the traffic population; that is the car population and even the size of our vehicles, which are plying these routes. 

I would like to also talk about the actual weight of these vehicles, which are transporting heavy merchandise and even petroleum products. Look at the road around Nakawa bridge, look at Jinja road, and look at the road as you go to Nabbingo. It seems most of these vehicles are damaging many of our roads. I do not know if the material, which is supposed to be used, is the kind of material, which is being put into these roads. Is the actual weight no longer checked? I thought some of these things should have been captured here -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But this is not the end of dealing with the Ministry of Works and so forth. This report was in connection with the budget and therefore it could not have been comprehensive. But as I indicated earlier, we shall continue debating policies of various ministries as we go along with the session. So, do not think because something has not been included in the report it does not matter. We shall be able to deal with it. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you for that guidance, Mr Chairman. But fore warned is also fore armed.  Much as it does not appear here we would have thought that some of them should have been captured. And we need some little data. It is a good narrative story but we need some data, some kilometre coverage and even some loopholes like my colleague from Tororo said. What has been done with the previous recommendations? 

I read somewhere that the Minister was saying that we under-funded the Ministry. We want to know what has been achieved with the little money they have got. What have been the loopholes; what problems have they met such that we recommend more?

Lastly, the honourable Minister should come out and tell us what they have been using the money for the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture for, because being a multi-sectoral framework it is also being captured here. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us hear something from the West, Buhweju, first.

MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to also thank the chairperson of the committee for the very good report so far presented. I do not have a lot to say, but I want to raise a few issues. 

Transport and communication are very important sectors in the development of any nation. In which case the Government should handle them very seriously. What have I not heard! I realize that a road policy will be put in place to improve service delivery. Does that mean it is going to do better than the present ministry is doing?
 
Secondly, I would like to get examples where such has worked, where the Government has divested itself in this sector to a road authority and this authority has performed.
  
Thirdly, the absence of the involvement of Parliament in the policy formulation; it is dangerous to do it alone because where policy formulation is concerned, Parliament is involved in such; not only Parliament but also the public. The people will own such a policy. But when it is done by one man, when such a policy gets problems, the price of reversing it becomes too high. It becomes too high and it is not owned by all. So, I urge that line ministries involve Parliament and the public in policy formulation because after all two heads are better than one. 

Mr Chairman, the chairperson of the committee has alluded to very high contract rates. In fact when we were in the Budget Committee the other day, we learnt that the cost of constructing a road in Uganda or maintaining a road in Uganda is the highest in East Africa. Why is this the case? Is this why we cannot have more roads made, because of the high costs? 

Mr Chairman, unlike my honourable colleague from Kapchorwa, the roads in the West, at least from Bushenyi where I come from, their maintenance by local authorities leaves a lot to be desired. In fact, it depicts a situation that nobody is in charge. You find say the Chairman LC III gets a grader, and to him a road means getting a grader running over the road and that is all. There is no laying of marrum, no water channels and all that. So you find these roads are quite impassable because nobody is in charge. So, I appeal to the sector minister to get a mechanism of ensuring that someone responsible is in charge of these roads and they can be properly maintained.

Like my colleague hon. Baba Diri, I have also noted that in our nation here particularly in these urban areas, development is ahead of planning. And this is disastrous because to plan after development is not easy. Putting up roads and drainage structures is a problem. When you look at our Kampala, it is expanding now so we need – I do not know what can be done to ensure that planning is always ahead of the development in this country. We should have better organized settlements for our people, and a better organized population.

I would like to ask also, just for my constituency’s sake because Buhweju as you are aware has no through road. It is actually the end of the world. Honourable minister, will that road from Buhweju to Bunyaruguru ever be done so that we can also get a through road to communicate to other areas? I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR JAMES KUBETEKERYA (Bunya East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for the work done. In the first place, I would like to get clarification from the chairperson about that annex on the list of the under served sub-counties, the ones that have been served by mobile telephones. If they are the ones who gave you this information, I think it leaves a lot to be desired. We have a district like Mayuge, which is not included and I think there are seven sub-counties without telephones. There is Kigandalo, there is Buwaya, Baitambogwe, Kityerela, Imamiro and the town council.

At the same time I would also like to remind the Minister that around August 2001 you wrote to us telling us that the MTN network was going to put us on but up to now nothing has been done. And to annoy us more, they have not included us in those sub-counties that are under served. So, I would like to give this information so that you add us on to that list.

The other issue is about the ferry services, Mr Chairman. The Minister has been telling us about Nakasongola, Kamuli and maybe Kalangala. But I would like to mention that the Busoga region, especially the south of it towards Kenya, there are districts like Mayuge and Bugiri that require a ferry. These people do not know sometimes whether they are in Kenya or Uganda. So, we should have ferry services between Mayuge and Bugiri, that is Sigulu Island, Jagusi in Mayuge and other smaller Islands. They are really far away and I think it has caused a problem in monitoring government services. 

Last month we went to Bugiri and they were telling us it is very hard to get to Sigulu Islands. So, somehow if you are going to look at health centres the local authorities will take advantage and tell you the route is impassable. And they will instead tell you how they have constructed let say four health centres when in fact it is not true. So, I would like to request the Minister that from your meagre resources let us have a ferry service between Bugiri and Mayuge in order to make the places accessible.

Lastly, I always get perturbed when we have renovations in town. It so happens that the nature of pavements that are being put up in our urban areas leave a lot to be desired. Mr Minister, as you go to your office, note that the roundabout on Jinja Road is incomplete but already the pavements have given way. Yet there are some pavements that are older than me and are still very strong.  

So, who monitors services or activities going on in town? I would like to request the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications to ensure that say if it is Kampala City Council doing it, it is done well. Otherwise they will always be requesting for more money to do the renovations, but they do something that is actually not very durable. Just go to that roundabout. Most of those pavements have given way and I think they have not even lasted a month. So, I would like to request that even Kampala City Council be monitored by the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. I thank you very much.

MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Allow me to also take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. There are few issues, which I would wish to seek some clarification on. 

First of all, we all do understand and appreciate that transport is one of the cardinal factors of production and later on development. We are also aware that right now in Uganda all business ventures have been liberalised. But I have been a little saddened to learn from the committee that that is not the case in as far as licensing Arua-Kampala route to bus operators is concerned.  

Mr Chairman, while the committee was in session the communities of Arua did petition the committee to come out with an explanation as to why Arua route is being monopolised by one transport company, Nile Coach. This therefore puts many of the road users at a disadvantage in the sense that they are the only operators. They have a leeway to charge any fare and therefore are not subjected to competition. 

An attempt was made by Gateway Bus Company to also to ply this route but the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications has reliably been known to be a stumbling block. This is to the extent that it has only allowed one or two buses of Gateway Bus Company to ply that route. 

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Chairman, with due respect to hon. Ezati, the committee was certainly petitioned about this issue. We called in the people who are responsible for licensing and we put them to task to explain this. They pleaded for mercy and said that actually Nile Coach was the only one that offered services at the worst time when everybody had abandoned Arua route. 

So, they were arguing that they should be allowed to continue so that they recover because Gateway is coming in after they have done all the donkeywork of cleaning that route to the point that now the road is now marketable and is going to be tarmacked. We listened to that but we could not put it in the report.

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am not surprised that Eng. Gagawala comes from Kamuli District otherwise he should have known that even at the most trying moment there were many more buses plying that route. There was Loyi Bus Company, there was NKK and there was Contour, which until 28 December 2000 had that tragic accident, which led to many people perishing in River Nile.
  
I do not think that the information you are giving me is well researched. 

Having said that, it is even frivolous to come out and say that Nile Coach was the only bus that endured the hard times. I did bring to the Floor of this House information and laid papers on the Table to the effect that there were many businessmen who had lost their equipment, drugs and merchandise under the same situation. But I think it is very unfair that the people of West Nile be subjected to the monopoly of this firm.

For example, look at the route going to the West. How many buses ply it? Every after five minutes there is a bus going to Kabale, going to Kisoro, going to Kasese, going to Mbarara. That is because where there is competition there is efficiency and there is good service expected to be rendered to the people. I think it is only fair, in the spirit of liberalisation, that this ministry does seriously reconsider its decision to have a monopoly instituted on this route.

The second issue that I would like to share with this committee is its attempt and appreciation of road maintenance, as one of the avenues of poverty alleviation. I would like this ministry to borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Health and that of Education. Whenever these two ministries send any resources down to the districts, whether it is for school facilitation, school completion or construction of healthy units, Members of Parliament are notified so that at the end of the day they know what amount of money has gone to the district and they can be able to follow it up. But when the Ministry secretly sends money to the districts, certainly it is subject to abuse.  

The people who take these contracts, I am happy the committee has noticed, are the affluent and the rich in the town. It is not the poor in the countryside who are actually targeted for these - as a poverty alleviation initiative. I think it could be useful if the Ministry could borrow a leaf from those other two ministries and also give us information to that effect, so that we can be able to make a follow up.

Then the third issue is that of operationalisation of the Condominium law. Mr Chairman, when Public Service through its various reforms came out with the idea of allowing the sitting tenants to purchase the full houses in which they were, this was bearing in mind the fact that a civil servant is the most disadvantaged person in terms of conditions of service.  

But three, four years down the road, there are those who were living in non-storied facilities. A good number of them have completed paying for those houses. They can therefore be able to mortgage the titles and get money for their own development. But there are those who are even living in tradition full houses but which for one reason or another may have been storied structures. Up to now they continue to pay commercial rent, which defeats the purpose of understanding the plight of a civil servant.

Ever since this Condominium law came into being, year in, year out we are being told, “It is going to be operationalised”. I would like to hear from the horse’s mouth, as it were. I would like to hear from the Minister: could he give us a succinct period within which this law is going to be operationalised? Because what I do understand is that there is now dialogue. Is it Housing, is it Works, or is it the Finance Ministry? The few civil servants who are still living in those houses are really paying through their noses.

The fourth issue that I would like to share is the issue of road equipment, which are being shared by districts. We do know that today not many districts have the opportunity to federate and have a framework within which to draw up an agreement to share equipment that is in their possession. Does the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications have a linkage with the district engineers? Because there is no point in having equipment located say in Arua District and you expect a young district like Yumbe or Nebbi to get it from there. If the centre detaches itself from the districts, rest assured that the equipment will not be able to reach the other districts. Is there a mechanism of that nature?  

Last but not least, there is the issue of monitoring and supervision. Colossal sums of money have been spent both for today’s generation and the future generations to repay. But I am at a loss as to whether the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications routinely supervises and monitors the work that is going on on the ground. This is just to underscore the issue, which was raised by my teacher, hon. Margaret Baba Diri when she talked about the Pakwach-Nebbi route. Right now people are going through the bush, the Chinese do not even want a vehicle to step on a metre or so of the road that they are constructing. Is it because they are not sure of the quality of their work that they fear that if a vehicle steps on it, it might again develop potholes? I think those are issues that the Ministry needs to closely monitor and supervise. I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee for a very good report. 

I am concerned about the change of the status of the National Housing and Construction Corporation from a corporation into a limited liability company. National Housing was created by an Act of Parliament and I really want to get clarification from the chairman and the Minister whether they did bring this change over to Parliament. I think it is important that we know the legal status of the change of the Corporation into a limited liability company.  

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I want to know whether there is an overall housing policy, because we can see in the report that there are projects and programmes many of which are normally chosen, for instance, as pilot projects. But it does not really cover the whole country in the form of a housing policy. I would like to know from the Minister whether there is a comprehensive housing policy. 

Maybe he could also give examples of the housing cooperatives and the rural housing schemes, which are being carried out and are mentioned in the report.

Thirdly, I am a bit concerned about the capacity of the chief architects and the quantity surveyors in the Ministry in regard to supervision of consultants who normally carry out government projects. This is because if we do not have the capacity to supervise the consultants who work on behalf of government, it becomes very difficult for standards to be maintained, and for costs to be kept down.  

So, I want to know about the capacity, which we have in the Ministry of Housing regarding the architects and the quantity surveyors in supervising government projects. Just like you have the Ministry of Foreign Affairs building going up, do we have enough architects and quantity surveyors to supervise the consultants that have been appointed?  

Lastly, I really want to know the status of the Karuma-Pakwach road, which passes through Nwoya County. When will it start? We are very concerned about the mobility of troops in that area. The road is so bad that it takes almost three to four hours for a lorry to go through Karuma to Pakwach. This does affect the security, mobility and also the control of the rebels on that road. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for a good report. I particularly thank them for having ventured into visiting the field so that they get their own impressions. 

Mr Chairman, much as hon. Nasasira humbly said he was representing the Ministry of Finance, I am sure the Ministers in the Ministry of Finance should be either sanctioned for not attending sessions when we are debating the budget, because it is their responsibility. I am also surprised that the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs are also conspicuously absent. 

I am also disappointed that resources to work on bridges –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me say this. Before I came here I received a telephone call to the effect that there is a Cabinet meeting. However, I expected the Front Bench to inform us about what is happening. Anyway, I received a call that there is a cabinet meeting going on now. I do not know whether it is correct.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Chairman, there is a cabinet meeting every Wednesday and I am here standing in for the Prime Minister. (Laughter).

DR KASIRIVU: Congratulations! Mr Chairman, I am disappointed that construction or repair of bridges on our roads was not given the prominence it deserves. Is it possible, therefore, that some form of supplementary is sought so that bridges are given attention this financial year?  

Almost every report that will be presented here will highlight hiring of expatriates and consultants, and it seems as if we cannot move unless we get expatriates and consultants. But I think that if we need an expatriate, that person should be here for a few months as one or two of our officers study their performance so that they can also take on the job, which the expatriates were supposed to do. But year in, year out, expatriates are around, and they are expensive yet some of them may not be actually as efficient as we think. So, what do we do to make sure that we minimise the use of consultants? This might reduce the confidence we have in ourselves, sort of.  

Much as I commended the committee’s report, I am very disappointed that a very important project in this country, the Busunju-Hoima road, has not been mentioned anywhere. Yet, Mr Chairman, you are aware that a few months ago people from the Kingdom of Bunyoro demonstrated because they are not happy. I am sure if the road were a bit passable, the committee would have travelled along that road. It is because it is very impassable that they could not venture there. So, at least they should have mentioned in their report that because of the bad state of the road, they did not go that way. I am expecting the Minister, in his response, to tell us what is happening, and the way forward on this road.  

I am a Member of the Committee on Agriculture and there is this monster they call PMA. It has been said that PMA is multi-sectoral and it includes roads. I am also disappointed that the Committee on Works did not mention that there are some resources from PMA, which have been working on some roads. Actually, we have demanded as a committee that some roads be labelled PMA and a signpost is put there so that we know that a certain road was worked on with PMA money. Otherwise, there is a possibility of somebody using funds from the Ministry of Works and then accounting to the PMA Secretariat. 

Mr Chairman, in the report of the committee there are several Bills, which will be coming here. As I rightly observed, most Bills come up as a result of a policy. I am expecting that this time policies should be generated, we debate them, so that when a Bill comes, we have already got background information against which the Bill was brought. Otherwise, to bring a Bill to Parliament and we begin fidgeting here and there when we do not have the background policy for it, is actually very unfortunate. I hope we shall improve our work method.

Lastly, I am disappointed again. Appendix ‘B’ of Annex 1 of the report has indicated the entire Bugangaizi County, which I have represented since 1996, as unprotected. I really require an explanation as to why Bugangaizi is unprotected and whether we shall continue being unprotected.  

Mr Chairman, you know we are a “lost county”, we are unprotected now -(Interjections)- honestly, something must be done! And I have been a good friend of the Minister of Works –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you still a “lost county”? Are you not a “recovered county”? 

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, we are still a “lost county”. I thank you.

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for an elaborate report. However, I have some concerns, which I would like to mention very briefly -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But please, restrict yourself to three minutes.

MR KASAMBA: Yes, Sir. 

Mr Chairman, this year’s budget emphasised the strategy of export promotion and the transport sector is one of the most important sectors, which is going to link us for the export of products, which are being produced. However, I would like to iron out the concerns the committee left out totally. Nothing was mentioned about railway transport. I thought the committee would at least have mentioned something in this year’s budget about railway and air transport. The committee has neglected those sectors. The committee only mentioned transport by road and water. But I think these are very import sectors as far as export promotion is concerned. 

My colleagues have mentioned PMA and I think the Ministry of Works is one of the most important supportive ministries in as far as PMA compliance is concerned. It should be mentioned straight away that PMA needs to be well stated as far as the Ministry of Works is concerned. PMA is a very important brainchild of this Government, so we need to mention how far the Ministry of Works has complied as far as PMA is concerned. 

There is also another concern as far as utilisation of road reserves is concerned. Of late there are so many service providers who are breaking up road reserves. When you move along Jinja Road you find private companies breaking up road reserves and installing underground cables. I think the Ministry of Works needs to come up with a strategy and present to Parliament how government is benefiting from the private users of the road reserves, especially MTN and UTL ground cables. 

I think the Government should come up with a strategy on how to benefit from that. Much as these companies are providing a service to this nation, I think there is need for government to levy ground rent for this. So, the Ministry of Works should come up with a strategy to present to Parliament how road reserves are being utilised and how government is benefiting from the use of these road reserves. 

Lastly, is the need to urgently come up with the Building Control Bill, which is a critical factor when merged with physical planning under the Ministry of Lands. There are many sporadic towns, which are coming up without any plan. The Building Control Bill needs to come up very urgently to help us plan for the town and country development for this country. I think the Ministry of Works should urgently bring these Bills to Parliament so that we are able to plan for this country. Otherwise, we are really putting up structures in a very unplanned manner. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, you will bear with me because we have another session in the afternoon. To those that I have not given chance to make some contributions, I will do so in the afternoon because I have to return to this side now.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But, please, three minutes.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I am also equally concerned. I am happy the Works and Transport Committee travelled upcountry and visited Kamwenge. But my only concern is that nothing has been mentioned about Uganda Railways Corporation and the buildings that have gone to waste at various stations along the Kampala/Kasese route. I would have wanted their recommendation on these structures.  

Number two, maybe the Minister of Finance will assist me on VAT on these flats. What value has been added to Bugolobi flats to warrant charging VAT? They would have charged a depreciation fee instead of VAT. What value has been added and what is the rationale of charging VAT on these flats? The Minister of Finance should assist me on that.

Number 3 is about the legal technicalities. Why has the National Housing and Construction Corporation been privatised in the process of selling these flats? What is the rationale? Who is gaining from that? Actually those are pertinent questions, which the Minister of Finance should answer so that the Ministry of Works also gets on board.  

Number 4, I am concerned about the Kapchorwa issue. The Ministry of Finance should sit with the Ministry of Works and assist us. Why is government more interested in paying US $200 daily for idle equipment and labour other than paying the contractor to finish the work in three months? These are pertinent questions, Mr Minister of Finance/Works, which you should tell this Parliament about so that we do not put resources to waste.  

I have seen various Bills and we were with the Law Reform Commission, which told us of the various Bills, which they recommended to the Government to present to Parliament five years ago. Now I see other Bills under the Ministry of Works and Housing; I do not know whether it is the priority of the Ministry. When are these Bills coming here? Are they of any importance to you? For example, are they of any importance that they should be brought to this Parliament? What is our priority as government?

Finally, I have seen the concern of the Works Committee that the money for PAF is not reaching the people. But the poor people do not have registered companies to contract these works. What is your recommendation towards that? Can they register any company? Should the PAF funds assist people to register companies so that they take over the works? That is the nature of the recommendation we would like. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR JOHN REX AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a few things to raise here. First of all, I would like to commend the work done by the committee. On page 6, I want to be specific, the committee has recommended that the urban roads be reverted to the Central Government.  

I would like to agree with that point because having worked in the Local Government, I have learnt that the officers in charge of central roads have always acted independently and they were not getting supervision or guidance from Local Governments. So, I think reverting all these activities to the Central Government will be more useful in order to check corruption, which I saw as a bottleneck in handling central works maintenance activities.

There has also been a lack of patriotism especially among officers who are in charge of central works roads. 

There is also one other thing, Mr Chairman, I would like the committee to guide me about. There is an element of supervision. Now that we are going to revert all these programmes to the Central Government, how are we going to ensure supervision? Somewhere in your policy statement you mentioned that there is poor workmanship or skills at the lower cadre level. Do we remain like that or are you providing some technical training or short courses for these people to match-up with the situation on the ground?

I would also like to know from the committee and the Minister, the issue of privatising or upgrading of roads in respect to Presidential pledges. Mr Chairman, roads in Karamoja have been pledged from 1996 up to yesterday. These roads were to be upgraded to first grade marrum roads or tarmac. Every time it comes up in the manifesto, it is shifted to the next financial year. When that financial year comes, it is pushed three years ahead. What kind of criteria do you use hon. Minister, to do this? If you could give me the answer, it would be very good. 

Look at your policy statement on road sector institutional support and the technical assistance project. There is nothing that you can see about Karamoja and in particular about Jie County. We are living on an island, we do not have bridges, and that brings me to the next issue about bridges.  

Mr Chairman, I feel that contracts on rehabilitating bridges should be given to international bodies, which have reputable integrity in doing the work so that maybe they sub-contract their work to local firms. In the long run those local firms could have a liberation from corruption and moral decadence. They could also get the experience of conducting jobs for value for money. Our local firms do not really look at this and they lack the instincts of patriotism. This is what the problem is. Shoddy work on the ground is all because of this tendency.

Lastly, is periodic maintenance. When I travelled from Masindi, I saw that there is a problem of road signs and resealing. In the policy statement, it is mentioned that where you find the road is eaten up, you go and patch it up. I do not know how useful it is to patch up a road or to reseal it because you do not have money yet within one or two weeks you find the road is worn out. How nice will it look if I patch up my coat and I appear in Parliament? How costly will it be? I think this is the problem we have.  

We have a problem of re-gravelling. Look at the roads when you are travelling from Soroti to Kotido. They are very bad, and I do not know whether the Ministry is aware of this. I passed Katakwi; it is lamentable. The rebels can get you there anytime because you are still muddled up in potholes! And it becomes worse when you get to Karamoja where there is some sophisticated weaponry, it becomes very risky to work on this. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MRS NVUMETTA KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to welcome back the committee from Kalangala. I hope there was fuel for the ferry when you travelled. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to make a few observations. The first one is on the Kalangala ship or steamer, and it has been planned for some time now. Unfortunately, the politicians of the area are not involved and do not know what is happening. 

Secondly, I have not seen any plan, even in the policy statement, about the landing sites. Where is it going to dock? The piers? I mean, nothing is indicating what is going to be done. It may be built and 70 percent of it finished by the year 2004, and then what happens for us to have a look at?

Mr Chairman, I also understand from some areas that there is an airstrip that has been constructed in Kalangala District. First and foremost, an airstrip is not like a path to my house, yet it is not mentioned anywhere. I mean, we do not know about it. It must be something. To me an airstrip needs a lot of technical input and I would expect that to be given by the Ministry of Works. But when this Parliament, including us the Members of Parliament from the area, do not even know where it is, it is absurd! Where is it? 

We are told it is there but we really need a little clarification on this, because it could be dangerous. It could be flying in people we do not know or we cannot fend for. So, Mr Chairman, I feel that something needs to be clarified in that area.   

Mr Chairman, about the IT content development, Kalangala not being on the list disappoints me. Why? It is the area that needs this development most because communication on the water is difficult. So we need to know about it more on the website and it has got a lot to give. It has got the fish, it has got the tourism; it has got a lot to give. But if it is not included on the list - and nobody can say that it is difficult to reach because there is already a UTL landline. So, it is not like electricity, which, I am told, has to go under water and the rest of it. So, why can Kalangala not be included? 

I would just like to put a little emphasis on the roads, like Bukakata Road. It has just been graded but it is in a sorry state now. Can it not be tarmacked? It carries a lot of goods! There is so much trade on that road that benefits our economy and I feel something needs to be done at least in the plans to come, and maybe some of the district roads. There are some small districts that have inner roads but they cannot raise enough revenue to look after them. Maybe some of these various small districts need to be looked at so that they are helped out with those feeder roads within their districts. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Chairman, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have presented to us. I also thank the Minister and the Ministry for having maintained the road through Mabira Forest well. It is now very conducive to go through at whatever time of day or night.

From the report, I would like to know exactly what the committee members were reporting about upgrading slums especially in Kimaga. I wonder where this Kimaga is - because what used to be Kimaga is now where we have the new dam called Kiira Dam, and then adjacent to that there is Nile Resort. Between there, there is MULCO and PAPCO former industries and what used to be the slum is no more. The slum dwellers were paid off to provide room for this dam. 

So, when we are informed of upgrading Kimaga slum, I would like to know whether there is another Kimaga in Jinja, because once upon a time I used to be a councillor representing that area and I took part in compensating the slum dwellers.  So, if this is not the Kimaga I know, then I think the committee needs to revisit it to see exactly where this Kimaga is now.

Mr Chairman, I was equally perturbed when I did not hear anything mentioned about the Bugungu Road, which leads to the government prison in Mukono. The Minister of Finance together with the Minister of Works, both of whom are here, I have personally taken them to this road during wet and dry seasons and they are well informed about the condition of this road. They have been promising the district that this is a government road and it will be maintained and improved. But when the report came out there is nothing mentioned about Bugungu Road, yet this is where government takes its prisoners. And they expect Mukono District to look after these prisoners using an impassable road!

We also have the Buikwe road. This is a substitute road from Kampala to Jinja and many times both ministers here present have gone through this road. They have been promising that in this budget this road would be included for upgrading. This is the only road that can access people from Kampala to Jinja, if anything happened to the road passing through Mabira Forest. But time and again I have been here requesting the Ministries to consider taking care of this road. Much as we have the Mabira Forest road, Buikwe road is even more important because that is where all the farmers, and traders reside. And since we know that now Mukono is a storekeeper of the gold of Uganda in the name of vanilla - these are the vanilla growers - it has become so expensive mainly because of lack of accessible roads. This has drawn everybody even Kampala dwellers to start growing vanilla, yet our vanilla is made expensive because of the inaccessibility of the place. 

So, I wonder, we went there with the Minister and he promised us in Mukono that they would look into the matter of this road. We have a railway crossing, which is about a meter above the normal road, and we have had accidents time and again at that railway crossing. But I do not know whether the Ministry will be considering removing the railway line so that we can grade that road and stop those accidents since the railway line is not being used anyway.

Finally, I would like to know how the Ministry is considering the future accommodation of the civil servants. Much as we are thinking of upgrading the slums, the Ministry is going ahead to sell the National Housing flats without considering where the future civil servants will be accommodated. Even all the plots in urban centres are being sold off. The houses, which used to be pool houses, have been sold off. So, can we get a plan as to where the Ministry expects the future civil servants to be accommodated, since they will not be having plots in these respective urban areas? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, you have just three minutes because I have to cover some three areas from this side.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let me take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done and also to thank the Minister. He has been a good listener and has taken the concerns of most of our people.  Thank you so much, keep up the spirit. 

Having said that, I stand here to seek some clarifications and give some information as well. I am looking at page 4 of the committee report on impact of road maintenance budget on poverty eradication. The aim here is to alleviate poverty of our local people. That is why I have this figure of Shs 5.007 billion advanced to the local communities for the maintenance of the roads. But the figure here of Shs 50,000 per kilometre, I do not know! Is this per month, per year? I need some clarification from the committee. You have given us Shs 50,000 per kilometre, so I need some more clarification from the chairperson on that.

I also want to make a comment on the Sironko-Kapchorwa road. I want to seek clarification from the chairman and the Minister. At this rate, of paying Shs 1.39 billion yet we know the outstanding balance to cover this road is Shs 11.5 billion, I see us completing this road in 11 years’ time. If we are to move at this rate, then we shall not be able to complete this road. What is the problem?  

We have also had the problem whereby some money, which was unauthorized, was withdrawn from the High Commission in Kenya. What action have you taken to address this? Because we see this as a problem, which has caused the delay in the completion of these roads, and yet the interest is accumulating and even the VAT will go up because the figure is going up. So, what action have you taken to address this problem?

We have a problem on this newly constructed road from Malaba to Bugiri. It is good the committee travelled there. The work on that road is sub-standard. What is your recommendation? I have not seen any comment here about that road. Honourable minister, I would like to hear from you about what has happened to that road.

When you come to the issue of water transport, I share with the committee the concerns that so many people died on this lake last year. Thirty-six people who were crossing from Kasilo to Kamuli died. I think you need to provide better water transport on these lakes to save the lives of the people.

Last year we passed a loan for the construction of landing sites. Kasilo County was to benefit with three landing sites. I have not seen anything mentioned in this report about the progress of the construction of these landing sites. Could I be informed what steps have been taken? I personally participated in acquiring land titles for these places where these landing sites are supposed to be built. So, what is the progress of this work?

To the Minister of Works and that of Finance, I visited Port Bell, but I was very disappointed. I wish the committee had also visited this place.  We found a water hyacinth harvester that had been imported, but it had failed to work. How can you import such a machine at a cost of over US $15 million! I need some clarification on that.

Finally, on the issue of VAT, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable member, I gave you three minutes and you should have restricted yourself to a few points, not everything.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I am concluding. On the issue of VAT on these flats that are being sold, I think the onus lies on this House. The PERD Statute is very specific. If you are dealing in the business of selling residential houses, there is VAT on it. Unless this House comes up and amends that, there is no way you are going to remove VAT on these flats. Thank you.

MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have about three issues to raise. I wish to thank the chairman of the committee, and of course the Minister, for a commendable report and the work done. My worry is particularly on the implementation of the Condominium law.

I have looked at the relevant law, the PERD Statute - I have it here, I can lay it on the Table if it is required – and I have looked at sections 20 and 21. The Minister of Works and Housing should not have been sidelined in the implementation of the Condominium law. Section 21 says; 

“Subject to the approval of the committee and to the provisions of this Statute, the Minister responsible for Finance, in consultation with the responsible Minister, shall effect the transfer of the propriety interest of the said…” He must be consulted! And in sub-section (2), either of the two ministers can transfer propriety rights.  

In the first place, I do not see why the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications should not have been a shareholder in the newly created National Housing and Construction Limited, the private company. I strongly propose that he should be a shareholder. It provides checks and balances, and it brings the relevant sectoral interests in the implementation of the law. So, he should be a shareholder.

Two, the implementation of that law leaves a lot to be desired. I understand the President assented to the Condominium law in early 2001, but up to now nothing seems to be moving. The people who are in these condominium properties need a detailed plan and schedule on how the divestiture is going to take place. 

We need a plan, and in any case I do not see the rationale of saying, “We are starting with Bugolobi”. The starting point should be known and should be on a particular date. The money people pay in terms of rent should go towards offsetting the cost price of the condominium properties at a later stage, when the formalities are finalized. 

So, I do not see why they are saying, “Now it is Kololo, then Bugolobi”; it is not going to be fair. We have been paying! What we are paying now should be capitalized towards the final cost of the property, and the VAT is inconsumable. Previously when other officials were buying bungalows, there was no VAT. I do not know when double standards in Uganda will ever end. When the big shots were buying bungalows in many of these places in town, there was no VAT. Now because these small people, the “Ruhindis”, are buying, there is VAT. This is simply because they have circumvented the law and they have now formed a limited liability company, which is registered as a VAT payer, therefore, people must pay. 

Let us bring the relevant law here and amend it. The problem is, Mr Chairman, there is no comprehensive housing policy in Uganda; there is none! The other day I was quarrelling about the two estates of Naguru and Nakawa; it is the same story, no plan! They say people simply have to be evicted, then at a later stage something has got to be done. What is that thing, which is going to be done, which we cannot know about now?

Finally, the tendering process needs to be completely reviewed and overhauled. As much as you are actually emphasizing creating a central maintenance body, you also need to look at this tendering issue very seriously. The award of tenders, the monitoring of works and the execution of contracts leaves a lot to be desired. I understand, for instance, that 2.5 percent is retained when the contract is executed. You give a man 2.5 percent of the total value, but the road is in shambles and the damage far exceeds the retained money. What do you do? The man just gets away with it. 

Why do we not increase, for instance, the retention fee? Why do we not put penalties that are sufficient enough to make sure that these people, when they breach the agreement, are accountable? But you know what happens, Mr Chairman, I do not have to eat into other colleagues’ time! I beg to support the motion.

MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thank the committee for the report. The concern I have is on page 82 of the ministerial policy statement, and it is about Ntungamo-Ishasha road.  

I would like to know from the Minister why the Ntungamo-Ishasha road has changed to Ntungamo-Rukungiri road. When this road was proposed, it was Ntungamo-Ishasha road but suddenly it has changed to Ntungamo-Rukungiri road. My people are very worried, suspicious and uncomfortable about this change of name. 

To add to that, if the proposal is that it now stops in Rukungiri, it will be a very big wastage of taxpayers’ money. Ishasha is at the border with Congo, definitely we would have a very high turnover if this road went up to Ishasha.  

Related to that, Mr Chairman, why has this road stalled? If I recall well, the Minister said here that the first phase of the road was supposed to be completed by 12 December 2002. But as I speak now, the second phase has not started and this is creating worry amongst the population who are supposed to benefit from this road. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR JOHN ODIT (Erute South, Lira): Mr Chairman, I also want to thank the committee, but my attention is drawn to three pages, 7, 11 and 5. To begin with, on page 7 the committee recommends that the manual routine road maintenance contract should be awarded to the poor people along the networks. 

I remember that the Government contracted SIETCO, a fairly poor Chinese company, to maintain the road between Soroti and Lira. That was meant to be a first-class marrum road, but I do not know whether the Minister is aware that it is no longer even a third-class one. The type of equipment used was very heavy, by any standards of the poor. 

So, I would like to know, with this kind of recommendation, what kind of poor should get into this kind of contract? What kind of equipment will be required for the poor people to use on this road maintenance? That is point number one.

Two, my interest was also drawn to page 11 where government is selling properties, including buildings. Some ministries are desperate and are literally on the streets, they do not have accommodation. A case in point is the Ministry of Agriculture, which has all along been interested in moving its offices from Entebbe to Kampala. 

Last year we allocated Shs 300 million just for buying a plot and because there was no money that item was removed. Now we are learning that there are many buildings here lying idle waiting just to be sold to unknown people. Why do we not borrow this money or buy these buildings? We could then give them out to the Ministry of Agriculture, so that they are nearer here and they can perform more efficiently rather than remaining with the burden of moving from here to Entebbe every morning.

Three, this idea of the district equipment being hired out to the private sector is also a very interesting scenario. First of all, when we go down to the districts, the Ministry of Works has what they call some kind of engineer who reports directly to the Ministry headquarters here. That is a very protected department in the district, and the district people also tend to just talk to them softly in order to get the facilities from those departments. If the Ministry is also complaining that the district engineers are hiring out this equipment, then I do not know who controls these officers in the districts. 

The district works are all under engineers and they should be under the provision of the Ministry of Works. The committee has highlighted clearly that these people are hiring out this equipment; under whose authority are they hiring out this equipment to the private sector? I know it is a fact, and it has happened again and again.  

Lastly, reference has been made to a number of roads but there is the old story of the road between Lira and Soroti, which is just 125 km. It is not tarmacked, and we would have been connecting to Mombasa, Lira and back to Kampala on a very good road. 

Heavy trucks, which used to avoid using Karuma Bridge, are now using it because there are sometimes no alternatives, but this bridge is very weak. It was built a long time ago, and it was meant for light vehicles, but now heavy trucks are using it. We do not know whether the Ministry is looking at the condition of these bridges and looking at an alternative route, which can feed the North and maybe parts of the DRC and Southern Sudan. These are my concerns. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Mr Chairman, I thank you and I thank the committee for the report. I have two short points. The first one is the one alluded to by hon. Fred Ruhindi, on page 13. The committee concludes that technically, after incorporation of NHCC into a limited liability company, the Minister of Housing has nothing to do with the company. I think this is not correct. 

By virtue of the fact that this is a limited liability company, it falls under the Ministry of Housing. Therefore, the technical aspect cannot knock out the fact that this company falls under the control of this particular ministry.  

My second point, Mr Chairman, is very short, and this is on the 55-kilometre road between Kyegegwa and Kyenjojo. I want to thank the committee for having visited this particular road. 

I also want to thank the Minister for giving Kyenjojo a grader. I would like to remind the Minister that this stretch needs to be done. We have seen that you have set up camp, but because we had equipment on this road before and it was removed, we need to have our fears allayed. We want to know exactly when the construction of the road will begin and when it will be completed. I thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR EDWARD WESONGA (Bubulo West, Mbale): Mr Chairman, I join my colleagues in thanking the chairman of the committee. I have a few observations to make as far as the report is concerned, and I have a few questions to pose to the Minister concern. 

I recall very well that when the President was campaigning for the presidency of this nation, he pledged to build bridges in Mbale, on River Manafa. The chairman has stated this very well. The President even went ahead and wrote letters to both the Ministries of Local Government and that of Works, directing that seven bridges, which were all unfortunately located in my constituency, be constructed. Six years down the road, not a single bridge has been constructed.   

I am lucky that the Minister who is in charge of the President’s office is here. I wonder whether the President at times has the capacity to supervise all these pledges. If he does not, I wonder whether it should be the Minister in the Office of the President to follow up such pledges? Otherwise, people would call them “hot air”.  

My second concern is that when I looked at the policy statement from the Ministry of Works, unfortunately, it is only marked “AC 4”, it has been said that no construction has started on bridges and drainages. Somewhere in the same statement of the funds approved in the last financial year, it says repairs were made on Goli, Mukoti and Abura bridges. It says works are about to commence on Buweswa Bridge in the financial year 2003/2004, and on five new bridges. 

Mr Chairman, I am worried because this has gone on for long. I would like the Minister to be specific because the six bridges in Bubulo West are Butuwa, Kongodyo, Bugimanayi, Buweswa, Buwagogo and Mungasa bridges. Are they the ones specifically to be soon considered? 

To make matters worse, Mr Minister, for the last three months we have had to lose four lives, including two students. It is a very unfortunate thing for a constituency to do without a bridge for the last six years and yet other constituencies have permanently constructed bridges. And what they refer to as temporarily bridges, 200 metres away – (Interruption)

MS WONEKHA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to provide this information, in case the honourable ministers have forgotten. We were together with them looking at those bridges, and we could see school children and women lifting their dresses and gomesis up to their shoulders in order to cross the bridges. I am trying to remind the Ministers. Thank you.

MR WESONGA: I thank you. I am sure that even the hon. Minister of Works himself at one time witnessed that kind of thing –(Interruption)

ENG. NASASIRA: I just want to inform the speaker who has just contributed that we have not forgotten. We cannot forget that trip.

MR WESONGA: I thank the Minister for acknowledging that, because he saw it for himself. But I wanted to find out from the Minister of Works what policy he has for temporary bridges. I could site a few bridges, which would have been used in Bubulo West. 

We have a bridge in my neighbour’s constituency, Bunghoko South, where they constructed another permanent one a few metres away from the temporary bridge that used to help the people. I have written to the Ministry requesting for the same, but I have never got a reply. I do not know whether it is the policy of the Ministry of Works that when a Member of Parliament writes, you do not respond? Because it is a long time and I have not got any communication from him. 

There is another bridge in Budadiri; it is about 100 metres away from the new construction. When I went to the Ministry to tell them about the same bridge, I was told that the public was rough and could not allow them to take it away. Does the Ministry have no policy? 

There is a permanent bridge in Busunju being constructed, and yet when I went to the Ministry to suggest that instead of losing people every now and again, pick on those bridges that assist children who go to school and people who seek medication, the Ministry has kept quiet. May I know how one can cry in order for you to listen and answer him?

Lastly, Mr Chairman, the President also promised the people of Manjiya, Bunghoko South and Bubulo West and East that the road leading from Mbale to Rwakaka is the only road that is not tarmacked, and that it would be tarmacked in the last financial year. I have properly gone through the policy statement book and I do not see it cited anywhere.  I do not know what they will say in 2006 because it is a difficult situation.  

Last year I requested the Ministry to take over the road that links Tororo, Butiru and Buhaweka, which is about 30 miles and it is actually beyond the capacity of the district to maintain. But when I went through the policy book, I did not see it. I wonder whether the Ministry rejected it or it has something to do in as far as that road is concerned. I thank you.

MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Chairman. I have just got two quick points to make. One is in respect of the recommendation on page 6 that district and urban road maintenance reverts to the Central Government Ministry of Works, including the equipment and funds for road maintenance. The Ministry of Works should consequently enhance its regional station capacities. 

Mr Chairman, is this extremely necessary? We are duplicating inefficiency in the districts. You get an engineer for Masaka Municipal Council, then another engineer for Masaka district and an engineer for the whole region. They are all there, they do not have sufficient equipment; they do not know what they are supposed to do; they cannot even build their own headquarters. It is necessary to have staff but we should get it centralized so that the job is done properly.  

It is a fact districts and municipalities cannot build tarmac roads because they do not have the capacity. The tender boards in those areas do not have the capacity to assess this work. So, why do we pretend? Why do we decentralize inefficiency? I strongly recommend that we build capacity for housing and planning in these areas. We do not have sufficient planners because we cannot employ them. So, why do we not develop this capacity to be able to do that job?

My second point, Mr Chairman, is to thank the Minister for having worked on Masaka/Mutukula road, and also to remind him that that is a highway, which passes through Masaka Municipality. Actually it appears people who planned this highway forgot that it has to pass through the municipality. So, I pray that it is immediately catered for because that portion is not handled at all. As a consequence, with increased traffic over that road, you are going to get many accidents on that road. If you cannot handle it immediately at least survey off the area which this part is going to take so that the people know where the road is going to pass; otherwise the municipality is unable to do so.

Finally, I want to comment on the question of this company, which has registered the two directors. One is the Minister of Finance and the other is the Minister of State for Finance. It sounds ominous even for accountability alone. First of all, this august House should have been informed of that development. But certainly the two Ministers in the same ministry should not have been the shareholders. This is a company, which belongs to the Uganda Government and there should be openness. There was only one shareholder and I do not think that complies with the law. With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, with this we come to the end of debates on works because we have another report to reconsider in the afternoon and you need a break. So, I call upon the Minister to respond to some of the queries and then we see how to proceed.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Eng. John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the spirit of collective responsibility I decided to stand in for my colleagues to ensure that business continues this morning. So where matters of finance are concerned, I will try to do my best.

I would also like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the report they have presented and the visits they made. When you read the report, which I hope members have read and have listened to, you will see that the report is trying to highlight the problems of the Ministry, and its shortcomings. We thank the committee for that and we welcome it.  

I wish to make a general comment on the report. My concern is that the process of preparing a budget policy statement is guided by the Budget Act and guidelines from the Ministry of Finance. We prepare a policy based on the amount of money we have. I was happy with the chairperson when he stood up and said the budget policy statement was very good except in these areas. But when you read the report, it starts by saying the policy statement fell short of the expectation of section 6(2) of the Budget Act. One gets an impression that perhaps the budget statement was not detailed.  

Secondly, the committee has highlighted the problems they observed from their field visits - some are institutional and others are financial. For example, if you go and find the headquarter buildings in dilapidated condition, it might be worthwhile in the report to mention that there are finances in the budget to repair that building. But if you say, “We found the building dilapidated”, and you stop there, it might imply that there is money but the building was not done and therefore it is the inefficiency of the Ministry. 

So, I am appealing to members that for future reports - like we are guided in writing our policy statements - they should highlight those weaknesses and also give reasons why those problems are there. At the same time they should mention the achievements. This report shows that we are a problematic ministry and yet our work is visible. So, I appeal to us to make a balanced comment like we do in our policy statement. 

We are advised not to talk much about shortcomings by my other Ministry of Finance. We are supposed to talk about what we can do within the budget framework. So, it will help because this report can be read separately from other documents and somebody who reads it in future will say, “What a terrible ministry this one was!” Of course, what the report is saying is correct but some of these problems are beyond us and the reasons for those problems could help if they were given within the report. I just wanted to emphasis that.

Having said that, Mr Chairman, I would like touch briefly on a number of issues in the report, and then I will come to issues raised by the committee. The report talks about lack of value for money as required by section 6(2) of the Budget Act. This value for money has to be understood carefully. What does that mean? In our case, for example, value for money is determined because we tender: there are bills of quantities before work is done.  Our work is paid per certificate of measured work; so in that respect we pay for value for money. For example, if a road was tarmacked from Soroti to Lira you can get value for money in terms of physical work, but you have to go back and assess whether the value achieved the intended economic goals.  

And, Mr Chairman, we have not reached that level of expertise as a government, not even as a ministry - to assess a project in terms of value for money of the expected economic benefits. We are so far able to measure value for money in terms of physical achievements. As we develop capacity in the Ministry and in the Government, we will be able to provide reports. Because I know even in terms of audit the Attorney General has not been able to audit value for money in terms of the intended economic achievements. You can only measure value for money in terms of physical achievements. So, we will try to improve on that next year. 

The committee raised the issue of no specific data on value for money provided by the districts, so we will improve on that. They also observed that failure to give specific data on value for money denies Parliament the avenues to demand accountability of funds. I think I have more or less explained that.

I now turn to the committee’s recommendation that the sector should rationally and maximally use the available manpower resources in the Ministry. In our case we really do try to use the manpower we have.

The committee in its report mentioned that Parliament is not involved in issues of the transport sub-sector and the process of policy formulation. This is not exactly correct. Unless Parliament feels that the Government should change its process of policy formulation, the current process of policy formulation is that you have a ministry. The process starts by developing a policy; we prepare a draft policy document and consult stakeholders through workshops and seminars. There is no policy that we have tried to develop, not only in this ministry but also other ministries, without having these stakeholders’ workshops where Members of Parliament have been invited to attend and more specifically the sectoral committees.  

Of course, the unfortunate bit is that sometimes some of these workshops when they take place Parliament is also busy or Members of Parliament are in their constituencies and sometimes they do not attend. But the fact is that we have been involving Parliament in the process of policy formulation. If Parliament so wishes that we change to Yellow Paper, Green Paper and eventually White Paper for every policy formulation, then Parliament could raise that as a matter for government to consider and in future we go through the stages. Because I know some countries use that policy. 

They start with the Yellow Paper, go to Green Paper and then the White Paper. Government has always involved Parliament, except that sometimes it is not possible to get all Members of Parliament to attend a workshop. I can quote many examples where we have been developing policies: cost efficiency of Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) is one of them. 

Sometimes the formation of the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) is misunderstood. In order to get a reasonable chunk of grants and loans for road development - our development partners were not really satisfied with the capacity we had in the Ministry - we had to form an arms’ length organization. We had to hire not only competent but also experienced people who would not accept government salaries, and we paid them well, and this has paid dividends since RAFU was formed. If you check the history of this country you will find that we have been able to design and complete Kyotera-Mutukula road and so on.  These projects have been completed without extra costs. So, the process of having RAFU as a precursor for a road agency or road authority has paid dividends for both government and definitely my ministry.

I will now touch the issue of government’s economic drive of contracting out road works through field visits. The committee was convinced beyond doubt that there is need to slow down on privatisation or contracting out road works. The committee is recommending that we go back to force account operations and use the Ministry.  

Mr Chairman, I would want to beg the committee to reconsider this recommendation because by using the private sector we are trying to develop our own construction industry. We want to get the “Sterlings” of Uganda, and in order to start developing this capacity you do not start by giving a small contractor to do tarmac roads. You start by making him grade the road, gravel it, reseal it and eventually he can qualify to do the major works.  If you want us to go back to the Ministry and do this force account operation, then you do not know what we will miss in future.  

When we borrow like US $30 million to build a road, all we get is a road. Most of this money goes back and this is the money we have borrowed because we are using foreign contractors. Can you imagine we are now able to have a capacity of Ugandan contractors to do this job who we will pay these millions of dollars? Most of these people will invest this money back in the country and that is how the economy can grow. And we are not going to get these contractors overnight. We have to get them by starting from the basics.

Secondly, in future the Government should concentrate on policy formulation, regulation, monitoring and the actual physical work done by the private sector. The private sector will do work well if we can develop our institutions to have capable people and other qualities that you want for efficient work. I do not want to go into details. So, I request the committee to revisit this because we will remain handling emergency work but we will use the private sector, to develop our own construction industry in the country.

The committee observed that road equipment that has been given to districts is not put to proper use, and I wanted to clear this. They also observed that the equipment hired out to private operators and the district officials squander the proceeds. I think hon. John Odit mentioned this as well. The equipment that was hired out was actually from the districts and not from the Ministry. So, the people in charge of supervision are District Chairpersons and CAOs who should make sure that their engineering partners do not hire out their equipment to private people. The committee also referred to –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to ask one question.  Previously the Minister of State in your ministry said that your equipment at the district could be used for community work. Is it still standing and will that cause a query?  

ENG. NASASIRA: Yes, that policy in our ministry still stands. If there is some community work to be done and they have some fuel - we do not we use our equipment all the time because of shortage of fuel - they can make a programme with the district engineer. The district engineer knows when he is not busy and when that work can be done, but it should be for public good. It is purely for community, not private work.  

We agree with the report, we are trying to strengthen supervision and monitoring of water transport. We are also concerned about the accidents. 

On the housing policy, people are not satisfied with what we call an enabling environment for housing. But an enabling environment means many things. It means supporting, building construction materials and industries. For example, some ten years back we did not have cement and government supported the development of cement industries. Now people are able to buy cement here rather than import it. That is one way of creating an enabling environment.  

We had only one housing mortgage company, we have now got two, and so people can go and get mortgages and build. We did not have the Condominium Properties law, which I will comment on later because people have raised many issues about it. People can now be encouraged to build high-raised buildings and get their own titles. That is another enabling environment. I will mention later about slum improvement and so on. So, an enabling environment means creating situations where people can build, although the committee does not agree with us on this in their report. 

If you look at the census report, the amount of buildings that have come up not only in the urban areas but even in the rural areas, I am sure honourable members will agree with me that the quality of buildings has improved both in the urban and rural areas over this period. It is not by accident. Government is creating this enabling environment for individuals to be able build, apart from other factors of the economy.  

Our housing policy is not very clear. We are not amending but we are coming out with a more comprehensive housing policy. We want to assure Parliament that we are working hard to bring the Building and Control Bill, and the Landlord and Tenant Relationship Bill.  

Mr Chairman, I am trying to summarize because I know we are running out of time. We have noted this recommendation of utilizing non-core properties, which could be converted into government offices. This cannot be purely decided by my ministry. It will be the Government to decide on that.  

I now come to the National Housing and Construction Corporation. Let me first talk about the corporation, about which people are concerned. The corporation is done in accordance with the PERD Statute. The PERD Statute was passed by our Parliament. If we are seeing the flaws where we are having two directors from one ministry, then it is the duty of Parliament to initiate an amendment with the Minister concerned with that statute. Parliament did not foresee the problem. 

There are two types of privatisation. There is when we sold the public enterprise completely. The purpose was that public enterprise “X”, if it is a parastatal and it is prepared for outright sale - that is in class IV and III in the PERD Statute - then it is incorporated in a company. Then the two ministers become shareholders, as a temporary measure, until it is sold. But there should have been a separation of the public enterprises, which are going to remain and where government has majority shares. 

First, the sector ministry has to have a say because they are the ones having the guiding policy.  

Secondly, as we have done for example with Uganda Posts Limited (UPL), the Minister in charge of Communications has one share and the Minister of Finance has 99, but they are two shareholders. The Minister responsible for Uganda Posts Limited appoints the board, with the approval of Cabinet, and the two ministers are the shareholders. Then there is a board, which now supervises management.  That was okay with UPL. So, if there is a lacuna in the PERD Statute then it needs to be amended and I have already discussed this with the Minister of Privatisation and the Minister of Finance, and we hope to resolve this matter.  

So, the recommendation by the committee that a Bill be introduced is actually not necessary for the National Housing and Construction Corporation. What is necessary is to incorporate the National Housing and Construction Corporation as a company. In the company’s Articles and Memorandum of Association, it should be clear what the role of the sector minister is, what the role of the Minister of Finance is, what the role of the shareholders is, who should be the shareholders, and what the role of the board of management is. So, that is the one we are trying to harmonise.

On the issue of VAT on flats, I think you have seen a lot of press reports. What I can say now, Mr Chairman, is that my ministry is having very serious discussions with the Ministry of Finance on this issue. So, we are going to discuss this and we hope that eventually we will come up with an amicable solution to this VAT issue –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But there is a point, which Capt. Byaruhanga raised on this. What do you say?

ENG. NASASIRA: As a minister?

THE CHAIRMAN: As a minister. He raised something about it -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, you see, the whole issue is prioritising. If the Government can spent US $2,000 daily –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I mean what you said on VAT.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: The VAT on housing - I wanted to know what value has been added to those flats for you to charge VAT on the housing units.  

ENG. NASASIRA: As a Minister of Finance –(Laughter)- the hands of the Minister of Finance are tied by the Uganda Revenue Authority Statutes. 

As a Minister of Housing, we should find a way, as a government and as a Parliament, of how to deal with this law. There is a level field. Other people did not pay VAT for the old houses and we will find a way of handling this VAT issue without breaking the law. The VAT cannot be passed on to the tenants who are going to pay for the houses, and that is why the discussions are going on. So, we are not in disagreement on this. It is just the law and the issue of the law is between the Executive and the Legislature, so we have to find a way.

On page 14 of the report, the committee talks about the Department of Communications. It says there is no need - really, even if you form separate authorities and regulators there must be departments in the Ministry. Some should formulate policy, others monitor these regulators, and so on and so forth. So, although we formed the Uganda Communications Commission, which participates in policy but mainly is a regulator of communication, there has to be a department of communication in the Ministry, which is responsible for communication.  

If you look at the structure of the Department of Communication, there is a commissioner, an assistant commissioner and a few other people. It is about eight people in the whole department. That is why the department is lean, because a lot of regulation and everything is done by the Uganda Communications Commission. But there must be a department in the Ministry that develops policy that represents government. So, you are not in conflict at all. The UCC does the work but that Department of Communications has to stay. 

With respect to spearheading the ICTA policy, my ministry was mandated by Cabinet to spearhead it. So, different ministries might be preparing their own in terms of what they are going to do because ICT is multi-sectoral. However, the spearheading ministry is the one responsible for communications.  

With respect to restructuring the Ministry, this is an on-going process and we shall continue restructuring. I think I have more or less commented on the general issues raised in the report, and I would now want to touch issues quickly, which have been raised by honourable members.  

Mr Chairman, hon. Ekanya was talking about implementation of Parliament recommendations. In my policy statement, we have a section and an appendix commenting on the responses to parliamentary recommendations. Page 15 of my policy statement refers to how we have responded to parliamentary recommendations and there is also annex “C”. So, we are not silent on parliamentary recommendations. They are not neglected. We always look at them and deal with them as far as we can and as far as possible. 

I have also noted his bridge request. It will be included on the list of other bridges and when funds allow, we shall deal with that one.

I have noted the comments by hon. Baba Diri. I think hon. Baba Diri’s comment on awarding contracts to the lowest bidder and therefore people failing to finish the work because there is no money, is not entirely correct. There are processes and procedures of bidding and awarding contracts. Of course, if a contractor is capable and he has quoted lowest there is no need why government should spent more money; you give it to the lowest bidder. But there is no need for a contractor failing to work because of lack of money.

The way the contract is managed, you award a contract and before the contractor starts work you pay him advanced mobilisation. In other words, you facilitate that contractor to be able to move and mobilise his equipment. That is normally around 15 percent of the contract.  

Then as soon as the contractor is on site, he is paid according to the work he produces. So, the SBI contract was finished ahead of schedule, because they were able to work faster and their certificates were paid as they worked. The Chinese contract had other problems. The problems were not financial but they were managerial. And as soon as they put a good management in place, now the work is progressing well. So, it is not a question of lack of money. There is no lack of money in any contract because you are paid as you deliver and you are paid in advance for you to be on site.
 
I have noted your concerns about lack of provision for physically challenged people in vehicles. And as we try to improve on our vehicles and transport, we shall then improve on the standards in vehicles to cater for people who are physically challenged.

Hon. Kulany, with respect to Kapchorwa road, yes, there was a delay in finishing Kapchorwa road because of finances. And unless we get adequate money and a supplementary, we are not able - within our budget, which we are asking Parliament to approve today - to reallocate Shs 11 billion to finish that road. Because the outstanding payment is about Shs 6 billion and money required to finish the road is Shs 5 billion. We are, however, negotiating with the contractor, together with the Ministry of Finance, to see how they can resume work as we pay. We are also negotiating with the Finance ministry to see how we can get a supplementary. The money that was allowed in the budget is inadequate, but we are hoping work will start soon.  

With respect to Kapchorwa/Aswam -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, this is where I need hon. Nasasira now to answer as a Minister of Finance. You can afford to lose US $2,000 daily on idle equipment yet you cannot relocate funds so that work is completed in three months! I just wanted that political logic from the Finance Ministry.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, it is hurting us to see the Ministry of Finance allocating itself Shs 10 billion for stationery, and we are begging for just Shs 3 billion for the road in Kapchorwa to be done.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable members, why do you not keep questions for the appropriate time? This afternoon we are considering allocations to the Ministry of Finance. Today we are dealing with Ministry of Works. I think if you have any query about the Ministry of Finance’s allocation, you should raise the question at the appropriate time.

ENG. NASASIRA: US $2,000 per day is not paid. When the committee visited the site and they met the contractor, he said, “I am going to claim US $2,000 per day because of my idle equipment”. That is the contractor’s claim. But when a contractor claims, first of all, it does not mean that you accept the claim. You have to evaluate the claim and secondly we are not paying now. The claim could be for a date in future, but it is not being paid -  (Interjection)- so the US $2,000 should not be taken as accepted, no. 

The employer can say, “No, I do not agree with your claim for many reasons”. Of course, at a certain time there will be payment for idle time in the long run, but those are costs of not paying on time.  

Hon. Mutumba was talking about slum improvement. But I am reliably informed that there is slum improvement in Kisenyi I, Kisenyi II and Kisenyi III. Compensation for the northern bypass will start in October; everything is ready. 

I have noted with concern the issue of road shoulders and the axle roads for heavy vehicles. But we have reasonably controlled axle because the traffic from Kenya now has about 96 percent compliance. Our weighbridge is at Busia and there is another at Malaba. In fact, our biggest problem now is not necessarily the big trucks, because the big trucks go according to axle not according to size. If the axle is properly loaded, that is okay. 

The big problems now we have are matooke lorries. The matooke lorries damage the road more than the transit traffic trailers that go to Rwanda and so on. But we have established another weighbridge at Mbarara to cater for that, and soon we are establishing mobile weighbridges with a team to check on vehicles on spot.

Hon. Bikwasizehi, will the road authority do better? Where are the examples? Yes, definitely I have already mentioned to you that even with RAFU we have done better than when we were doing everything within the Ministry. But there are effective road authorities in Ethiopia, and our neighbours Tanzania and Kenya have started their road authorities. But the road authority will do better also if it can raise funds for road maintenance.  So, we are hoping it will do better.

I have noted your road, which I know very well. We are looking for ways of doing that road, the one from Bihanga up to Katerera. 

There have been statements that the cost of constructing roads in Uganda is the highest in East Africa. This is not true! I would want anybody who makes such a statement to bring facts. I know of one neighbouring country where the cost of making the road is 17 percent higher than in Uganda.  

Although our fuel costs are higher, because you know we are an inland country. So, I want to challenge anybody because this statement was being made in a conference and so on, to show facts and figures that the cost of making roads in Uganda is the highest in this region. I have my own figures also. But I want to assure you that that is not true.

The areas not accessed by telephones will be accessed within our rollout period. This will be either through the operators or through the rural telephone development programme.  

With respect to bus transport, hon. Wadri has gone out. I will explain to him when I meet him.  

Hon. Zachary Olum has also left, I think so I will explain. (Interjection)- well, these were individual issues raised about their areas. For example, he wanted to know when the road starts in his constituency. If honourable members of Parliament want to know, tarmacking -(Laughter)- the Karuma-Owilo road is going to start in two months’ time. But that is in Nwoya constituency, which I thought I would explain to hon. Zachary Olum.

Dr Kasirivi, I am sorry that the whole of your constituency was unprotected or under-served. But when we asked the operators to list areas where they do not think it is economically viable to put telephones, your constituency happens to have been one of those listed. But you are now going to be served under the rural telephone scheme. So, either way your constituency will be served.

Hon. Kasamba, I think we have talked about the railway in the policy statement. Although it is not in the committees report, we talked about it. I have taken your note about – normally we give road reserves out free for services. That is why part of the use of the road is out so that utility companies can use it for their services.  

Then the Building Control Bill, as I have said, will come soon. I think I have answered most of the questions of hon. Capt. Byaruhanga in terms of National Housing and the Kapchorwa/Aswam road.

The PMA money goes directly from the Ministry of Finance to districts and it goes through LDG and others. So, the PMA money goes directly to the districts.

Hon. Kavuma, progress on the Kalangala ship is on and we shall be briefing political leaders when there is a stage to brief you about. For example, we briefed you that the tender is complete, the consultant has been hired, the person to build the ship is here, the place has been established and the building of the ship will start soon.

With respect to landing sites, this ship is going to be made to land at any beach. This makes it easy to move from island to island, instead of building sites. It is going to be designed in such a way that it can land at any beach.  

The airstrip you have been talking about, we are aware of it. It is a privately developed airstrip and what we do as a policy is that any person is free to develop a private airstrip, with the clearance and approval of CAA. In fact, as I talk now, CAA is going to visit that airstrip this weekend – I think. I cannot tell that it is formally licensed, but we are aware of the airstrip.

With respect to the IT content as you noticed, the first phase is 26 districts and Kalangala is not among them. But Kalangala will be in the second phase, because we have not covered all the districts -(Interjection)- I think Iganga is there. If it is not there then it is in phase II. Iganga is in phase I.

Hon. Balemezi, we have noted your road to the prison. We have always tried to maintain the Buikwe road reasonably, but it is a marrum road and we have not yet found money to upgrade its tarmac, although it is among those listed.

There are concerns about houses for future civil servants. We will sell these houses and create a rotating fund for future civil servants to access money through this fund to build houses. That is why it is being accumulated now to about Shs 20 billion. It will be shared between the public servants and the private people through mortgage schemes. I will explain some concerns of hon. Okupa. 

Hon. Ruhindi, I hope you are reading the PERD Statute together with the amendments. Because the problem with the PERD Statute was that when it was amended, it was not a comprehensive statute. There is an old PERD Statute and the amendments are separate. So, when you are reading the PERD Statute you have to read it together with the amendments. But I have explained what I think was the shortcoming when the law was made here, and I do not know how to go further than that.

Hon. Okupa was asking about this water hyacinth machine, which was got at hundreds of dollars but has never worked. That has nothing to do with my ministry. This was bought by the Ministry of Agriculture through EU, and I know it never worked because it had a problem. I hope the Agriculture Ministry will deal with it.

The role of Minister of National Housing, I said we are harmonising that. I mean the sector Minister or Ministry has to have a role in any public enterprise, especially when it is going to remain; it has to have a role. So, we are trying to harmonise that. I think the mistake was within the law but we are going to do it administratively. 

Hon. Kyatuheire the Ntungamo-Ishasha road has not become Ntungamo-Rukungiri, no! The project is still Ntungamo-Ishasha road, but we are doing the road in phases. The first phase was Ntungamo to Kagamba, which we have finished. We have now started on Kagamba-Rukungiri and as soon as we finish that we shall head to Ishasha. But anyway, even the section that is being done now is heading to Ishasha and I think that is where hon. Kyatuheire passes. We say in my language that if you have a sick chest, when you cough and spit, you are clearing your chest. So, we are on the way to Ishasha.

MS KYATUHAIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If I were travelling to Kanungu this afternoon and somebody asked me where I was going, I would say I am going to Kanungu even if I am going to stay a night or two in Mbarara. So, if you look at Annex “D”, the project’s name is Ntungamo-Kagamba-Rukungiri and initially it was Ntungamo-Kagamba-Ishasha because Rukungiri was already implied under that name. So, that was the clarification I was looking for from the Minister. 

ENG. NASASIRA: The project is Ntungamo-Kagamba-Rukungiri because we are referring to project code TR65D and TR65C. When we come to TR65E, then we shall mention it. That is why it is not mentioned there. (Laughter).  

Hon. Odit, I have already answered the hiring of the equipment, but the Soroti-Lira road is in this document. Currently, the consultant is finalising its design for tarmac and it is under RDP3 as part of the funds we are already negotiating for from the World Bank. So, it is due for upgrading to tarmac. (Applause) I am sure it will start before 2006.  

I have also answered hon. Byamukama’s issue on the incorporation of the National Housing and Construction Corporation. But I want to assure you that the camp you saw is for work to finalise the tarmacking of Kyegegwa-Kyejonjo, they are not going back. Somebody will give me the information - that I cannot remember - but I think it is supposed to take 18 months.

Hon. Wesonga, your concern for bridges is well appreciated in the Ministry. We have replied your letters - not all of them - but of course you have written many because of the concern, which is true. But we have not only replied letters. We have physically, with hon. Wesonga, visited the place and as you read from this section, the bridge that you mentioned is in your constituency. It is the first bridge that is already under tender and Namulo is going to be there too. 

We are trying to solve this bridge issue in a different way. Instead of waiting for building bridges everywhere, for example when you look at Manafa River in hon. Wesonga’s constituency, the constituency is divided almost into two by one river. So, we are going to build about two bridges and other crossings where unfortunately the children and other people are drowning. 

We will build footbridges, which are cheaper, because the footbridges cost about Shs 10 to Shs 15 million. But when you go for a big bridge then you spend Shs 100 million or so. So, we will build footbridges and direct access to these two bridges so that people can cross. That is how we are going to handle Namulo for the time being. So, I want to assure hon. Wesonga, before the end of this financial year, you will have some bridge crossings of the pedestrians and the other ones.

With respect to the temporary bridges you are referring to, you can take a temporary bridge but you must have resources to construct it. We are addressing your problem with other bridges, but I know your problem is a serious one. Taking over the road will be considered overall, as we look at all the roads we want to take over in the country. 
 
MR WESONGA: Thank you very much, honourable Minister. Mr Chairman, I had asked the Minister to tell me the policy regarding the temporary bridges. I have sighted areas where bridges are dormant, and the Ministry seems to be fearful to collect them and give them to other areas. I sighted Busunju, Budadiri and Bunghoko South. 
 
Mr Chairman, at one time the Government of Uganda procured bridges when El Nino hit areas. I also wanted some kind of clarification as to what steps one must take in order to procure the El-Nino bridges.

DR WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just wanted to give this information to hon. Wesonga. First of all, I want to remind you and the House that Sironko District, where Budadiri belongs, is an El-Nino prone district. As we talk now, we have just suffered landslides and many of our bridges have been washed away. So, there is no floating bridge in Budadiri. In fact, we are looking for many more bridges. 

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I really do appreciate the situation in which the Ministry of Works is and at one time I was discussing with colleagues and wondering whether it would not be prudent to phase out a few ministries in order to allow the Ministry of Works to take root on the structures that really provide the infrastructure for the provision of services.

When you come to the example that the Minister has just given of Namulo Bridge, the Minister made a pledge for some of these bridges during the presidential campaigns. They even took engineers to do the surveys and preliminary commissioning. At times it becomes very difficult for the Minister and Members of Parliament in those respective areas to explain to the people why the President pledged. The people responded but the bridge is not coming. But at least the people of Bunyole have hope, because it has happened to Budumba Bridge before and it was constructed. So, they still have hope that Namulo will be constructed but it is only taking longer than would have been the case. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

ENG. NASASIRA: Namulo is with others, and as I have said, for Namulo we will first solve the problem of people drowning there by providing pedestrian access. Namulo is a big bridge and we have already surveyed it, but we do not have the money.

With respect to the policy on temporary or idle bridges, you can see how complicated the policy can be. Hon. Wesonga wants the bridge to come from Sironko District to Mbale District and of course Sironko District also wants bridges. But we only left the bridge there because we are yet to transport it where we are going to fix it.  

With respect to Busunju Road, across River Mayanja, we cannot take the bridge off until we have finished the new bridge we are constructing. That is because that bridge is still being used. This actually reminds me of hon. Kasirivu, that actually Busunju-Hoima road is passable because the committee passed there. The chairperson is here; he used the road. It is rough but it is passable and I want to say that the works are about to resume because we have signed a deal with the contractor. The impasse that was there has been resolved and as soon as the contractor brings his performance guarantee from the bank, the work will start. Hopefully it will start in a week or two for the actual tarmacking of the road.

Finally, hon. Kawanga, the taking over of the responsibility of districts and urban roads really cannot be decided by our ministry alone. First of all, it is a constitutional matter and secondly it is a legal matter. The Constitution and the Local Governments Act give districts autonomy and power to look after their roads under our monitoring. So, if we have to reverse all this, then we have to do it through the constitutional and legal framework that is in place.

I have noted the road through Masaka Municipality, and I think the issue of directors of National Housing has been answered. So, Mr Chairman, I want to thank the chairman once again and his committee, and the honourable members for their contribution. I pray that my budget be approved so that we can go and start some work. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I put the question that the report of the committee on the estimates of the Ministry be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 016 – Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, recurrent expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 23,363,010,000 be approved for Recurrent Budget for Vote 016, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Head 116 – Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, development expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 106,050,000,000 be approved for Development Budget for Head 116, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Eng. John Nasasira): Sir, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Eng. John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budgetary estimates for Vote 016 - Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication and has approved Shs 23,363,010,000 as Recurrent Expenditure; and for Head 116, Shs 106,050,000,000 as Development Expenditure for the fiscal year 2003/2004. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Eng. John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you very much for disposing of this particular business. (Applause). I also thank the committee and the Minister.  

We are supposed to start again at 2.00 p.m., but in view of the fact that we only have 20 minutes to the hour, we should start at 2.30 p.m. I think that will be sufficient time for you to have a break. So, proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(Proceedings were suspended at 1.45 p.m.)
(The House resumed at 2.45 p.m., the Speaker presiding)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is to the Members of the Sessional Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. Notice of a meeting: His Excellency the President wishes to meet you on Thursday, the 21st of August at 12 noon at State Lodge in Soroti. Transport to take the members will be available at Parliament at 7.00 a.m. that day. You are requested to turn up for the trip.  






MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I missed the last part of your statement, or announcement. We meet here –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: In the morning that day, Thursday. 

MR AWORI: At Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, tomorrow at Parliament.

MR AWORI: I was thinking that maybe it would be Kololo airstrip.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember yesterday the hon. Minister in Charge of Luweero, Prof. Semakula, wanted to make a statement but I ruled that he would be given an opportunity to make a statement another day rather than the same day the other one was made. Now, let us listen to his statement.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LUWEERO (PROF. SEMAKULA KIWANUKA): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a statement in reply to a statement, which was made yesterday by the hon. Member of Parliament for Mityana North, Mr Kiwanda.  

Honourable members of Parliament, yesterday the 19th August 2003, the hon. Member of Parliament for Mityana North made a statement to this House to which, with your permission, I seek a right to reply.  

Mr Speaker, I came into the House yesterday at the tail end of hon. Kiwanda’s statement. I caught only certain bits of it. A significant part of it was that I am in conflict with him because of his support for the Vice President, whom I do not support.

The second significant statement as disclosed was that his life was in danger. I did not hear the rest of the statement. Nevertheless, hon. Kiwanda has spoken to a number of FM radio stations over which he made further allegations. He said that he found a certain Dr Sematiko and I trying to hide smuggled drugs and because of that, when we reached the house of Omumbejja Ndagire, I did order her to beat him and throw him out. He further alleged that on the way I belittled him and called him a boy and told the people who were with him that he was a bad man and that we are going to deal with him. 

Mr Speaker, all the above is a gross fabrication. The following is a true account of what happened at Lusanjja on Saturday 16 August 2003. 

I was invited by princess Fatuma Ndagire to go and meet abataka on that day. I arrived at about 1.00 p.m. But on the way to Lusanjja, I met hon. Kiwanda’s car parked almost in the middle of the road. When we passed it, I recognised him. He was standing with one other man. I got out of my vehicle and went to greet him. He asked me where I was going and I told him that I was going to a family function. He drove following me until I arrived at Ndagire’s home. The princess welcomed me and asked me whether it was I who had taken hon. Kiwanda to her house and I said, “No, he came following me”. She replied that she had not invited him. 

Meanwhile, hon. Kiwanda had seated himself with other guests. 

When the princess repeated her objection to his presence, I very humbly beckoned him and we went out. He followed me and I said to him that it would be bad manners for him to impose himself when the princess had objected to his presence. He replied that he was the area Member of Parliament and therefore he had to be present. Thereafter I quoted him the English saying that “a man’s home is his castle”. The essence of that saying is that even though castles are for very big people like Barons, Lords, Viscounts, however humble the owner of a home may be, once that person is in his or her home, he or she must be respected. Hon. Kiwanda refused and we returned to the sitting room together.   

The reason I beckoned him outside was because I thought that was the most diplomatic manner to handle it. I did not want to speak to him before everybody. When we are two or three that is when we can refer to our culture, and say, “in our culture we do not do these things”, and that is what I said. The princess had now become very angry because Kiwanda had returned to the sitting room. She raised her voice and told him to get out. He rose and confronted the old lady as if he was going to box her. We were all shocked and stood in silence. He left the room and went out to the shed; there was “ekidaala”. 

While in there he reportedly told the ladies who were sitting there that he had brought them medicine. Inside the house, the Deputy Director of Medical Services, Dr Wilson Mubiru gave a list of the drugs he had delivered. After that the princess asked us to accompany her to where her potato plants had been destroyed. Hon. Kiwanda followed us, which incensed the old lady and she decided that she had to take action. I think she picked a cassava stick and followed him. It was at that juncture that he finally decided to leave.  

The so-called smuggled drugs, Mr Speaker - allegations have been made by the honourable member that hon. Sematiko and I were caught in the act “nga tukukusa” - trying to hide drugs, which had been smuggled. When we reached the house - I had been asked to arrive at 12.00 noon but I arrived at about 1.00 p.m. - these people, including the Director of Health Services in Mubende district, were already seated. There were packets of drugs.  

If it is true that I, an honourable member of this House, have been involved in a criminal act of smuggling drugs, I think they should let the law take its course. But I would like to inform honourable members and Mr Speaker that the drugs in question were legally delivered. They were delivered through the right channels, as evidenced by the presence of the Deputy Director of Medical Services; and the boxes were clearly marked “Bujadda”, the village where this project is. Also present was the LC V Vice Chairman, Mr Lutwama, because I was told that the chairman was sitting for his exams. There are supporting documents with letters to His Excellency the President. 

This has been called a bicuupuli clinic. I would like to inform this House that the clinic is not bicuupuli, because it the result of the project of an association registered in 1999.

Let me go to those who were there on that day. The only people I recognised when I entered were the princess and a man whom I believe is her son, because whenever she comes to see me, they are together. I did not know anybody else in that gathering and I had never met any of those people, except those two and hon. Kiwanda. When the princess invited me she said I was going to meet abataka. Actually there was a group of old people behind the house. There were also others who were younger. For example, there was a lady councillor, and later on the sub-county chief joined us.  

It has been stated that I went to the constituency without informing the Member of Parliament. Mr Speaker, Bulera sub-county and Busajja village are part and parcel of the Luwero Triangle. It is not misconduct for me as Minister for Luwero Triangle to go to any part of the Triangle where I have been invited. As a matter of fact, in the past two and a half months I have been to the following places: I have visited Luwero sub-county in Luwero District to see a project site, and no Member of Parliament from that area has come up and complained that I went there without him or her. 

I have been to Kangombe sub-county and I had an extensive programme with the district administration. I visited the hospital, the core TCC and so on. There is a Member of Parliament there but nobody has complained. I have been to Kikamulo sub-county and toured the clinic, which they are building, and a war monument; and no Member of Parliament for the sub-county has come up and complained. I have been to Nakaseke and to Kabarole. I went in June to see the finishing touches on the war monument, and no Member of Parliament from that area came and complained.

I would like to state that there is no abuse of office in me, as a minister, going to any part of the Triangle where I am invited. 

Secondly, I do not think it is out of order or it is an act of misbehaviour to go a private function. In fact, people joked with me when the member was following me and I said, “Yes, I do have a private life, I can go privately wherever I want”. I have been out of the country too. Supposing my relatives want to get me a second wife, must I inform the Member of Parliament, must a Member of Parliament follow me on a function like that? I think a minister is entitled to –(Interjections)

The speeches, which were made, were all about development –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, let us hear the statement so that we can transact other business.

PROF. SEMAKULA KIWANUKA: The speeches, which were made, were all about development and the concern of the so-called Bataka on the weakening nature of the Movement in their area. I said – and this is a statement I have made everywhere – that my politics is the politics of development and therefore my focus was on development and poverty. 

Later, at the end of the speech, I turned to Movement politics and I said that the people of Lusanja should never weaken in their resolve to support the Movement. I said the people of Lusanja should never weaken in their resolve to support the President and there I become very ethnic. I said that as a Muganda it was President Museveni who restored the Kababa to us. Those were the political statements I made. 

The honourable member has unfortunately dragged the name of His Excellency the Vice President into this saga. At no time did either me or any member of the audience bring the name of the Vice President or his title into our conversation. 

Let me now finally say that I personally have no conflict with hon. Kiwanda, I do not belong to the area. If the people who are there are in conflict, I was innocently met and I was there as a guest. And I thought, as our culture is, that I should not embarrass him. I called him and said, “Come outside, this is what should be done”. That was the house of the princess. If that is interpreted to be belittling him, then that is a new interpretation of good manners or bad manners.  

Mr Speaker, let me repeat that I personally have no conflict with hon. Kiwanda. I will be quite happy, if he wants me to go at his invitation, to go back to Mityana North and according to the programme he will have organised for me, I will be happy - as other people have done. I think this is my duty and I do not think it is proper to say to a Minister of Luwero Triangle that he should not go anywhere in the Triangle unless a Member of Parliament knows. There are private things and this is where I went. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the statement. We have now heard the two sides: the account of hon. Kiwanda and the account of the Minister and they do not agree. In view of this, I intend to send the matter to the Rules Committee to investigate and make a balanced report to us for a decision.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/04

THE CHAIRMAN: Perhaps before we proceed, I want to remind the Minister of Finance that now we are dealing with estimates of his ministry but the Ministry of Finance is always in charge of the budget process from the beginning to the end. Therefore, when we finish your estimates, you are expected to be here until we finish the process. (Applause).

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Mr Chairman, the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development derives its mandate of assessing and evaluating activities of government, among others functions, from Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, and rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  

The committee covers the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In consideration of the policy statement, the committee analysed the performance of the Ministry, its structures and the extent to which government has complied with the recommendations of the committee in the previous years. The committee further discussed the performance of the projects and the semi-autonomous bodies under the ministry.  

Methodology:

Mr Chairman, in order to accomplish the task of analysing the budgetary requirements of the Ministry, the following documents were examined:  

1. The Background to the Budget, 2003/2004. 

2. The President’s State of the Nation Address to the third session of the 7th Parliament of Uganda. 

3. The budget speech for the financial year 2003/2004. 

4. The Minister’s response to the committee’s recommendations on the policy statement of the last financial year, 2002/2003. 

5. The report of the Budget Committee on the budget for the financial year 2003/2004; and 

6. The ministerial policy statement, 2003/2004.

The committee further held meetings with the Ministry of Finance and its technical team. The committee also met with following semi-autonomous bodies:  

1. Uganda Revenue Authority 
2. Uganda Investment Authority 
3. Task Appeals Tribunal 
4. The Departed Asians Property Custodian Board 
5. National Insurance Corporation 
6. National Planning Authority.  

The report is basically on the general performance of the Ministry and its semi-autonomous bodies towards achieving the mission of poverty eradication.

Mr Chairman, the vision of the Ministry is to eradicate absolute poverty by the 2017. The theme for this year’s budget speech is, “increased production for increased exports and the eradication of absolute poverty.” 

The mandate of the Ministry includes, facilitating economic growth, efficiency and enhancement of overall development. The Ministry is also charged with mobilization of resources and management of public finances in a prudent manner.  

To achieve the above, the Ministry has two arms, the political and technical. The political arm is headed by the Minister, assisted by four state ministers. The technical arm is headed by the Permanent Secretary, assisted by a deputy and three directors.

Observations:

The committee noted that the Ministry’s vision of eradicating poverty by the year 2017 and the budget speech theme of increased production for increased exports and eradication of absolute poverty, are not realistic given the development infrastructure in the country. 

Eradication of absolute poverty would be achieved if subsistence agriculture was transformed to commercial, poor terms of trade improved and agro-processing industries put in place.  

It was observed that with the current liberalization policy, where the economy is so open that even similar agricultural products produced and available in Uganda are being imported, the poverty levels would be compounded unless measures to improve the quality and marketing strategy of local products are instituted.  

The Minister decried the high population growth as part of the problem of the economy. The current population growth rate of 3.4 percent is one of the highest in the world. It cannot be supported by an economy growing at 4.9 per cent.  

The committee observed that if measures were put in place to train the labour force, the productivity and quality of labour would improve, hence adding value to the economy. This would give the nation a favourable human development index.

The Accountant General’s office, formerly Directorate of Accounts, will ensure proper management of public funds in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. This Act seeks to address the issue of misuse of public funds together with other abuses of office by public officers.

Recommendations:

The Ministry should have an attainable and realistic vision that reflects its seriousness and scientific approach to solving the problem of poverty in the country. 
 
The continued public outcry on corruption is an implication that the function of mobilization and management of public funds is still porous. The Ministry should, therefore, step up its efforts in collaboration with other arms of government to tighten the loopholes in the process. 

Government should develop policies aimed at improving the human development index.  

POLICY OBJECTIVES AND FRAMEWORK

Mr Chairman, the following are some of the policy objectives:  

•Maintaining micro-economic stability to produce an enabling environment for investments.
 
•Promoting rapid, equitable and sustainable economic growth with an emphasis on private sector led growth. 

• Monitoring and analysing poverty levels and planning for its eradication in all parts of the country in the short, medium and long term.  

• Mobilizing domestic and external resources for development and for public expenditure.

Macro-economic Targets:  

The real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate for the financial year 2002/2003 was 4.9 percent against a target of 6.6 percent. The inflation rate was at 5.9 percent against a target of less than 5 percent. 

The annual growth rate of 1.4 percent is far below the target of 4.1 percent.  

The reserves were 6.2 months, which exceeded the target of 5 months by 1.2 months. This was a result of an overall balance of payments surplus.

Observations:

The target GDP growth rate was below by 1.7 percent, which was attributed to the lower growth in the agricultural sector. It was further observed that the agricultural sector is still pegged to the natural weather patterns, and there are minimal efforts to tame nature.

The committee observed that the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA) and the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) have conceptual, design and implementation problems and therefore cannot adequately and realistically address the issues of poverty eradication.

There are no deliberate efforts to adequately harvest and use rainwater for production despite its abundance during the rainy season and the various natural water resources countrywide. There are no demonstration farms through which farmers could be practically trained. The animal sub-sector has not received adequate attention either. 

Mr Chairman, in the policy statement, the Minister did not comment on the interest rate, which is a cardinal micro-economic indicator.

Members observed that the gap between the inflation of 5 percent and the over 20 percent interest rate is too wide. The intervention by Central Bank to stabilize the exchange rate is not sustainable.  

Mr Chairman, the high population growth rate of 3.4 percent was higher than the projected rate of 2.9 percent. It was also observed that there is no deliberate policy on employment.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends modernization of agriculture by availing sufficient water for production all the year through and developing commercial strategies for the products.  

Government should address the discrepancies between interest rate and inflation rate, to create a conducive environment for investment and business as a whole.  

The quality of the labour force should be improved through training, in order to increase the levels of productivity.  

Government should develop an employment policy to cater for the increase in the skilled population.

The Financial Sector Reform:

The ratio used to measure the depth of the financial sector is the ratio of money in circulation to GDP. This ratio has risen from 9.8 percent in 1994/1995 to 17.8 percent in 2002/2003. This implies that the financial services have deepened in the economy and the population that transact monitory business has grown.  

The micro-finance institutions have also played a very big role in deepening the financial sector by availing funds to the rural people, though at a high interest rate. However, there is no law regulating Tier IV micro-finance institutions and this may affect their operations.  

The coming into force of the Collective Investment Schemes Act has also helped in the mobilization of funds from small savers for long-term investment.  This has also been evident in the activities of the stock exchange operations where the securities exchange rose to 225 percent.

There is an increasing response to the customer needs, for instance, by introducing new products in the financial sector like cash-cards, Automatic Teller Machines et cetera. 

The committee observed that there is still need to broaden the financial sector to cover at least all districts. Sixteen districts have no formal financial institutions.

The continued depreciation of the local currency is not healthy for investment. High interest rates also discourage business on leverage.  

Domestic savings are still very low and there is no deliberate effort to mobilize these savings. Taxing of interest earned on savings by the banks is a disincentive to saving.

Recommendations:

There should be enhanced countrywide sensitisation of the operations of the stock exchange and the benefits associated with it.  

The public should be sensitised on the benefits of using monetary instruments other than cash for security and ease of transport.  

The financial sector should be broadened to cover the districts where such services are lacking, and efforts to stabilize the exchange rate should be enhanced. 

Government should institutionalise a mechanism to help the rural farmers access financial services without major difficulties. The implementation of the micro-finance institutions outreach plan should be accelerated to benefit all.

Government should promote domestic savings by, among others, removing tax earned on savings. 

Privatisation:

Mr Chairman, by 1992 the parastatal sector was standing at over 140 enterprises covering trade, commerce, agro-production and processing, manufacturing, insurance and utility.  Over 80 percent of the above private enterprises were commercial in nature and already competing with the private sector.

To-date, 113 enterprises have already been divested as follows:

• Asset sale			21
• Concessions		4
• Repossessions		5
• Share sale			48
• Liquidation/strike off	35
  Total			113

The committee was informed that the total outstanding payment from the sale of private enterprises was Shs 21 billion in 1998, which was reduced to one billion Uganda shillings in 2001.  

The one billion shillings outstanding is made up of the following:

• Shs 200 million from Lira hotel
• Hilltop Hotel, Shs 25 million
• The African Textile Mills worth US $425,225, which is under liquidation by Bank of Uganda to recover US $1 million owed to Co-Operative Bank.

Observations:

There are no subsidies from government. 

The privatised enterprises have been revamped.  There is an increase in production and some increase in levels of employment and revenue.  

Nationals have bought 60 percent of the enterprises. However, it was observed that the nationals, who constitute 60 percent, got a lesser share of the total in terms of value.  

There has been an increase in competition, which is a positive trend. This led to an increase in production, technology transfer and in innovation, like in telecom.

Mr Chairman, I refer to Annex I of the report -  “Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project. Divesture Income and Expenditure Report from Inception to June 30, 2003.” This is an income statement from the Privatisation Unit, which shows a net surplus of Shs 63,367,000,000. However, to interpret this as a gain would be unfair because out of that, Shs 78,268,000,000 came from government. So, in the books of government, if you look at page 9, government’s contribution and others is expenditure to government. 

We have direct costs and indirect costs. So, as we talk today, through the process of divestiture we have realized a net loss of Shs 14.9 billion.

Recommendations:

The enterprises whose payment period has expired should be resold to other intending buyers. 

The privatisation of private enterprises in the utility sector should be handled carefully and transparently because the sector is very sensitive and touches the basics of life like water, power and transport.  

Government, and the Privatisation Unit in particular, should try and minimize the costs of divestiture.

Resource Mobilization:

The tax revenue registered a performance of 101.11 percent by collecting Shs 1,242.32 billion against a target of Shs 1,228.74 billion. 

The committee was informed that this was due to the following: 

• Improvement in tax administration 
• Joint anti-smuggling activities with sister revenue authorities in Kenya and Tanzania 
• Value Added Tax and income tax reforms 
• Increased funding of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) activities.  

Members wanted to know what is being done to widen the tax base for more revenue, instead of reliance on tax and imports that may be affected by the coming of a customs union. 

It was also reported that the Government is going to implement the fiscal decentralization strategy, which was approved by Cabinet, on a pilot basis. The strategy includes requesting the local authorities to collect tax on behalf of the Central Government.  

Observations:

The increased tax performance is commendable, but it was noted that the depreciation of the shilling might have had a role due to inflation pressures.  

The contribution of Pay As You Earn (PAYE) was reported to be around four percent. The committee observed that the threshold of Shs 130,000 has not been adjusted for over seven years despite other variables, like prices continuously changing.  Members observed that increasing the threshold to 20 percent, which is Shs 235,000, would be justified because it is the next level from the current 10 percent, that is Shs 130,000.  

Members also observed that the non-tax revenue is still small. 

The monthly publication of URA on public matters is still limited in distribution and language. 

Government might get more revenue from Value Added Tax and other taxes not affected by the union.

Recommendations:

• URA should strengthen its management to seal the loopholes of alleged corruption among its ranks.  

• The threshold for Pay As You Earn should be revised upwards to the next level of 20 percent. 

• More effort should be made to widen the tax base especially on non-tax revenue. 

• SRPS officers should be trained in tax matters in order to appreciate the importance of good interpersonal relations in tax administration and the unit should be incorporated into the Uganda revenue structures.  

• URA should translate their publication into more local languages and should improve its distribution.

Public Expenditure Management:

The whole of the public expenditure management is still poor, resulting into creation of more domestic arrears and a lot of wastage in spending on non-essential issues.  

Public Procurement:

The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 created the Procurement Authority. This Authority is to serve as the central organ of Government on public procurements. The Authority will also, among others, harmonise local government procedures, policies and practices related to procurement.

Utilities:

The committee observed that there is high expenditure on utilities, mainly electricity, telephones and water.

Observations:

There is still waste on utilities and purchase by Government, especially on vehicles.  

Fiscal Decentralization:
 
The Cabinet approved the decentralization strategy whose implementation is to start in the financial year 2002/2004 on pilot basis. Members however observed that most of the districts lack technical capacity as exhibited by numerous reports of absorption incapacity, poor planning and corruption. 

Commitment Control System:

Domestic arrears are still being created despite the operation of a cash budget and commitment control system.

Recommendations:

The Ministry, in liaison with the relevant government ministries/departments, should urgently come out with a policy on management of government vehicles to minimize waste, especially the expenses on fuel and maintenance. A fleet management system should be put in place. 

Government should also consider the idea of hiring or leasing vehicles from car dealers to reduce the cost of maintenance.  

Government should ensure that the local governments have the capacity to manage public funds before effecting the fiscal decentralization programme.  

Punitive measures should be strengthened and effected in order to effect the well-intended idea of the commitment control system.

Micro-Finance Activities:

Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs):

Members observed that MFIs have been embraced by the majority despite the high interest rates, which have been associated with high defaulting rates.  

They accept deposits from the public, which is illegal, since the assumed law under which they operate, the Money Lenders’ Act, Cap 264, does not provide for the function. The law allows them to collect money from members only, like cooperatives credit and savings societies. 

Entandikwa Scheme:

Mr Chairman, the committee was informed that the Entandikwa Scheme was a failure. The committee, however, requested for a detailed report on the performance. The committee wondered what the Minister in charge of Entandikwa is doing since the programme failed and why that office still receives funding from government coffers.  

The committee was further informed that there are plans to restructure the duties of the Minister in charge of Entandikwa to take on the micro-finance activities. 

The committee was also informed that in the Micro-Finance Outreach Plan, which was approved by Cabinet in August 2002, each sub-county will have a financial extension worker who will link the local entrepreneurs and farmers and analyse their credit needs. 

On the fate of the Shs 10 million per parish as promised by the President, the Committee was informed that this will be handled by the restructured ministry.  

The Youth Entrepreneur Scheme (YES):

The committee was informed that this project failed like the Entandikwa scheme. The committee was also informed that the programme would also be run along side “Entandikwa” in the outreach plan. 

Recommendations:

The report on the performance of the Entandikwa should be expeditiously tabled in the House, and the money collected by the Entandikwa intermediaries be remitted to the consolidated fund.  

The micro-finance institution regulations should be considered and addressed in order to create security and confidence in the sector.  

In future any new initiative, which needs funding from consolidated fund, should be approved by Parliament to comply with Article 154 of the Constitution.  

SEMI-AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 

Non Performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART):

Mr Speaker, NPART’s life was extended in order to handle Uganda Development Bank portfolio and continue handling the other Uganda Commercial Bank portfolio.  

The total number of properties so far sold for both banks is 607 and a total of 413 properties are on the market with a value of Shs 5.3 billion and assigned debt value of Shs 34 billion. The uncollectable accounts amount to Shs 11.8 billion. These are 198 properties from UCB worth Shs 7.9 billion and seven Uganda Development Bank properties worth Shs 3.9 billion.  

Observations:

The trust’s mandate has been extended twice and has taken long to complete and wind up its operations. The trust has done a good job bearing in mind that these were already bad debts. However, it should wind up when its life expires on 9 October 2005.  

The committee noted that there are 198 properties originally worth Shs 7.9 billion but have been classified as worthless on the basis of unsaleable securities, unsecured debts write off of accumulated compound interests and write offs by court orders.  

Recommendations:

There should be no further extension of NPART because the costs of administration are increasing and more properties becoming unsaleable.  

The NPART should encourage settlement of dispute out of court to reduce the tedious and lengthy process of appeals and costs involved, where possible. 

TAX APPEAL TRIBUNAL (TAT) 

Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that there are plans to open upcountry branches to expedite the increasing number of cases from upcountry. These upcountry branches will act as secretariats and the tribunal will be moving there when the cases have been registered.

Observations:

The committee was informed that there are conflicting areas in the Tax Appeal Tribunals Act and the Stamps Act CAP 172 and the Customs Management Act.  

Members were informed that the specific sections in conflict were forwarded to the Minister with proposals to amend the law.  

The committee further observed that the tribunal is understaffed given the amount of work it handles.

Recommendations:

The Tax Appeals Tribunal should be strengthened further in terms of both human and financial resources to enable it carry out its mandate in the country.  

The Minister should expedite the proposal to amend the cited flaws in the law and enable the tribunal to ably and smoothly carry out its mandate.

The Custodian Board:

The Custodian Board derives its mandate from the Departed Asian’s Properties Decree, 1973 as amended by the Expropriated Properties Act, 1982.  

The committee was informed that a Bill to wind up the DACP was tabled in 1986 but later withdrawn by the Minister and shelved.  

The committee was informed that the board does not receive any more claims as the time for claims lapsed. The claims being handled are compensation and not properties. This allayed members’ fears that the sales maybe illegal as new claimants may turn up.  

Observations:

Only 19 elderly British Asians were compensated in respect of 41 properties, while 32 others opted to repossess their properties.  

The committee further observed that 16 Asians of the same category were neither compensated nor did they repossess their properties.  

The committee observed that a total of 4,062 properties had been repossessed as at 31 July 2003, and 1,253 properties were fully paid for. The reserve price for these properties was Shs 14.2 billion, and actual amount received was Shs 12 billion.  

The committee was informed that there are new properties being discovered by the board and currently they are 182 properties to be sold. The task force, in accordance with the Act, does not get money from the Consolidated Fund but funds its own activities from the collections.

Recommendations:

The properties identified should be valued and put on the market for sale.  

Properties partly paid for should be resold if the buyers fail to pay within the stipulated time. The board should devise a strategy to sell the properties on commission basis by the organisations with experience in marketing real estates especially when there are many properties on the market. This should be done expeditiously to minimise costs.  

UGANDA INVESTMENT AUTHORITY

The Uganda Investment Authority has cumulatively licensed 2,550 projects whose invests was worth US $3 billion, with 98,566 jobs created. (See Appendix II of the report).

Observation:

There has been a big difference between planned activities and actual levels. Planned investments were out at Shs 16 billion and actual investment was US $3 billion; planned employment was 207,594 and actual was 98,566. 

The trend of investment has been cyclical. The peak in 10 years was in 1995 when 401 projects were licensed and the lowest was in 1999 where only 96 were licensed. However, the general trend of licensed projects has been increasing since 1999. (See Appendix III of the report). 

It was also observed that the ownership of the projects licensed was as follows:

1. Locals - 35 percent
2. Foreign - 41 percent 
3. Joint venture - 24 percent. 

Members observed that the 98,566 jobs created in 10 years are too small and the quality of the jobs also may not be the best for this country.

Recommendations:

The authority should be strengthened to attract more foreign direct investment.  

The nature of jobs created and skills required should be analysed and only import skills that are lacking in the country.

Government should continue improving the investment environment to attract the competitive foreign direct investment, for example, tax policy and corruption, which can be addressed by an appropriate policy.

Local investors should be given equal attention in order to encourage and promote local investment.

National Planning Authority (NPA):

Mr Speaker, the National Planning Authority is a statutory body with its own Vote - 108. However, the Authority’s budgetary estimates appear in the ministry’s policy statement because by the time budget estimates were approved, the Authority had no accounting officer.

Observations:

The NPA submitted a budget of Shs 3.9 billion, which the Minister of Finance gave his comments about, reducing it to Shs 550 million.  

The committee noted that the critical activities to start NPA would not be covered by the Minister’s proposed amount.  

The committee advised the Ministry to meet with NPA and agree on which activities should be funded this financial year. I am glad to note that the Minister met with the NPA’s board and agreed on a budget of Shs 1.960,730,000. (Appendix IV).

Recommendations:

The NPA should focus its objectives and work plan bearing in mind the budget constraints.  

Parliament should give special support to NPA in its formative stage.

The committee, basing itself on the above, recommends a budget of Shs 1,960,730,000 for the financial year 2003/2004.

BUDGET ALLOCATION

Mr Chairman, yesterday we had to adjourn because we had to meet the Minister of Finance and his technical team to iron out some issues. I want to inform the House that an addendum report of the committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement is to be read and tabled.

The committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development held a meeting with the Minister of Finance this morning, 20 August 2003, and agreed to amend the report on the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2003/2004.

The following issues were considered: 

1. The Apparels Tri-Star (Uganda) Limited:
 
Members scrutinized the agreement of the company with the Government of Uganda and the following were observed:  

The memorandum is discriminatory to other investors and it looks like Government is a shareholder.

The committee further noted that the agreement was too much in favour of the investor.  

The committee was, however, informed that the benefit of bringing in the investor was to capture the over one million orders he had in the US market, and was ready to export within four months.

The committee agreed with the Minister to have a detailed analysis of the performance of the AGOA programme and the above company in particular, and report back to the House.

2. Expenses on Government vehicles:

The committee observed that the circular by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service, giving orders on use of public vehicles lacked sanctions.

It was also observed that the management of government vehicles is so far a failure.

The committee recommends that remedial measures that include enforcement/sanctions be put in place within three months. That is by mid November 2003, to save the public on the costs involved. Other queries included the cost of consultancy, stationery, printing and training costs, which the Minister responded to satisfactorily.

3. Domestic arrears:

Members observed that non-payment of the above arrears has affected a number of people who supplied goods to government.

The committee was, however, informed that the Government plans to pay the outstanding arrears of about Shs 200 billion within three years, and that this financial year Shs 45 billion is budgeted for.

Based on the mandate and function of the Ministry, the committee recommends the following budgetary proposals to this House basing on corrigenda: 

1. Recurrent expenditure for Vote 008 should be Shs 82,417,645,000, not as it is stated. 

2. Development expenditure is Shs 101,619,751,000.  

3. Vote 108 - National Planning Authority, Shs 1,960,730,000.

Conclusion:

The committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry to achieve its objectives. The committee would like to thank the semi-autonomous institutions, the Ministry officials and all those who attended the meeting during the consideration of the policy statements.

Finally, I beg the House to adopt this report and pass the budget estimates for the Ministry for the financial year 2003/2004. I thank you, and I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you, chairperson and members of the committee for the report. If there are any observations or comments they can be made now, but we should restrict ourselves to four minutes.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the committee for the report presented, and I would like to directly go to page 2 and look at their observations on the last paragraph; “The committee noted that the Ministry’s vision of ‘Eradicating Poverty by the year 2017” and budget speech theme of ‘Increased Production for Increased Exports and Eradication of Absolute Poverty’ are not realistic…” 

I wish to say that this is a very serious statement and I want to relate it to the issue of the Ministry’s vision in regard to the national vision.  

I would like to get clarification from the Ministry, because the Ministry of Finance does the planning as well. During the budget debate, the issue of the national vision was 2025 but now the Ministry has 2017. I would like to see how we harmonize this; maybe this is one of the causes of failure to attain what is projected. 

The other issue I want to raise is on page 4 and the committee is making an observation on PMA. They say that they have conceptual, design and implementation problems. As a Member of the Agricultural Committee, I want to add that one of the implementation problems of the PMA is the issue of lack of sufficient knowledge of what PMA is. 

I have heard many misinterpretations – especially when people talk about PMA as an institutional framework of eradicating poverty. People tend to put specific indicators to an issue, which would have broader indicators. So, there is need to sensitise people to understand what PMA is and the components that are involved in the PMA programme.  So, that is another problem that we need to look at.  

When you come to page 12, there is the Procurement Authority.  I would like to know the progress of this Procurement Authority.  

On page 13 the committee looked at the fiscal decentralization and they are talking about the incapacity of the district to absorb the funds there. But I also want to say that apart from the problems at the district level, there is a problem at the centre, of late release. That should be addressed as one of the problems affecting the area of decentralisation. Thank you very much.

MRS MARGARET ATENG OTIM (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. They did recognize the fact that it is the agricultural sector that will revamp the economy. However, I am disappointed when so little is put into that sector.  

I am happy with the recommendation it has made about silos. I too would like to add my voice that silos be made available to help in cases of surpluses produced. About two years ago we had a problem whereby a lot of maize was produced and then it had to go for Shs 30 only per kilo. So, if silos were in place we would not have such a problem again. It would be very easy for us to convince our people to produce a lot more, because we know it would be taken care of.

I would like to say something about resource mobilization. The committee acknowledged that very good work had been done. However, I would like to say that more could be achieved if we looked into certain problems. I have had interactions with some officials of URA and these are the things they say. Many of them are demoralized because they are transferred from districts as District Revenue Officers, and brought to the headquarters to serve as clerks. That is very demoralising.  

They also complain that they have managed to advance in education. But when they inform their superiors about their new qualifications, they are asked, “Who is responsible for the studies”? If it is not URA they do not acknowledge it. Because of that, many people have left for greener pastures.  

They also complained about facilitation at the work place. They say there is lack of transport. If there were enough transport for field officers, they would be able to move from place to place in order to mobilise for resources. If that problem is addressed, we could achieve more.  

They also said there is lack of computerization of the system. There should be some computerization in place, and a network whereby if you are at the border of Malaba, your work is reflected at the headquarters and throughout the country.  

This brings me to the conclusion that the Ministry of Finance and the Committee on Finance is charged with a lot of tasks, mobilizing resources and seeing to it that resources are distributed adequately to all sectors. It, therefore, makes me insist that the sector of finance should do a lot more work. You should be able to visit all the other committees, look at what they need, know what they do, know what they lack and know what they have. That way you will be able to perform better. Likewise, the Ministry should be able to know what other people need, what they have, what they lack and what should be done for things to improve.  

Besides inter-committee work, there is a suggestion that the Committee of Finance should also go out; not only that committee but also others, they should be able to go out to the field and find out from the smaller people who are engaged in work. This business of sitting in Parliament and listening to the Ministers and Permanent Secretaries is not enough. We have to go to the very people who do the work. I, therefore, end by saying that if we want to get a lot more, we should be able to invest more. Thank you.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda South, Mbarara):  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for doing a wonderful job. My comments are very few. 

My first point is on mobilisation. I remember the exchange rate last financial year was about Shs 1,800 to the dollar, but now it is about Shs 2,010. That is a depreciation of about 18 percent. When we get 18 percent and multiply it by the target, which was 1.22; you get well over Shs 1.24 billion. Therefore, we can say that this target was registered because of the inflation and not because of the efficiency, which they have put down here.  That one I want to oppose.

About micro-finance activities, Mr Chairman, these activities are doing far better than the Government banks or the Government institutions are doing on the ground. But they are working very well without any law. They are not regulated and soon we shall get abuses of this scheme.  

To show that they are doing a very good job, I visited one micro-finance institution where I found they have introduced an element called “produce purchase scheme”. During the bumper harvest they purchase all the produce, put it in the store and when there is a shortage they sell this produce. After deducting the interest, the profit is shared out among the members of the micro-finance institution and the owners of the produce. It was working very well and actually we should commend these micro-finance institutions.

Going to Entandikwa, that failed and we still have the Minister for Entandikwa! I do not know what he is doing! This one should have closed long time ago, and I hear that they want to restructure it so that he can administer the micro-finance institutions. He will fail the micro-finance institutions also. We better put a law and let the micro-finance institutions operate under the Financial Institutions Statute.  

I had a lot to comment on but it seems my time is running out. I want to comment on the Uganda Investment Authority now. I want to know how many companies were licensed last year. You gave us a cumulative list of ten years, but you have not given us how many were licensed last year. I need to know this because I know very well what has been happening in the market down there. Investors were running away from this country and going back to Kenya after they sorted out their political problems in Kenya. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented. I will restrict myself to one problem; that is inflation, which was highlighted in the report. The President himself also observed this problem when he requested the Prime Minister to address the Governors of the central bank that met here this week. The President asked the Governors to tackle or to fight inflation. I think this is a major problem. A problem, which can be solved gradually, but I think government has not made a good effort to solve it so far.

Inflation, as the President indicated, actually pushes away investment and as a result employment will not be created. And as a result macro-economic growth will not take place in the economy. So, we will have to tackle it as much as possible. But I think it can be done.  

In the Budget Speech the Minister promised to address one of the causes of inflation and that is introduction or promotion of small denominations of currency. This has not taken place and I urge government to promote small denominations as fast and as much as possible because there is a big problem. There is an outcry of lack of small denominations.

The smallest currency one can use is the twenty-shilling note. And when you buy something with the twenty-shilling note, in many cases there is no balance for you and as a result prices go up –(Interjection)- yes, this is a reality. 

I have also met some business people who argue that actually commercial banks now have intermediaries. These are boys who go and pick up small denominations like one thousand notes, ten thousand notes, and five hundred shilling coins, and sell them. They take them to special places so that other people who want to use them can buy them. I hope that the Government can try to look into this and see how small denominations are treated in commercial banks so that the whole public can take advantage of it. But at the moment there is an outcry and the impact it has on the economic growth, the creation of employment and the investment, is a big problem.

I would also like to note that actually investments have not picked up as expected. This is very true in Masaka. And because of the inflation, there is no attraction. I can tell you that for five to ten years, I have not seen any investment, any factory, or anything taking place in Masaka. That means there is dormancy in terms of investment and in terms of Masaka’s economic growth. It is also true in terms of employment. Many young people are on the streets. We have not created employment to attract people away from the streets. Why? It is because of the way government is handling the problems that are visible and that are manageable, especially in terms of inflation.

The Prime Minister is here and yesterday he addressed the people about this problem. I urge him to call upon the Government to ensure that inflation is handled. It can be handled especially if small currency denominations are introduced. Let us have small denominations so that people can buy. But people now cannot buy something because there is no exchange of money. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota North, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the committee for the report. My concern is the observation by the committee that still there is some agricultural produce, which is imported to Uganda. We have repeated this time and again, trying to discourage investors here in Uganda from bringing in their agricultural produce. So, I request the Ministries concerned to make sure that agricultural produce that we also have here is never imported into this country.

Another observation I want to make is a public outcry on corruption. Mr Chairman, I was overwhelmed recently by the comment of one of the heads of institutions in Uganda, a technical institute one of whose departments was given Shs 12 million. But out of the Shs 12 million from the Ministry of Education, he only got Shs 6 million. On getting to his institution, the head of department wanted Shs 2 million out of the Shs 6 million. And of course, he also wanted some. I do not know how government will control this kind of corruption in our ministries. 

Another head teacher in Iganga District was given money to construct a laboratory, and he was allocated Shs 120 million. He signed for Shs 120 million from the Ministry but he was given only Shs 70 million, leaving Shs 50 million in the Ministry. Mr Chairman, these accountant generals should really work hard to check this corruption -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Bitamazire Namirembe): Mr Chairman, I have listened very carefully to the statements made by my colleague from Mpigi District. However, as Members of Parliament and probably leaders of this country, when we get such information, it is not enough to come to the Floor here and bring out this information. I will request the Member of Parliament to report that to the Ministry so that we can follow this up with head teacher whom he knows signed for some monies, which he did not get, and so on. I thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): I thank you, Mr Chairman. I am sure honourable members are aware that they are receiving information on the money that is going to their districts. At some point we shall be able to give you information as to how much money goes to your constituency, so that you know how much money goes to your primary school, or how much money goes to the health centre. That way you will also be part of the accounting authorities. 

This business of leaving the watchdog role to a few individuals or organisations is not helping us. Every Member of Parliament should also at some point come to say, “In my constituency, in primary school A, there has been this abuse of funds” and so on and so forth. And, discuss it with the local authorities, the sub-county government, the councillors of the sub-county, and the councillors of the districts. This must be a massive job and so all of us have to be involved. I thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: First of all, I thank the State Minister for Primary Education but I fear to follow through with her suggestion. The problem is that when you talk to these principals, they say that the moment you reveal this, they are either going to be dismissed from their posts or be sacked completely from their jobs.  

The information from the Minister of Local Government, I have a sheet here where allocations are -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and I want to thank the Member for giving way. By saying that he does not want to reveal the names of the people who connive and steal government money, is he condoning corruption? You as a leader, you are part and parcel of the government! What is your role?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member, what I understood from the Minister was not that when you think a principal is stealing government funds, you go and tell him “you are stealing funds”. You go to the bosses in the Ministry and report so that they can set up the machinery to investigate.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will do that. I will try and find out the names. 

On the information by the Minister for Local Government -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable member, do not tell us the names here; it will mostly endanger you. If you have those names, you can go to your colleague in Mpigi and reveal the names.

MR MUTULUUZA: On the information by the Minister for Local Government, I have got this sheet already. I am going to request my DEO to give me the list of teachers in both primary and secondary schools, so that I compare the amount of money allocated, and their salaries. I hope I will not be going against the law. 

On page 12, public expenditure, we passed a law on the commitment control system. I do not see why this is continuing because in the Public Accounts Committee we are experiencing a lot of problems.  The accounting officers are not adhering to this commitment control system, as law requires. So, I think it is the weakness of the Ministry. They should try to make sure that accounting officers do not break the law. 

On page 12 of the report again, Mr Chairman, there are high bills on utilities and telephones. I even wanted to raise it this morning when we were considering the Ministry of Works’ policy statement budget. The issue of MTN and other telephone companies charging per minute instead of per second is killing people. These people are “stealing” our money outright in broad daylight. So, we should try to make sure that these companies charge us per second not per minute.

Lastly, in Appendix No.2 it is indicated that 87 projects are in Mpigi District, with an investment of US $237,387,966 million. I wanted the Minister to at least brief me on this. I do not know of any investor in my constituency apart from the flower project. I thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wish to also add my voice to those that have thanked the committee for a job well done. However, they are issues over which I would have appreciated further information and deliberations. These are as follows: 

Unemployment has plagued this country for some time. In the Budget Speech there was even a promise that we would start exporting skilled manpower. I do not know whether the committee actually addressed this issue because I have been unable to find definitive action that the Ministry intends to take to facilitate our children to tap the international job market. I think this is a matter over which Ugandans need some answers and I hope the Minister, in his reply, will throw light on the action he intends to take.

The other issue I wish to make observations about is the institution of the National Council of Science and Technology, which also falls under the Ministry of Finance. One of the rationales for housing it there was that it would actually get priority attention in terms of resource allocation. The tiger countries have been able to make strides in economic development because they have embraced science and technology. 

Unfortunately, this issue does not seem to come out very clearly. Definitely, this has not been demonstrated in terms of resource allocation to the National Council of Science and Technology to enable it to play its rightful role of transforming this country and reducing the poverty levels. How come that the National Planning Authority, which is a newer body, is able to have its independent vote and National Council of Science and Technology, which is an equally important body, is still marginalised in terms of resource allocation?  

Today we heard about the National Housing and Construction Corporation being privatised and it has only two directors both from the Ministry of Finance. I am aware that before divesting property the shares revert to government. But I am also aware that there was a mechanism whereby the line ministers could be part of the machinery. This is the matter, which the Minister of Finance should explain. Why have they departed from that policy, which was inclusive - of the line ministers of the bodies that were going to be divested, to ensure that the initial objectives for which those bodies were set up would be carried forward even by the new managers of such enterprises? I think that in order to protect the public interest there is need to include the Ministers of the sectors that are responsible for the bodies that are being divested.  

Mr Chairman, I am aware that Tri-Star is not the only player in AGOA. The committee has only singled out Tri-Star but there is another operator also in the Apparel government that I am aware of. If the justification for the Ministry of Finance to pump in billions of shillings was to capture the lucrative American market, does the taxpayer not deserve to know how much of that market we have so far captured? 

What is the value of the trade between Uganda and the US so far, as a result of the interventions of AGOA? We should know whether it is a cost effective undertaking or not, or whether we should start cutting our losses. I hope the committee in investigating this matter will come out with more concrete information as to what we have put in so far, and what guarantees we have from the investors, so that we are not fleeced off. What are the remittances to us from the United States? 

Finally, Mr Chairman, some of us raised the issue about taxation, particularly the increase in road licenses and how it was hurting the people at the grassroots. I expected the committee to address this matter because there are people outside there who have vehicles whose surrender value is about Shs 1 million or two, and you are asking such a person to pay a road license worth Shs 400,000 or Shs 600,000 per annum –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The issue you are bringing up will be settled under the Finance Bill, not this report.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you for that information. However, in terms of determining the sectors or sub-sectors for taxation, yes, the rates might be reviewed. But I am trying to raise a general point that the people at the grassroots should be considered before we come up with tax proposals, so that equity is ensured. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the report of the committee and to comment on the way the Ministry of Finance has been running our economy, and the lack of creativity in the financing mechanism.

I will elaborate on some of the areas, which were touched upon by the committee but not in greater depth. In terms of creative taxation, we are here among other things to promote exports. We know very well that one of the leading exports or foreign exchange earners is fish. I am disappointed that to-date fish - being a natural resource - the Ministry of Finance has not come up with a Bill to create loyalties for fish that we sell abroad.

I call fish a natural resource because the fishermen, the few people who process, do not manufacture fish; it is a natural resource. None of us make fish, we only harvest it, process it and sell it. That is why I am saying that as we have levied loyalties on gold and probably oil in the future, I recommend that they consider levying loyalties on fish. 

The people who export fish are making more than 60 percent profit on a natural resource they do not manufacture. Why should we not take at least half of that amount? I know we are trying to encourage foreign investors but they should not exploit our natural resources. As somebody who comes from what I call a lucastrine district, neighbouring the lake, we are entitled to a bigger share of the proceeds than a mere fee that we collect from fishing licenses.

Two, in terms of managing our finance, Mr Chairman, I am disappointed that last financial year the Minister of Finance brought here a Procurement Bill, which became a Procurement Act with a lot of cracks. We know among other things that procurement has been the biggest source of corruption, which we condemn. But at the same time we have failed to come up with more creative methods of preserving our scarce resources so that we do not spend too much money on procurement of assets. 

I am specifically referring to the matter of vehicles. There is no credible reason why we should spend over Shs 400 million buying vehicles when you could lease them. When you look at the most developed economies, the US followed by UK, all their government vehicles, especially those in embassies are on lease from Chrysler or Ford Corporation. They pay very little per month and every four years they take back the vehicle and they are given another one. Mr Chairman, I am surprised that with all the technocrats and consultants we have in the Ministry of Finance, they have not discovered that one.  

I recall that last year when we were in New York we were talking with some colleagues, including the Rwanda Ambassador. He picked up the idea and now all diplomatic vehicles of Rwanda are on lease at less than US $100 per month, and yet we want to lock up so much money! 

I must give credit where it is due. When the Ministry of Finance had ran into difficulties last year of raising US $48 million to purchase a G4 for the President’s travel, at least they went to Equator Finance Holdings and they were able to get that aircraft. The President is using it at the rate of US $480 per month instead of tying up US $48 million, which we need badly. I give you credit. For once you were creative and you saved us money. 

Why do you not do the same for the vehicles, for the Nissans? Why do you not do the same for the computers we use? You can go to DFCU and they will give you money to lease a computer. Why do you want to lock up Shs 1.4 million in a computer when you can get it for Shs 100,000 per month for two years? It becomes yours later, or they give you another one.  

Mr Chairman, the other areas where you are profligate include also the matter of Uganda Export Promotion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you suggesting hire purchase terms or – because when you say, “the computer becomes yours eventually”, is that not a hire purchase arrangement?

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, there is a difference between hire purchase and leasing. For leasing, you pay a small deposit for the purpose of legal papers and thereafter you give them so much money depending on the value and the nature of the equipment. You pay per month, and at the end of two or four years they give you similar equipment and take back the old equipment. If you are interested, then you can negotiate the price to retain it. 

Mr Chairman, as I said this is common knowledge -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The other day you were talking of leasing, the Ministry of Transport did their best after we had been requested by the budget, but we found it damn expensive. I for one own a bus on lease, but I am paying through my nose. You cannot manage, not with this country of ours. Unless the terms are slightly better in another country but in Uganda it is damn expensive; you cannot afford it. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, I can see I have problems in explaining the difference between a lease and a lease purchase. What you are talking about is a lease purchase. The difference is actually hire purchase - what you are talking about.  

Notwithstanding the information, I would like to receive from my honourable colleague, I know I have got limited time but being generous and democratic, proceed.   

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This idea was brought to the Budget Committee, requesting the Ministry of Finance and the whole government to use the lease system by especially going to all the motor vehicle companies, which have the franchise here. That work was done. They could not afford it, especially with vehicles, which are running on bad terrain and the way we handle them. It became extremely complicated and they could not allow the government to use that type of system. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Much as I appreciate it –(Interruption) 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I think what we proposed in the Budget Committee is that the Ministry responsible should actually study and see whether there would be any savings. The information we got was that the company leasing vehicles would do some maintenance on the vehicles, which is a cost to the government. In addition, they would also insure the vehicles themselves. So, if you compute the maintenance, the insurance and all these other things vis-à-vis the buying, then we would estimate whether it would be worthy to go leasing or not. But this exercise has not yet been undertaken. We recommend that it should be looked into.

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the idea has been taken. Can we go to another one? 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With due respect to my honourable colleague, let me proceed to another item, otherwise we can spend the whole afternoon on leasing. Thank you, I appreciate your information. 

Privatisation is the next problem that I consider a total mismanagement on the part of the Ministry of Finance. We have sustained a loss of Shs 14 billion shillings. We borrowed US $48 million some time back for this exercise; in the end we are in a loss of Shs 14 billion. On top of that, my concern is that the damage is done. 

My concern, notwithstanding that lesson, is that we have come up again in the last three months to set up another state company called Uganda Property Holdings. What is the matter with us? We are privatising and setting up new companies at the same time! 

This new company is allegedly supposed to manage the properties of the embassies abroad. It is totally unnecessary to set up that type of situation. If only you gave the necessary resources to the Ministry of Foreign affairs to maintain their property, there would no need to set up another government company to do exactly what Foreign Affairs can do efficiently.  

So really, for the Government to come up with another parastatal body, it is absolutely ridiculous. We have lost money and now we are setting up another company to lose more money. What can they do that Foreign Affairs could not do?  Foreign Affairs only failed to maintain these properties because the Ministry of Finance refused to release the money. 

On top of that, Mr Chairman, on this question of management, when the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had the ability to collect rent from their properties, they could maintain them. I recall a year ago when we had problems in Washington to repair our property, we went to the open market. We borrowed money using Uganda House in New York as collateral. We raised the money, we repaired the building and we paid back. The Government came out clean. And now we come up with this arrangement and think that these people can do it better than Foreign Affairs could do? I am saying this matter should be dropped.

Mr Chairman, the question of SRPS. It is a continuation of tolerating corruption. Why do we have to go to the UPDF to give us soldiers to collect taxes or to check on corrupt officers within URA? It is totally unnecessary, superfluous and it is another way of accepting corruption. It is not necessary. 

Last but not least is the question of export promotion by executive intervention. Last year we spent Shs 240 million to give various enterprises involved in exports. We gave this money to the big companies and yet the basic person in Uganda, the fisherman who brings the fish from the waters of Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga and others, does not receive a penny. We gave to the big enterprises that are now flourishing.

Worse still, there is now what we call “de-Africanisation” of commerce and industry in Uganda. All the indigenous Ugandans in industry and commerce are going under, and I can give specific examples if need be.  

We have Sembule, the first African owned steel rolling mill. When they ran into problems we were reluctant to come to their rescue. Up to now the man is on his own, struggling in courts of law. And who is in a court - the people suing him? It is PTA Bank. We are shareholders as a government, suing one of us. It is not because of mismanagement, it is because the PTA took over the management of Sembule Steel Mills and they mismanaged the resources. Now they are asking the poor fellow to pay back what they misused!

This kind of situation – if the Ministry of Finance does not come to our rescue, then we might as well privatise the Ministry and have somebody else to manage our economy better. Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Laughter).

LT JIMMY KINOBE  (Katikamu North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also want to add my voice to my colleagues’ to thank the committee for such a good report.

The committee, on page 5, observed that there is a very high population growth. Whereas the observation was related to employment, as a Member of Parliament who comes from a district where we have an opposite policy on curbing population growth, I want to know from the Minister whether there is a binding policy in government on this. Are all government agents supposed to implement this policy?

I do not think that the problem is the population per se. The size of the population is not really a very big deal but the quality of the population and subsequently how you plan for it. Mr Chairman, the Minister is aware that this culture of even rewarding people who get twins, who give birth every other day, is picking up in places including my district.  

The other day when I was reading the papers I read of a councillor in a given area who gives a goat to every couple that produces twins. It was also, I think, in Rakai. It is becoming a style. There is a radio programme on CBS every morning, the Kengere. So, I do not know what the Ministry has in place to make sure that if these uncoordinated statements from government agents are not properly checked – (Interjection) – they are independent? No, I do not think so. 

I was going to say something about the unqualified statement by the President. I must say “unqualified” because when the President talked about the population in East Africa, he talked about numbers not quality. Now in the minds of other people out there in the field, they saw that he was supportive of my chairman, and indeed the following day he was on radio celebrating that, “You people, you were saying it is wrong, even the President the previous day supported me.”

This is very dangerous and it is going to undermine a policy in which we are investing a lot of money, and it is a global concern about population growth. I am told that we are not ranking the highest. We are among the highest in the world -(Interjection)- Are we the highest?  

My concern, Mr Chairman, since the Prime Minister is also here - how do we co-ordinate our messages? While the Ministry is very busy promoting policies about family planning, some of us leaders give contrary statements, which amount to undermining the efforts. I do not know how we should proceed.

I now want to touch on the observation of the committee on page 13, the fiscal decentralisation. The aspect I am going to tackle is cross-cutting but good enough I see the Minister of Local Government here and the other line ministers who have services that are delivered to the local governments. So I presume that they will take note.

First of all, I want to say that decentralisation has made innumerable achievements despite the shortcomings that were observed in its implementation. And good enough it is properly entrenched in the Constitution. So, what we can do is to see how best we can enable decentralisation to deliver as it was anticipated and possibly achieve the highest form of decentralisation being advocated for by other Ugandans.

But whereas we still have that commitment, Mr Chairman, you will observe that the Votes of the districts are only 30 percent of the national budget that is transferred directly to the districts through the respective accounts. But surprisingly, the Ministries still spend almost another 30 percent in the local governments via the Ministries. This has made monitoring accountability very difficult.  

I can give an example of classroom construction. Whereas there is a Vote under School Facilitation Grant (SFG), which is a Vote of the money directly sent to the local governments, some of the money is given to the Ministry of Education and they advance it to local governments. So, it becomes a problem when you come to monitor the school. You have to know whether this school was constructed using the money the CAO got directly in his Vote or the money, which was passed via the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education.  

When I talked to the Permanent Secretary at one stage he confessed that actually there was a structure. Unfortunately, in Mpigi District where a school had been constructed using EDF funds, when the Permanent Secretary requested for the accountability, they sent copies of the invoices and the originals were sent to EDF. Until he sent his accountant there, only to find that they were using the same structure to account for the two sources of funding. This is making it very difficult to monitor accountability because of the so many accountability centres. 

When I talked with the Auditor General, he also has that problem. He has a department, which audits money spent in local governments but on Central Government projects, and money spent directly under the Votes. When they go to monitor sometimes they mix up these accountabilities and you find the same structure being accounted for using the two different sectors. So, as we consider further fiscal decentralisation, we must see how to strengthen accountability.

Mr Chairman, I have some proposals, which I suggest the Minister of Finance should look at. 

One is the weakest point. Mr Minister of Local Government, I think it is high time we considered looking at the qualifications of councillors in district councils. Whereas we are now talking about capacity of the civil servants to the extent that we are now even sending graduates at the sub-counties, the quality of the politicians in the bodies –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But do you not think your suggestion should come when we are dealing with the Local Governments Committee report?

LT KINOBE: They are talking about capacity in their report. Their recommendation is that the Government should ensure that local governments have the capacity to manage public funds before the policy is implemented. And the Ministry of Finance is the one, which sends the money. If you do not generate consensus with the Ministry of Finance, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But the Ministry of Finance cannot deal with the issue of quality of councillors in local governments.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, to represent statistically means to look the same as the people you represent. Therefore, to require higher qualifications of councillors presupposes they will be representing something different.

LT  KINOBE: Well, I do not know the relevance of that but what I want to respond to is the requirement for the Ministry of Finance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what I am saying here is that you have merits in your suggestions but it should be handled when you are dealing with the Local Governments Committee.  

LT KINOBE: I thank you, Mr Chairman, for your guidance. But the moment you raise the quality of the people, it has financial implications. Because in my next submission I am going to talk about the capacity of those councils, after you have made them qualitative.  

The next point I want the Ministry of Finance to note is the PAF monitoring fund. When you look at their guidelines, they say that; “Monitoring by councillors: the only councillors financed under the PAF monitoring and accountability grant to monitor the Local Government programmes will be the members of the Executive in line with their legal mandate. They can be involved in both grant specific and multi-sectoral monitoring. No other locally elected politicians can be involved in monitoring using the PAF funds.”  

From the time I started working with the local governments, I realized that if the council committees, which are the equivalent of the Parliamentary committees, were brought on board in the aspect of monitoring, and if they were also legally allowed to access some of this money, possibly they would do a lot of work to help us to monitor the utilisation of the public funds in the local governments. But the practice today is that councils normally sit once or twice a month and sometimes they only sit when the leadership so wishes. 

If the executive have something to do, which they find that the councils will undermine, they make sure that the council stays away as long as they want, until the matter is out of the way. Yet if the council committees were empowered financially – because the question would come that they do not have funds. But if you consider the amount of money, which you will lose in embezzlements and you equate it to the additional amount of money that you would put in for these councillors to be able to sit, I believe there would be a saving.  

Another area, which I wanted to suggest to Ministry of Finance to look at, is to legally allow the council committees to access the PAF funding, which is sent instead to the technical people. When you look at the money that is sent for monitoring, they pay the CAO, the engineer of works and the district executive members. In practice, these are the people who continuously do the work of implementing the programmes. If they are the ones to monitor themselves then report in Kampala, how effective is that reporting mechanism? 

I believe that if councils were empowered through their committees, they would really do a good job. But the problem is that they are fused together. When you go down there, the chairman almost single-handedly runs the council, the speaker is at the mercy of the district leadership and they normally sit at the high table together. If a member puts up the hand and the chairman shakes his head, the speaker will not choose you. So, these are some of the problems in the councils, and those members who have bothered to go and sit in councils know. 

So, I think we need to empower the councils if we want them to fulfil the mandate that is required of them under the Local Governments Act.  

Finally, -(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: May we know what the relevance of council meetings is, to the report of the Committee of Finance?

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable members, some of these ideas are very good, but I think we shall have an occasion to debate the reports of the Local Government Accounts Committee. This is where these remedies will be better placed, than in the estimates of Ministry of Finance.

LT KINOBE: I agree with your wise guidance, Mr Chairman. So I wind up by saying that whereas government is committed to sending money to local governments, the commitment is even entrenched in the Constitution and it is also delivering very fruitful outputs. There is a problem in monitoring public finance and accountability in the local governments. 

It is unfortunate that my submission has cut across but we realize that local government is a crosscutting aspect. When you talk about dissemination of services in local governments, you almost virtually touch every department. But as the Chairman has ruled, at an appropriate time my committee is going to submit its report and make concrete recommendations on how to cure this aspect of financial accountability in local governments. Thank you.

MR KAGIMU KIWANUKA (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to start with the micro-finance institutions. Much as I am grateful to these micro-finance institutions, they have brought problems to our constituencies, especially mine. These people charge high monthly interest rates. They are selling off bibanjas of people; men are running away from their homes; it is really terrible! 

There was a case of FINCA. One time it lent money to a certain lady and the lady fell sick and she was admitted to the hospital. These people came and said, “We want our money.”  She said, “But I am sick, you see I am on drip.”  They said, “No, FINCA does not know sickness, we want our money.” So they went ahead and started selling the lady’s property, pulling blankets away from the children!
 
It is good they are lending money, and their argument is “We did not invite you to borrow this money. You know our terms are stiff; you either accept them or not.” But it is true; I think the committee should look into this deeper. Perhaps the Ministry could look deeper into this –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that a lot of people I have discovered in the rural area are actually moneylenders. They do not come under micro-finance institutions. They are really moneylenders but they camouflage themselves as micro-finance institutions.

MR KAGIMU KIWANUKA: Thank you for that information. I thought FINCA was a micro-finance institution? Anyway, these institutions are lending money at cutthroat rates.  

Another point is about the Custodian Board. Mr Chairman, most of these Asians are coming back to steal this property yet they were compensated. In fact, I would like Parliament to pay special tribute to you because I remember you blocked about 20 Asians who wanted to steal property. They had been compensated but you blocked these people. 

Another issue is about this Uganda Investment Authority. They have licensed many projects but you find that as the committee observed, the jobs that they give to our local people are really not substantial jobs. They are labourers and potters. They give the really paying jobs to people from their home countries. I could bring examples if I had time.  

In Kenya what was happening was that before they give you a license, you must put a native on the board. And one of the reasons they were doing this was to see that the native caters for the interests of the country. Because if for example Prof. Latigo or hon. Kamuntu is put on a committee he will make sure that at least there is fair share when they are giving out these jobs. Some people see it as just political rewards - that they are going to put people in positions to reward them. They could get somebody from somewhere and then they reward him because he campaigned. But I think there is a positive aspect to that.

Another point is about the agro-processing industries, which they talked about. In fact, I am wondering why in Uganda we do not have a coffee processing industry or a factory like in Tanzania, which was producing Kena. We produce coffee. Why do we not process this? You bring a real machine here. There are these local, small ones, but we need a substantial one. This will help first of all the coffee farmers to increase the prices, and it will really help our economy because we depend on coffee.  

The President is always complaining that we are selling raw products and then we are not getting enough foreign exchange. I remember when we were in the Constituent Assembly we tied our hands by putting in the Constitution an Article that does not allow a back bencher to move a motion forcing government to touch the Consolidated Fund. In fact, I am planning to move a motion, when we are amending the Constitution, to amend that Article so that we are allowed to move motions, which force government to touch the Consolidated Fund. Here I would move a motion to force government to put up this factory and then this factory would raise the standard of living of our people. 

Another issue, Mr Chairman, they went to textiles, but textile does not help. Actually I was going to talk about this AGOA issue, the Tri-Star Company. There are allegations that this project is failing and that the goods are chased from the United States market because they do not compete. I do not know how true this is. That even here the girls locally are being paid by government because the muyindi cannot pay them. They say that government is just trying to show that the thing is a success when it is not. I do not know whether those allegations are true. So, I seek clarification from the Minister concerned or from the chairman of the committee.

About the high interest rates of banks, this issue has been coming back on the Floor every now and again but the interest rates continue to remain high. I do not know what is happening. One time the Bank of Uganda started giving seminars about this money, which comes to Bank of Uganda - like the Apex money. This money comes at a low interest rate but the problem is that the banks through which Bank of Uganda has to channel this money do not want to lend out this money because the interest rate is low. 

The banks prefer to lend out their money, for which they charge high interest rates. So, I will bring it back at the time of the Finance Bill, but the interest rates are really killing businesses.  

The issue I would like to end with, and again I will bring it back under the Finance Bill – is that in Indonesia there is a mechanism they use. If the bank lends you money and you fail to pay - as the honourable member was saying, some of these banks like Sembule were closed not because they were mismanaged but because of circumstances beyond their control. In Indonesia there is a mechanism, which they use: the bank does not come to attach your property. I will explain it at the most appropriate time, otherwise I would be given points of information and it is not the Finance Bill being considered. 

However, something must be done because every now and again banks are selling property of people not because these people are mismanaging finances but because of the problems in the economy. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I must also thank the committee for their good report and thank the Ministry of Finance and URA in their success in meeting the target for tax collection. 

I would also like to appreciate the fact that the Ministry of Finance has began to appreciate the need to have the National Planning Authority effectively working and in place, and we thank them for the revised budget for the National Planning Authority. I have just a few comments to make. 

I start by agreeing with the report of the committee on the issue of PMA and NAADS and since our report is coming tomorrow, a substantive debate will be on it tomorrow. But I would like to correct something, which comes up quite frequently even in our committee when people complain about the weather. I think Ugandans must know that in terms of natural agriculture, Uganda’s weather is one of the best in the world and we should be the last people to complain about the weather. 

The problem is not the weather. The problem is that we have not learnt how to design our agriculture to take into consideration the reality of our weather.  Researchers have done a lot of things. There are new varieties that are early maturing, and high yielding crops. If you mechanise you open the dry soil early, you know, doing such simple things that could completely transform the productivity of our agriculture. As a professional agriculturist, in my view this is how PMA should be approached in this country, and not by “creating an enabling environment”. 

A lot has been said about mobilisation of resources. I would like to say that the Ministry does not seem to have clearly appreciated the potential that certain things that are simple could do. Supporting these could greatly transform resource mobilisation in this country. 

I would like to commend them. We recently passed the micro-finance support program loan. In my view, that is one of the most important loans that have passed through in the Committee of National Economy. I know that the micro-finance institutions properly set with good motive and managed by competent people, can make a huge difference.

When I came to Parliament last year in May, we started a micro-finance institution where my own loan was to assist financially. One of my colleagues, my cousin who left Uganda Commercial Bank at the rank of general manager offered to provide technical support. Another person, Mr Opio Ogalo, another person who was a director in the Bank of Uganda serves on that board of micro-finance. It is called AGARU. We opened only one branch in one trading centre in the middle of this war. In one year the membership rose to 1,000, the deposits totalling to Shs 365 million. 

Teachers no longer go to Kitgum to face the risk of being killed by Kony. Their cheques are deposited in the bank in Kitgum and they get the money from home. These micro-finance institutions, properly supported, will make a huge difference. 

But in the area of agriculture, the interest rates and the efficient nature of our rural agriculture have a big impediment. Therefore, deliberate funding support given directly to agriculture through these institutions, with reasonable interest rates, must be urgently considered by the Ministry of Finance. Because then the producer of wealth in the village will be able to access resources that they need to buy those new technologies in the field. These could be herbicides or hybrid seeds that transform their productivity.

The other aspect that I wanted to mention in the context of resource mobilisation is our taxation policy. I do not know whether we have a comprehensive taxation policy or whether we have a policy to promote savings through taxation. Do we have a policy to promote investment in the rural area through tax relief? I am not aware of this, and this is one of the areas that I thought I should point out to the Minister. They should consider this when they are looking at resource mobilisation.  

I will just mention something very briefly about fiscal decentralisation. I agree with the suggestion of my colleague, hon. Kinobe and when we come to the Local Governments Committee report I want to include those local government institutions like the District Public Accounts Committee and the tender board. This is where wastage of rural funds is greatest. But physical decentralisation, which will allow local governments to shift funds according to their interests, if not guided, is going to be very dangerous. 

Therefore, I am pleased that the National Planning Authority is now going to be in place. Let those pilot districts be the targets of the National Planning Authority so that those districts have comprehensive plans to allow funds to flow without arbitrary change. Because when election years come, the district chairpersons, the councillors will now want these roads done, which will derail what would have been a normal development process. So for fiscal decentralization, the pilot districts should couple it with comprehensive NPA approved district development plans, so that funds are not diverted.

NPART’s cost efficiency ratio is 32 percent. What I am wondering is, what does this mean in terms of what is going on in the collections? Have we ever had audited accounts of NPART examined to determine whether the real problem, the real overheads are high because of the reality of what they are handling? Or it is our usual Ugandan things where we use processes to pilfer money? Where does this money go? Have we ever thought of putting aside this NPART money to support some of these development initiatives that we need to transform the rural community?  

Lastly, the Uganda Investment Authority. Mr Chairman, the committee accepted trends in investment and it is so easy to say that it is increasing. But that is not helpful to us.  Because if you talk about trends increasing by five or 10 percent, what does it mean?  What about the sector characteristics? What is happening in agriculture? What is happening in mining? We want this disaggregated. The implication for these when you disaggregate is to determine whether our overall policy of PEAP is really working.  

And if it is not working, how do we make policy adjustments to ensure that foreign direct investments are attracted to those sectors? Then we will have the greatest impact on poverty alleviation and the transformation of our country.  If we can do that, then we will be able to help this country move forward. I thank you, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, any comment?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. Allow me to say right from the start that we are grateful to the Committee of Finance, the Chairman, all the Committee Members and to the honourable members for their contributions. Your contributions are very important to us and we shall definitely take them into consideration when we are formulating the policies that guide us in our mandate. 

Having said that, I want to touch briefly on the issues that were raised by honourable members. Hon. Madada raised the issue of the vision and he was saying that in our vision we intend to eradicate absolute poverty by the year 2017 and yet there is Vision 2025. As I stated in the general debate earlier, there is no contradiction between Vision 2025 and the intention to eradicate absolute poverty by the year 2017. 

The Vision 2025 has several targets and these targets have different delivery periods. All the deliverables cannot be based on a single year. So, while our vision still remains 2025 and the targets under that vision are under consideration, our intention is to eradicate absolute poverty by the year 2017.  

Mr Chairman, he made some proposal on PMA, that masses should be sensitised. Yes, PMA is an important programme and we have noted members’ concerns throughout the debate on the weaknesses of PMA. I am glad to say that PMA is undergoing review and all the recommendations will be taken into account.  

I wish to say that the National Procurement Authority is in place. I know that we are in the process of recruiting. I think the acting chairman, and the authority, are doing their duties as per their mandate under the law.

I now go to hon. Ateng’s concerns. She was concerned about resource mobilisation and she said that members of URA are demoralized. Well, I am hearing that allegation for the first time. To the best of our knowledge, members of staff of URA are some of the best-paid civil servants that we have.  But if they are demoralised, well, we may not have much to do because payment of salaries depends on the ability of the Government. Nevertheless, I undertake that we shall look into that matter and find out the root cause of the demoralisation.  However, we have demonstrated that URA has performed very well. 

There was a suggestion that the Ministry of Finance should visit other sectors to appreciate their needs. Yes, this is very important, and during our interface with the committee that proposal was made and accepted. 

Hon. Byabagambi commented on the exchange rate and he talked about depreciation. He said that the revenue target registered was because of inflation. Well, partly yes and partly no. We have also demonstrated that there are other measures that were put in place that occasioned good performance last financial year. 

Hon. Byabagambi also touched on the issue of micro-finance activities. He said they are doing a good job, but there are problems. Yes, this is the youngest institution. It is still young; the Micro Deposit-Taking Institutions Bill has just been enacted. 

We are doing everything possible to ensure that we see how to regulate Tier IV, but it is not true to say that micro-finance operations in the villages are not regulated by any law. As hon. Awori noted, if it is not a micro deposit taking institution, then it must be something, a co-operative society, a limited liability company or a moneylender. And there are laws on moneylenders - there is a Money Lenders Act - there are laws on co-operative societies, there are laws on –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but I remember when we were dealing with micro deposit-taking institutions, there was an undertaking from the Minister of Finance, within six months then, to bring a law to deal with this issue that is causing a lot of problems in our constituencies. But I think nothing has so far been done. Now I am reminding you, please, try to bring it within a month from now.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I remember, because of the difficulty we found in the propriety of regularizing Tier IV, we communicated to you our inability to comply with the deadline. We also asked for more time, and I think we proposed that by the close of this year we would have come up with a proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, this problem is serious.  Maybe you do not have a rural constituency, but for those who have rural constituencies, it is a serious problem. Therefore, you should really take some time and think about it. The problem, which the Member from Bukomasimbi brought up, is a real problem. Therefore, the sooner you honour your promise the better.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, with the permission of the Minister of Finance, I would like to say that I have attended two seminars of the Micro Finance Institutions Association. They even have a draft proposal that they want you to study and see if you can use as a basis for the Bill. Please contact them; they have a proposal for you.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the micro finance money, which is being channelled through Entandikwa and the other micro finance units, is part of the development budget of the Minister of Finance. 

It really surprises me to see that the Ministry of Finance, which is basically a paper industry - a ministry of clerks, lawyers and others - is now asking for Shs 100 billion, plus Shs 80 billion recurrent! This is compared to the Ministry of Works, which we are crying about and saying, “If only the roads could move!” And they are also allocated Shs 100 billion and Shs 23 billion.  

This makes it very contradictory; unless the micro finance institutions are also going to access part of this Shs 100 billion as part of development expenditure. But if it is all going to paperwork, I am really flabbergasted!

THE CHAIRMAN: To be honest, your committee has handled this matter and it has given a satisfactory explanation. Therefore, if you have to ask this question, you better ask the chairperson who scrutinized the details. After all, what is he going to say? He is going to say, “Yes, we are justified”. So, why do you not ask the chairperson?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, the micro-finance industry, which you have ably alluded to, is running the risk of going under. As Prof. Latigo has mentioned, some of the micro finance institutions are intermediating funds in millions of shillings without any legal basis for supervision, auditing or control. They are operating on goodwill, and you cannot run a financial institution on just goodwill. 

Therefore, when we are urging the Minister to come forward with some legal framework to give a basis on which these institutions can be sustained, we are really expressing an urgent need. Without it, even some of the leaders who have pleaded for these micro finance institutions and they have been established in response to the advocacy programme, will be embarrassed when these institutions go under. We really need a law.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I take into consideration the concerns raised by all the members regarding micro finance. As I promised, we are reviewing the whole policy on micro finance and we shall come out with a regulation on Tier IV.  But as I said, it is not so straight as to how Tier IV should be regulated. But the concerns are pertinent, they are noted and we are working on it. As I promised, we shall give our position, to be debated by this House, when the time comes.

On the quantum of money in the Ministry of Finance as raised by the honourable member, we appeared before the committee and defended all the figures that are listed under the Ministry of Finance. But I want to say that the bulk of that money is project money. It is for so many sectors, not necessarily the Ministry of Finance alone. Most of the money is donor money, we do not even have a say on it. We only administer it because we happen to be the people in charge of receiving and implementing some of the donor projects. 

Besides, most of that money you see is domestic for arrears, which is not a very small figure. So, nobody should think that we in the Ministry of Finance have kept for ourselves a big chunk of money, which is not justifiable. At least the committee has been satisfied. (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Chairman, if a donor is donating money for PMA in Agriculture, what has the Minister of Finance got to do with that money? That money should go to Agriculture to develop agriculture, so that agriculture gets that praise or otherwise for that matter. If it is to do with the roads, that money should go to the road sector. Why does the Ministry of Finance want to be in between? Why? 

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Maybe we could help our colleague. For us in agriculture, one of the biggest problems we have is this budget ceiling. The ceiling does not allow the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget to increase to a certain level. So, if there is some money for agriculture reflected in the budget of the Ministry of Finance, it is good for the Ministry of Agriculture. Through the budget ceiling and the MTEF framework, we will not be able to have that money included in our budget at the moment.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform members that last year the Ministry of Finance had money for so many projects and they have since divested from the projects they were holding to line ministries. 

I also would like to inform you that one of the reasons we said we could not produce the report yesterday was because of almost the same reasons, if you look at the areas we are asking about. We had to ask them to bring figures, including employment terms for consultants, so that we see how far they have gone. At the end of it we are satisfied that this was fair. I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, before I wind up, there is a matter raised in the report regarding the PAYE threshold, and there is a proposal that the threshold should be revised.  But we have strong grounds to say that raising the threshold will not achieve the intended purpose. 

If you want to take people who are not subject to that ten percent tax under the threshold, they constitute 80 percent of the work force. So, 80 percent of the workforce is not paying the tax. 

However, if we revisited the threshold, that would mean we would revisit all the bands upwards. When we do that, the intended beneficiary, who is the poor employee, will not receive everything. Rather, the middle class and the targeted rich, the 20 percent –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the Shs 200,000 makes somebody part of the middle class?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, may I elaborate on this? The current threshold is as follows. The people between Shs 0 and Shs 130,000 pay 0 percent. 

Those between Shs 130,000 and Shs 225,000 pay 10 percent. 

Those between Shs 235,000 and Shs 410,000 pay 20 percent. 

Those above Shs 410,000 pay 30 percent. 

I am telling you that 80 percent of the workforce falls at the level between Shs 0 and Shs 130,000. From the arguments of honourable members, those were the people intended to be protected. When we do that we shall not have achieved anything, and yet in terms of revenue loss, the revenue expected to be generated from PAYE - if we retain the band as it is - is Shs 40 billion. This is money that is already in the budget. The question is: where would we get it? 

Our view is that much as it is a good proposal for this financial year, we leave it as it is and then we review it next financial year and we come up with a –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, we were promised last year that they would reconsider. And I want to inform the House that when this thing was done, the exchange rate of the shilling to the dollar was at between Shs 1,000 and Shs 1,200. Now it is Shs 2000. So, many things have changed. 

I think the Minister should come up and consider broadening the tax base, rather than continuously hitting the traditional causalities. Thank you very much.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Chairman, the committee actually proposed Shs 235,000 hoping that the plenary would raise it to the next level of Shs 330,000. We had proposed Shs 330,000 because of all the changes that have taken place over time. Then the Ministry pleaded with us and we had hoped that the plenary would raise it higher than our proposal. 

Actually, for this category of taxpayers, Pay As You Earn, the reason the Ministry is not flexible with it is because it is the easiest to collect. The employer collects and remits it so the cost of collection is very little. Because of that, the category of employees is suffering at the cost of those where collection is difficult and therefore evasion is higher. 

The gap of Shs 40 billion could actually be filled by all those who evade tax, if tax administration could be improved, because evasion is very high. So, we want to plead to the plenary that for the moment - because the Ministry always says it will review and it will not - we consider this to be a very serious matter. We should know the categories of people who are affected and give them relief, and urge the Ministry to improve on tax administration. Those who are evading tax are the big ones, and tax must be collected in that area rather than insisting on the very small people to pay more permanently because they are easy to tax.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the chairman on the National Economy Committee said that this matter would be handled when we are dealing with the Finance Bill, not now. We shall handle it.

LT. KINOBE: Mr Chairperson, the effect of the Finance Bill will be to guide us on how much money will have generated at the end of the exercise, but we are already allocating. I want to know from the chairperson whether you considered the implication of raising the threshold from Shs 135,000. How much of it will affect the money you want to raise through the Finance Bill, so that by the time you get to reduce on the revenue you have already addressed it as you allocate? You may get caught up in a difficult situation. 

You are already apportioning and allocating. At the end of it all, what we are going provide will reduce the revenue, if it is not provided for. That is the clarification I am seeking from the chairperson.

THE SPEAKER: No, the Finance Bill is the taxation aspect. Are you saying by rubber-stamping this, it cannot be adjusted?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, the threshold of Shs 130,000 means that those who are earning between zero and Shs 130,000 will not pay the tax, and this has been fixed for the last seven years. The chairman has said that the exchange rate was low. When the price of commodities was very low, since then all this has changed. What the committee is really proposing is that people earning from zero to Shs 235,000 will be exempted from the tax. That way the tax starts from Shs 235,000 and above. 

This is justified because if government policy is to fight poverty and increase taxation of those who are least able to earn, you will be taxing 10 percent. We are saying this is unrealistic, it is inequitable, it is unfair and should be revised; and the justification is there.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I wish to give clarification to hon. Kinobe by citing the actual figures. Our position is that the proposal would actually have major consequences on the budget because the payee is budgeted to provide Shs 198.5 billion. This is 12 percent of the total URA revenues. 

If you raise the threshold as proposed, there will be a loss of approximately 20 percent, which is as I said earlier, Shs 40 billion. At this point in the budget process we cannot afford that and yet the beneficiaries intended to benefit - if we could see what it is they are going to benefit. For example, a worker with a salary of Shs 150,000 per month who currently pays only Shs 2,000 as tax will pay just 1.3 percent of his salary. So, the intended target really will not be achieved and yet the loss in terms of revenue will be so big.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As I had earlier informed the House, the Ministry had promised that they would provide for it but this time around we see the same area being taxed. Some were proposing to waive tax for hotel businessmen on their imports of televisions and what not; why do you not put tax there and waive tax for these poor peasants who have suffered for seven years?  

MR RUZINDANA: Point of information.

THE CHAIRMAN: But, honourable members, are we going to achieve what we want on this aspect?  

MR RUZINDANA: But members need this information. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Are we trying to make a decision by considering this report now?

MR RUZINDANA: No Sir, but the arguments we are bringing forward now were brought forward during the consultation process before we came to this stage but our views were disregarded. The likelihood of them being taken into account at a later period, even in the next financial year, is not there. That is mainly because this is one of the easiest taxes to collect. 

The main taxes from which we are getting revenue now is VAT because it is easy to collect. If you go to income tax the collection rate is not as high as in Pay As You Earn or in VAT. We cannot continue encouraging this aspect of tax administration that it should not be enforced. The Minister can give us the figures. How much is the percentage of the Pay As You Earn that you get from the higher income earners?  How much of it is there? Most of the tax is earned from the low-income earners. 

The higher income earners, who are self employed, do not pay PAYE because they do not reflect a salary. How much is the PAYE of Mukwano or Sudhir? None. How much is the PAYE of all other people who are self-employed? None. This affects small people, mainly the employed in the formal sector in government, in the private sector, in parastatals and so on. The bulk of the people that should have paid tax are not there. So, when we say this should be taken into account the Minister says, “Because of the problems we have in tax administration - in other words laxity, laziness and other problems - the small ones should pay tax that is not justifiable”.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but the question is: are we going to take the decision now? The idea is to discuss this and make decision

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Kinobe had asked whether this proposal would fundamentally affect the budget we are going to pass. I said it is true that this will be considered in the Finance Bill. I want to allay the fears of members that when we do it we shall look at the other alternatives we think we can use. I have already cited examples in the Budget Speech like; 

“I am proposing to remit duty on essential inputs in the hotel industry. However, these in puts must be imported with the names of local hotels printed on them.” So, why not tax these people and save these –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, as I wind up, I want to assure all honourable members that your concerns are properly captured. They will be taken into consideration. Those regarding tax measures, we shall have time to debate them when we are debating the Finance Bill. I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you. I want to thank the Minister, the committee members and all of you for the contributions you have made to this particular subject. I put the question that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, recurrent expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 82,417,645,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, development expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 101,619,751,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 108 – National Planning Authority:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,960,780,000 under Vote 108 of the National Planning Authority be provided for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the whole House regarding the budget of the Ministry of Finance and the National Planning Authority and passed it without amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.  

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. There is an announcement. There are a number of bulletins and documents, which have accumulated within the precincts of Parliament over a period of time. These documents are a balance of what we circulated as Members of Parliament. They are being sorted out in the basement of the South Wing. Members of Parliament who are interested can go and pick some of them for their libraries in the constituencies. This is announced by the Sergeant at Arms. So, you can go and sort out what you want.

Honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s business but before we adjourn, I want to remind you that tomorrow we have two giant reports: one from agriculture and another one for social services. Therefore, I would like to appeal to you to be on time so that we start at exactly 10.00 a.m. so that we can finish at 2.00 p.m. We will also deal with the one on social services. The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 August 2003 at 10.00 a.m.) 


