Wednesday, 20 August 2008

Parliament met at 11.03 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. We informed you yesterday that the President of Zambia was dead. It has been confirmed again and I am just giving you notice that the government will be moving a motion, probably not today but perhaps tomorrow morning, so that we properly pay tribute to President Mwanawasa. So, you can arrange for a debate during the course of tomorrow. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)	The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2007/08

II) 	The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2008/09

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

 (Debate continued)

11.06
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I begged for your indulgence yesterday so that I could come more prepared today to respond to the policy statement of the minister. What I want to make clear from the outset is that the position I am going to present is not an opposition to the report because I was part of this report in the committee. It is rather the policy difference that there is and I have simply moved to areas where I think we have a difference as the Opposition in principle. 

Before that, I wanted to make one clarification. Yesterday, there was an argument over the issue of selective appointments and promotions in the Ministry of Defence. I do not intend to debate any areas in Defence; I am going to concentrate on Internal Affairs and I thought it was important to clarify this. 

The minister talked about the agreement in the committee over the divulging of this information to Members that we agreed as a committee to receive this information in camera. That was a statement of fact. The only discrepancy that there was, was that it has taken a long time. It is a year since we reached that agreement and I think if Members rose out of concern on the length of time and the absence of new information they are within their own rights.

Madam Speaker, I have a document but it is not enough to go around. I think there are copies which can be given to my colleague, the honourable minister that side. I am going to synchronise my responses with the committee report itself.

Madam Speaker, I want to start on page 16 -(Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. I am seeking clarification on this point which he made about the matter pending for one year. I just wanted to know what his suggestion was. Was the committee saying it has not succeeded in handling the matter? What is the implication of what he is saying and what was the suggestion therefore being made about this debate?

MR KYANJO: Thank you, honourable minister, but you will get a more satisfying answer from your substantive Minister of Defence. He is fully aware of what happened. I would beg that we proceed with the responses -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just say something, hon. Members of the government and the Opposition. Yesterday, we had a small intercession here concerning how much should be said about promotions in the Army and I have subsequently discovered that an agreement to have a meeting in camera was made one year ago but no meeting has taken place. So, I would like to know, why hasn’t the minister met the committee over this matter and allowed it to come back this financial year? If he has no intention of holding that meeting, it is going to be recurring every financial year. When are you going to have that meeting in camera with the committee on Defence over those issues?

DR CRISPUS KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, first I am grateful to hon. Kyanjo for reiterating this point because we made it also yesterday. It is true that we agreed by consensus in the committee that this matter, for the sake of the stability of this country, should be handled in camera. And for us as the sector, we have been waiting; we are not the ones who fix the schedule for the committee. We now have a new chairman who has undertaken to appoint a date and we will come to the committee. Even if it is tomorrow there is nothing we do not have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, let me hear from the chairman. Can this matter be handled by October?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to assure this House that immediately we finish the budget appropriation process, we are going to draw work plans for the various sectors we are responsible for so that we are able not only to read through the papers they give us but also to interact very effectively to ensure that we bring to book whatever we need to undertake. And I assure you that by October, we should have had that meeting with the ministers on as far as the promotions are concerned. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the issue is very clear. (Mr Mbabazi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have undertaken to come back by October. 

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I have heard the minister and the chairman of the committee. But what was implied in what we were saying was whether this matter should continue to be debated on the Floor or this House refers it to the committee as the committee wanted it to be done. 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should not suffocate debate in this House. If there are matters of classified nature, they should be clearly and well defined instead of them being raised in the House when some of other issues are being debated. The matter being raised and the matters I raised on the Floor yesterday are matters that are not classified. They are matters that cannot cause any instability in this country; they are matters of public policy within the Ministry of Defence and specifically relate to promotions, recruitment, deployment and retirement of officers. They are clearly highlighted in the policy statement of the Ministry of Defence.

So, I do not see how and why, at this stage the government side should come and say that we should not allow the debate on such matters to continue yet these are matters of public concern. If they are matters of classified nature, then we should not debate the entire of Ministry of Defence policy statement. Let them go back with it, debate it in the committee and if it is classified, let it be passed at a classified level other than coming on the Floor and begin to block Members from openly and clearly debating matters that affect the public and the interests of this country. I think all of us are stakeholders in the stability of this country; it is not necessarily the front benchers on the government side. This country belongs to all of us! We all own it despite the fact that we are playing different roles.

So, I think this matter must be clearly understood that there is nobody who wants to undermine the security of this country; nobody wants to undermine the stability of this country, but matters of public concern – because you cannot abuse the process of promotion and undermine other people, then you cover them up by saying, “No, they should not be debated.” This should really be unacceptable.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was at page 16 where there is the supplementary of Shs 1.52 billion in the committee report to cater for shortfalls in the operational budget for the Juba peace talks. This Parliament should be informed that a detailed breakdown of this amount was not availed to the committee and that the general description in the statement is less than satisfactory. I would like the minister to explain further on this issue.

Again on page 16, there is the Directorate of Citizenship and Migration Control, which is reflected as point number one. I would like to say the actual extent of computerisation has not been measured and private findings show nearly no work done. We would also be desirous of hearing an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

Point three on page 22 is a challenge. This challenge is almost desired. Last financial year, we recommended that the Ministry of Internal Affairs works closely with that of ICT to reduce costs and maximize potentials. However, this does not seem to be the case. It would be important for the minister to explain why it has not happened as we had recommended.

On page 23, there is point eleven, which talks about Shs 2.08 billion. This figure is contestable. Available information indicates that the amount is tabulated before deductions are made from the following: One, some foreign missions, which do not declare accurate collections from visa stickers. Two, a number of visa stickers are found to be fake or get damaged – [Hon. Members: “We need copies.”] - Well, I have no capacity to supply. This is the report of the committee, which I think you all have. I am reading from a text, but comparing it with the report. It is very easy to follow.

Madam Speaker, let us go to the other issue that makes this figure contestable. A reasonable amount of foreign notes are usually found to be counterfeit. So, when you bring this figure and report it to the House before these deductions are made, then it becomes contestable. It should be corrected.

Madam Speaker, let me say something on point number 13 on page 23. These activities should be surrendered to the ICT Ministry because it will be worked out better in that ministry.

Page 24 –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the shadow minister for giving way. I am rising on a point of procedure to see how we can go through our work fast and how the ministers on the government side can provide information in time; and this is not for this report, but also for the other coming reports.

The procedure in House is that, the chairperson presents a report from which issues are raised. I think it is our culture that most of the shadow ministers are actually Members of those sectoral committees and they debate and prepare these reports. I know, it is the right of the shadow minister to come and raise matters, but if they are of substantial nature to the point where they are well written. 

It would serve better for the working of this Parliament if such issues are raised early, sent to the minister in advance in order for him to prepare the answers. And when they are raised here by the respective shadow minister, then the relevant government minister will be in a position to answer. Otherwise, dealing with each report is going to take a long time. This side does not have copies and it needs time for the ministers to effectively respond. I want to be guided on procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter has been coming up since last financial year, but on Monday I directed the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to examine this issue. It is true that a number of the shadow ministers are Members of particular sector committees, but they do not file minority reports yet they want to contribute.

So, since we do not have a position, I have asked the Rules Committee to guide us and we agree on how we are going to proceed because it takes more time. We do not know whether we should exclude them from the committees so that they operate on their own or not. That is the dilemma I have for now. I cannot close them out because the rules are not there, but I hope that by the next financial year our Rules Committee will have given us direction and we know how to move.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, even when the rules are silent, I think it is good practice that when a shadow minister has substantive issues to raise, and he had taken the liberty to reduce them in writing that that document should be served on the side of Government, so that government has the basis on which it can respond to the issues being raised by the shadow minister. When the Leader of the Opposition was responding to the Budget, he came here with a document and when the Minister of Finance was responding to the Budget, he brought a document. So, we thought that would be the practice to guide debate in this House now and in the future. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But did you give a copy to the sector minister? The sector minister has it.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, we are going to waste Parliament’s time for nothing. The fact of the matter is that, it is not our deliberate intention to deny the government side this information. As I speak now, even releases for our offices have not been done; for the last two months, we have been using our own money to buy even photocopying papers. I do not want to embarrass Parliament on this; it was not Parliament’s fault.  But I entirely agree with you that you should have it and I can assure you that it is not a deliberate thing. Whatever few copies we have, let us use those; it will not re-occur.  

Secondly, what Madam Speaker said is important because we have been grappling on whether we should put our shadow ministers in the sector committees or out and all these will be defined by what the committee that is examining the rules will provide. But it is the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act that provides that the Leader of Opposition, through his shadow ministers, make responses to government policies and we cannot run away from that. So, let us just go with what we have now and then we will sort out the rest later. I apologize for this but let us proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But also for the comfort of the honourable ministers, your responses will really come at the end of the debate. The other Members will speak and then you will respond later. You are not required to respond immediately. So, there will be time for you to internalize what the honourable members is saying but I hope you have handed over to the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Leader of Government Business.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank Members for their concerns. I fear to go back to these concerns because they would raise new debates. I got the committee report myself on the Floor of the House. I am a Member of the committee and a shadow minister. But I got the copy right here and late.  So, I was only unable to complain.  

Madam Speaker, let us go to page 24 of the committee’s report. The activity in number 22 needs investigation; there are verifiable reports of ghost reporters manufactured by conmen in the ministry. 

Page 25 number 38 about amnesty; our opinion is that the current law is not very consistent with the laws of natural justice. It should be reviewed because it is sort of funny. Madam Speaker, when one Mr Obita comes in the morning and gets amnesty, what happens to the others? Santa Okot is around but has not gone there. But that could be sorted. 

The other intricate one is that, the current law seems to suggest that if a brave person broke out of prison and ran out with bribes all the way and goes with everybody he bribed, and were able to sneak their way to the Amnesty Commission before they are captured, then they can be free. But what about those who have been in custody? So, we need a review and reach a compromise on how to see that this law follows the rules of natural justice.  

Page 26, No.1 is about the data bank. Our recommendation is that, let us separate the development of the national data bank from the creation of identity cards. Instead, let efforts be devoted to the former with meaningful and sustainable mechanisms which must include the following:  data collection and capture, issuance of identification numbers otherwise known as IN as in the case of Value Added Tax (VAT) which is essentially free. When you issue a number to Kyanjo, you are not issuing a card; therefore you are cutting the costs. Many of us have VAT numbers, but we did not pay for them because they are free of charge. 

So, let us concentrate and pay for the creation of the data bank but necessarily tagging it to the component of the identity card. Then any institution which demands an identity card in form of a license, permits, passports, access cards and etcetera can arrange for the payment of an extra charge to the central data bank other than burdening ourselves with the creation of the data bank and manufacturing of the identity cards which is an extra cost of Shs 5,000.

Number three, on the same page, our proposal is that we halt the production of East African passports till they are fully internationalized and thereafter we can share the cost of production amongst the five East African countries through a central process. Otherwise, if we budget for our own machinery as Uganda, the passports have not been internationalized the policy could be different tomorrow. And with machinery, we will have to change a lot of things to configure with the new designs of the passports. So, it is a better idea that we first internationalize the passports then see whether it is possible to work with the rest of our countries in East Africa to manufacture these passports.  

Page 31, No.2, that activity did not get actualized and as a consequence, Madam Speaker, this Parliament is currently investigating the Police. It is a clear sign that this activity did not happen.  

Number three, there is no sufficient information provided in form of survey reports or land titles as purported by the ministry.

Page 32, it is our sincere prayer that the whole project under the Netherlands grant should be recommitted to the appropriate committee for further scrutiny through field visits. Available information is not supportive enough.

Page 33, No.2, about the trainees in Police. The quality of trainees has not been satisfactory and we think that the idea of mass training is alien to Police. It is common to the army but alien to the Police. Naturally, if you pass out 5,000 Police, just be sure they are not going to be perfect policemen.

No.3, due to suspected selective opportunity allocations as has been the complaint, this House should demand for actual lists of the beneficiaries; those who qualified. At least the lists have not been produced.

Page 34, No.18. We would like the minister to explain to the House how the trucks and cars in question were distributed to different areas of the country after CHOGM. There was an unwritten agreement through different committees that after CHOGM, facilities should be distributed to different areas. There is evidence that very many of these facilities - trucks, lead cars, fire fighting equipment - are all concentrated in the city, and distant areas are crying for such facilities. So we would like to get sufficient explanation from the minister.

The second issue under No.18 is about the work done at Entebbe, Jinja Road and Katwe Police stations. Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I thought the honourable shadow minister was a Member of the Committee on Internal Affairs and in that respect he should have raised these matters in the committee. Is he in order therefore, to come here and waste our time over issues he should have raised in his committee and the issues which should have been answered in the committee? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said that this matter has been a challenge to us since last year. The Members are Members of the committees but they have not signed the reports. They attend the meetings and they do not sign the reports. So please, honourable members, I know it is tedious but let us listen. When our committee decides whether they should or should not be, then we shall take them to task.  But now I do not know what to do with them. They did not sign. I do not know what to do.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, we were all in this House, probably not all of us were awake. Is it in order for somebody who was not awake when you were explaining to raise an order in the House? (Laughter)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, the complaint from my colleague is legitimate but this Parliament needs to be informed that we are equally serious people and we are careful. These issues were raised in the committee but they were not responded to and therefore we thought that that was government policy. So what we do is to come here and make sure that the issues are re-raised -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member to complete what he is saying. He is about to finish. And our Rules Committee will sit and resolve this matter. We need a harmonised way of doing things. The issues you are raising are exactly what I referred to the Rules committee. I want them to tell us, should the shadow ministers be part of the committee or not? If they are part of the committee, should they avoid signing and then come here? Please, let us allow the Rules Committee to give us guidance on that one. I do not want to usurp the -

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleague, these issues were raised in the committee and we gave answers. If he felt that the answers we gave were unsatisfactory, then he should have said, “Honourable Minister, I am not satisfied. Can I either get a written statement from you or something?” We were there with all my staff and we replied to questions that were raised and nobody came up to say, “That answer is unsatisfactory.”

On a procedural point, Madam Speaker, are we really procedurally right to raise these questions now when actually time was given? Everybody was given time. My ministry gave an entire week; meetings were adjourned I think three or four times and we were there with my staff full time. Now, I do not know whether we are procedurally right really for this issue to be raised at this time. What am I expected to do, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately I do not have the minutes of your committee meetings, so I do not know what was discussed there. But if he is not satisfied, he is raising them again and you will answer them. And when our Rules Committee determines whether they should not be part of the committee, we shall kick them out. The Rules Committee will decide whether they should write a minority report. Please, let our Rules Committee do that.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Let us go to page 36, No.5 –(Interruption)

MAJ. (Rtd) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the way we are proceeding is very interesting. I am lost because I do not know whether we are debating a minority report. If the Member was a Member of the committee and he is not satisfied with the answers given, he should have prepared a minority report. In the absence of a minority report, if he is reading a document, we should be privy to this document he is reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us give the Rules Committee an opportunity to examine all these matters and advice us and we agree as a House, please. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, page 36, issue No. 5. Last year, Parliament recommended the purchase of a new Police helicopter and the explanation by the minister as has been presented in this report of the committee does not indicate  anywhere that this helicopter was purchased. 

No.8; we propose that this activity be stood over until the ministry produces a list of the beneficiaries of the last payments of arrears. It has been a point of contest; arrears are paid and complaints continue to mount. 

Page 37; it is our observation that the anticipated challenges cannot be overcome unless the following is done: one, stop over involvement of Police into civil matters; two, stop infiltration of the Police by state paramilitary elements; three, prevent budget leakages. An example is unauthorised excess expenditure. If you went and looked at the Auditor-General’s report of 2007 Volume III, page 7, it indicates that local authorities alone over spent Shs 8.43 billion  and there were some Shs  9.9 billion unaccounted for for advances.  There are 381 million non-remittances or purported remittances to URA. There is also the problem of non-compliance with financial commitment control systems. There is also a problem in prisons where they made excess expenditure of Shs 5.6 billion. So, if these gaps are closed, we hope the cries of the Police and the ministry will be minimised. 

In conclusion, we have a recommendation or a proposal to this House; that as a remedy to easing pressure on prison facilities and as a way of improving the non-tax revenue base, we propose that Parliament commissions a study to explore the viability of building prison private wings where opting prisoners on remand or conviction shall pay for their stay at regularly revised tariffs. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

11.42
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to debate the report produced by the chairman and the committee and I thank them for the report. 

I start by thanking in particular the UPDF for neutralising these forces which were trying to disturb Uganda. I congratulate them for that. (Applause) And I also thank the Police for keeping peace in this country without these two, maybe we would not be sitting here. So, we must congratulate them! (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I have heard people on radios and even my colleagues questioning expenditure to the Ministry of Defence. You really wonder and think, are these people serious? No matter how much you spend on education or health, without security, they become useless. So, expenditure on defence is justifiable.  

Madam Speaker, I also salute our force for the work they are doing in Somalia. (Applause) Many forces feared to go there; our people did not fear, they went and they are doing a good professional job. So, I salute them. 

I also congratulate our forces for trying to stabilise Karamoja. The people of Karamoja have suffered for many years. Other areas are enjoying stability but Karamoja has been suffering from cattle rustling, highway robberies, incursions with neighbouring districts and countries. If the UPDF can handle this and you get Karamoja stabilised, I would be very happy and we should really congratulate them. 

Madam Speaker, as they do this, I appeal to government to look into the welfare of our army because of the good job they are doing. Because of occupational hazards associated with the job, their shop should be operationalised very soon and all the other facilities looked into.  

The construction of the barracks; our soldiers are living in a very sorry state. I appeal to government to explore possibilities of going through public/private partnership to have these barracks constructed once and for all- even for Police so that they can live happily and in adequate places. 

Now, let me turn to the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC). In my view, Madam Speaker, I think they are trying to take on too much; the pharmaceutical section, the lime and dura and the farm in Katonga. I think they should divest themselves from these. There are other people who could do this better than the army. 

Now, last on the army is on the payment of pensions and gratuities to the people. If you look on page 13, they say you pay terminal benefits at the rate of salary in operation at the time they left the forces. Madam Speaker, this is unacceptable and it is wrong. When I graduated and started working, I was getting Shs 1,200; an engineer! The highest the civil service! You can imagine how much those people were getting and you are saying they should be paid at the rate that they were getting at the time they left service. I think that is unfair; they should be paid the equivalent of their ranks now.  That is how their gratuity should be calculated. 

Madam Speaker, this national population desk should be really funded and we get the national data ready and also get the identity cards. My colleague, hon. Kyanjo, it is from the data that we shall get the identity cards. So, after getting the data, what follows is not very expensive. 

Now, I turn to the sell of the land at Nsambya Police Barracks. Madam Speaker, I am against Police selling land to a private partner or private company. Let this government revert this land to the local authority so that it can be properly planned and then it can be given out. But giving it out now, we are going to land into a problem of somebody wanting to do something which is not in conformity with the planning of the city. 

11.47
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join hands in thanking the committee for the report and I want to start with two fundamental clarifications that are contained in this report. One is on page 27, where the committee made an observation that money has not been provided for the computerisation of the records in the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration.  

Madam Speaker, on Monday this Parliament received the long awaited Bill on dual citizenship, and permit me to express my worry because the Certificate of Financial Implications, which was attached, I believe was authentic. If that certificate was authentic, why are we failing to provide funds for the computerisation of records in the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration and yet this Bill was tabled here? I believe it will be debated and eventually passed.

Number two, on page 13, on auxiliary forces, it is reported that all auxiliary forces, the Arrow Boys, the Amuka, the frontier and all those operating in Karamoja were duly verified and all their arrears paid. In yesterday’s press reports, the Daily Monitor’s lead story was “Gen. Museveni fires Brigadier over 250 million” and when you read the details, it is talking about money that was meant for payment of salaries to those who served this country in the auxiliary forces. Here we are reporting that all their arrears were paid. Which is which, Madam Speaker? 

There are still people outside there who served; I remember at the time of recruiting Amuka I was the chairman of the district youth council of Lira and a member of the national executive committee of the youth council in the country. I personally participated in mobilising the young people to join Amuka and up to now some of them are still crying, their arrears are not paid. Which report is which? Are there arrears already paid or we take what was reported to be the right position? Six army officers were fired for allegedly misappropriating funds that were meant for paying salaries to our young men and women who served in the auxiliary forces!

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Obua for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that in Pader District alone we have over 1,000 of the auxiliary forces, the LDUs that are not paid. Being a member of this committee, I raised it but it is not reflected here. I understand a team from the Ministry of Defence was facing the PAC last week and they reported that politicians who report on these new cases of the unpaid LDUs and auxiliary forces are just bringing lists of their campaign agents and their people. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the hon. Obua for allowing this clarification. First I think there are two issues we are talking about. We retained LDUs on payroll in the Acholi sub-region for the reason that we want to make sure the area is stable; that the issue of Kony is resolved before those LDUs are sent home. So the LDUs the hon. Akello is talking about fall in that category. 

The report which was in the newspaper regarding the suspension of some officers also relates to this current category of LDUs who are on payroll. The money that got lost was due to pay them for their – I think the last two months. I think we should commend the system that we have that enables us to know that this error has happened and we move to deal with it.

Regarding the second category, which is the arrears - the auxiliaries for which Parliament passed a supplementary - the chairman of the committee was very clear. We have paid over 31,000 auxiliaries. We do acknowledge that we need to recheck because there are still others who are not paid. We have finished the second verification in Oyam District and paid. We have just concluded a re-verification in Teso sub-region and we have found approximately 4,000 auxiliaries not yet paid and this process is on until everybody gets paid -(Prof. Latigo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are taking hon. Obua’s time. You know, he has only five minutes.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, the last statement of the honourable minister is that they verified and found that 4,000 had not been paid. Our problem has been that every year we raise the issue of paying LDUs and pass supplementaries -(Interjections)- every year we pass supplementaries. If it is argued, I will bring the record. Every year we pass supplementaries to pay LDUs. The 4,000 who have not been paid, were moneys sent to cover them? And if it was sent; where did the money go? This is a fundamental problem. In Pader District in my constituency, LDUs at one time rebelled because the guys who were going to pay them were deducting 10,000 from each person. This is a problem honourable minister. Where did the money go, that 4,000 never got paid?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, therefore, I would like to thank the President who is the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF, because in this country we must have the principle of giving to Caesar what belongs to Caesar. If someone has worked for his or her thing, it must be given. Give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar.

Finally, I want to speak for the Police and the Prisons service because the UPDF is duly represented here by ten able bodied men and women who are officers. I want to talk about the issue of welfare of police and prisons. I will specifically narrow my submission down to two areas: salary enhancement and accommodation. I appreciate the fact that we have to some extent enhanced the salary of our young men and women serving in the UPDF, but we have not done the same to Police and to Prisons. These are three national sister institutions that are doing a good and commendable job according to our Constitution, for our country and the people at large. We should really be balanced and fair to all the three national institutions. I want to urge that in the nearby future, we should take charge and consider the Police and equally Prisons, because they are also doing work on behalf of government, for the people of Uganda.

Two, on the issue of accommodation, most structures in the Police and in Prisons are dilapidated. Let us design and have a master plan that is aimed at rehabilitating and constructing police stations and barracks for these people.

11.57
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. I want to refer to page 37 under welfare. Police today, especially in rural areas, is living under pathetic conditions. When you visit Kamuli District especially in Budiope constituency, you may think you have reached the IDP camps in Soroti. All police stations in Budiope constituency are housed in grass thatched houses and how do you expect a policeman to curb crime in such an area? This report is silent about the plans to construct houses for policemen.

There is an issue of the national database and national identity cards. This country is facing a very big problem of identity and to my understanding this project was jointly managed by UBOS and Finance and later it was stopped by the IGG. This report has two conflicting figures on page 26. The ministry is telling us that the project may cost US $56 million and on 5.2.2, they are telling us that the project needs Shs 155 billion. When you try to compute these two figures at an exchange rate of Shs 1700, it will be Shs 95.2 billion. But they are telling us that they want Shs 155 billion. I would like the minister to clarify the surplus and what it is going to do.

On the same page, the ministry is telling us that they have already hired a team of consultants to advise them on how to proceed with the national data bank project. I wonder how you can hire a consultant just to advise you on how to proceed and yet all the technicalities were handled by UBOS and Ministry of Finance? I think that the ministry just needs money to proceed with the procurement process. But when they tell us that they have hired a team of consultants to advise them, and yet no money was allocated, we wonder where the ministry is going to get the money to pay the hired consultants. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.01
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to use this opportunity to raise the procedural issue I wanted to raise earlier. I totally agreed with you that the shadow minister should be able to present his position because it is their work to oversee what this side is doing. But on the issue of not signing the document, in my view, if you do not agree with the committee work, you bring a minority report. And I would also like to suggest that in future the shadow ministers bring their own written report, which is distributed to us and it goes on record.

I want to join my colleague in supporting his views on the issue of the state of our Police. There is a saying in my language that if you are not satisfied, you cannot feed others. In other words, if you are hungry, you cannot feed others who are hungry. We keep demanding high standards from Uganda Police and indeed the standard in my view is still low. Honestly, there is a lot that still deserves to be attended to and I would like to bring out some of it. But if you look at their state, you have some policemen for example who are guarding more than two homes in one day. I mean if you are guarding in the day and in the night - for sure you need time to sleep. How can it be humanly possible that one policeman is guarding two places in 24 hours? 

The state of their housing; when we grew up we knew that the Police was the cleanest institution. I do not know why that has disappeared. Actually the Police have lost that. They used to have their uniforms well starched, everyone looked smart, and the accommodation, however small, was always clean. I happen to have spent much of my lifetime as a young person with a policeman in his home in Naguru in fact. The shelters were actually small and the toilets were shared but they were smart and clean. There was a standard that was demanded. This has disappeared. If you see where the Police stay today – and this was during Amin’s time that I am talking about. We need to check that –(Interjections)- but my minutes will go. Madam Speaker, can I -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to you. If you do not want the information, do not yield.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Mugyenyi, my OG - you should not have feared to receive this information. The situation of the accommodation in the Police barracks is so bad that as of now if you go to Namboole Stadium, the place where football and other sports are supposed to take place, the place has been jammed by the Police. The toilets are no longer functional because the facilities, which are there, were not meant for that of people –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Your time is over OB. I need my minutes and thank you very much for the information. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, there is the whole issue of stolen property from abroad and this is the function of Internal Affairs in conjunction with Foreign Affairs or whatever, but Ugandans are really victims of stolen property from outside. Interpol Uganda is not doing its work. There is clear information but you find that the policemen are compromised. It is not only Interpol but CID as well. 

I want to say it on the Floor of Parliament and request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to look into this issue of stolen vehicles from abroad, which are sold to us and we become victims. The information is available and Police is not doing anything about it. If you want information, concrete evidence, I am an example. Come and get it from me. Everything is there but the Police will not act because they are compromised. And I am willing to give this information.

On the issue of our forces that serve abroad, when they are taken outside - with due respect to the Ministry of Defence, I know I have raised this issue before and it has been addressed to some extent - but we have people who have been injured and these are Ugandans. We have people who need compensation as per the agreement either by AU or by the United Nations. It takes so long to compensate these people and sometimes they are not properly attended to in case of injuries and we cause them to complain. We are their Members of Parliament. Do not be surprised that we get this information because that is what we are supposed to be doing.

Our young people who are taken to Iraq to serve - at the beginning these people were being paid US $1,000 and they were being sought from everywhere. And because of unemployment in this country, we have so many graduates who are going to Iraq to serve as security guards. You cannot blame them, they need our protection. They need the protection from companies that are exploiting them whether they are American or Ugandan. We need to look into what these companies are doing with our people. They started by paying them US $1,000, now it has reduced to US $700 and it is reducing further with some companies paying US $500 and yet we know that the international organisation that hires these people actually pays them so much money. Where is this money going? Is it going to the American companies? Is it going to Ugandan companies, which are not submitting it to our people? I think that the plight of these people also should be looked into. 

There is also so much bribery going on. We have had families selling their property in order to get their children to go to Iraq and at the end these children do not actually go to Iraq but the companies are receiving bribes after bribes. I am saying this so that the companies can check what is happening because at the end of the day, it is the young people who are suffering, and their families. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.09
MRS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the report. The discipline, honesty and the respect of soldiers cannot pass unrecognised in this country. Why do I say this? I want to appreciate the work done by the Inspector-General of Police, Col. Kayihura, as a soldier in the Police Force –(Applause)- for changing the attitude of the Police towards work, honesty and respect for humanity -(Interjections)- yes, I do. I know the respect our soldiers have for the people and I appreciate the fact that the soldiers can train and change our Police so that they work together and they work very well -(Interjection)- yes. What can we do? Our Police are in trouble. I have looked at the budget of the Police particularly for development and it is so limited that no development can actually be done with it. 

I appreciate the budget of the soldiers, but I would like the Police development budget to be increased a bit particularly so that the poor accommodation the police suffer – the police are living in dilapidated houses. At times when you go to Naguru and look at the structures that they have, you wonder how civil servants or the forces can live in such houses. I really feel that from this budget, renovation of the houses and construction of new buildings for Police accommodation should be a priority.

I also want to put it to us that the Police need to be promoted so that they are motivated and they can work harder than they are doing today. We are here in Parliament because there is security and because there is peace. Without the soldiers, without the Police, without the Prisons, we would not be here. So, we need to make them feel a little bit comfortable and human so that they can do their work very well. 

I also want to talk about the SPCs. We have many SPCs in many of our counties who have not been paid for whatever work they did and they are still on the job. Can they be paid their dues because they really worked very hard right from the elections’ time?

Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about development. On page 16 there is a paragraph about the development of infrastructure at the entry points. My constituency happens to be at the border between Congo and Arua. In that constituency we do not have infrastructure. We have people there standing under small trees and there are a lot of small businesses between Odramachaku and Arimana. However, URA actually harasses the women and the youth who do a lot of business across the border. I feel that there should be some policy to see that such businesses are formalised so that when the women go from Arua through Odramachaku to Ariwara, it is official and their things will not be grabbed. 

What is also disappointing is that URA, after taking items from these women at times sells them and takes the money for themselves and I think that is not correct. Also at times they are heard shooting; guns are supposed to be for our protection so when they are turned against us –(An hon. Member rose_)- I don’t want the information. I think that is not fair.

Another thing I would like to talk about is installation of power supply in Arua Prisons. Only Shs 30 million has been allocated for this and this is not enough and it is not going to do the work that has been planned. This is because the company that supplies electricity in Arua is a very expensive company and it is called Wenereko. It is a South African Company. An electricity pole costs Shs 2 million and electricity is very rare - four to six hours’ supply a day - and the rest of the time it is off yet it is being charged very expensively. Furthermore, when you are disconnected, the reconnection fee is Shs 30,000. You can imagine the type of company that is supplying electricity in Arua. I think what should happen is that electricity that is already billed in Nyagak should be extended to Arua  –(Member timed out)

12.16
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman and the committee, which has produced this elaborate report. I have a few observations and I want to start with the accommodation of men and women officers in the forces. Accommodation for those people is really pathetic and it requires immediate attention from government and legislators who approve the budget so that when we approve the budget, these people who give us security have money to build decent accommodation. 

I want also to say that the way the security people have been treated leads them to experience low self esteem and demoralisation. Those two together can lead them to commit crimes like theft and corruption because they have nowhere to turn for what they cannot get from the government. I also want to say that their salary is so low that they cannot afford to look after their families or pay fees for their children. We all want to take our children to good schools but these security officers cannot afford to. Why not give them a good salary, which they can use to avoid turning to corruption or harassment? 

I also plead for the inmates. I wish we could all be sentenced for one or two days so that we can get that experience, which inmates face in jail! I have learnt from those who have been to jail that they have to sleep in turns because they are so congested; some have to sit while a few sleep. They go on exchanging the little space around them in that manner. I urge government to construct prisons for inmates so that even if they are people who have done wrong, they are not mistreated. 

On the other hand, I appeal to my fellow legislators that we should find a law, which deters pregnant and feeding mothers from being convicted because it is very bad for them to be in jail when they are in such a condition. Some children are born in jail and I don’t think that is how they would be treated if we endeavoured to put everything that they required in place. I have been to one jail where I found women with small children squeezed in one small room. You find that the room becomes smelly, which means that they cannot stay there that unhealthy manner.

In the report I read about the sale of land intended to be carried out by government. I want to urge government to desist from selling land because I am sure that that land is required by the institutions that they belong to. I want to give a small example that shows that we are learning to do wrong things because we think that what government does is right. I have seen a local government, which has floated and sold all the land surrounding the prisons so that when the officers want the prisoners to do some gardening for their food, they cannot do so and resort to going outside and borrowing or hiring land for the inmates to grow food, which they can eat. I know we provide them with money but that money is not sufficient at all. Those people have got to get additional food stuffs for them to survive  –(Member timed out)

12.22
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for their detailed report. 

I would like to commend the Ministry of Defence and the commanders of the UPDF for the bold decision they took to be the first in deploying our Army for the African Mission in Somalia. We shall continue to pray for them. 

I have two areas of observation and I would like to begin by commenting on page 16, the issue of construction of border posts. The Ministry of Internal Affairs set a programme that Afogi border post would be constructed in the Financial Year 2007/2008 but when you turn to page 22, Afogi border post is put under pending programmes or ongoing one. However, to the best of my knowledge, I visited Afogi border post together with the hon. State Minister for Energy on the 7th of this month and what we saw there was only a uniport. That means that Afogi border post is not even in the planned development programmes of the Ministry of Internal Affairs for this year. 

I would like to point out that Afogi border post is a very crucial one especially during this time that we are experiencing relevant peace in the Southern Sudan and in Uganda. The business at that border post has tremendously increased. So, it is very necessary for the ministry to consider construction of Afogi border post. I know there is a border post, which has been budgeted for this financial year - that is Goli – at an amount of Shs 100 million. I want to appeal to the ministry, if possible, to share that Shs 100 million so that at least one house is put up for the immigration officers at that post. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister of Defence whether security roads are to be constructed by the Ministry of Defence, or it is under the Ministry of Works and Transport. I have to bring out this because last year when the Gulu-Atiak-Nimule road was closed, there was a promise that it would be worked on during the dry season and as I speak, the road from Gulu to Atiak is already closed. 

Passengers and business persons from Kampala who want to go to Juba either travel through Arua to Koboko or through Moyo and recently when I went with the State Minister for Energy, we had to use the security road. But it is also so bad that I do not see it reflected in the budget of the Ministry of Defence. Yet on page 11 under the anticipated challenges for this financial year, they cited the incomplete Juba peace talks, which means that the issue of roads is imperative for the Ministry of Defence. I would like to urge that that road should be worked on. We are tired and it is too long to travel from Kampala via Arua to –(Interjection)– Okay, hon. Minister, you may give me that information. You are welcome. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you very much, the Woman MP for Moyo. It is true that the Gulu-Atiak road is in bad shape but I just want to say that the ministry has already procured three contractors for Gulu up to Nimule. We have Gulu-Pabo-Atiak, then the end. So we expect the work to start anytime. One of the contractors is Sobetro, I think. He is the one to start from Gulu to Pabo. So, please, rest assured that the work will be done soon. I just wanted to say that. Thank you. 

MS AURU: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. I hope this time it is going to work but because it was last year in August when that road was closed, up to this time. That means it is closed again, so I cannot really take it seriously; I only hope that it will work this time. 

Lastly, I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in supporting –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are so many meetings taking place in this House. If you want to consult, please go outside. Hon. Auru, please conclude. 

MS AURU: Madam Speaker, I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to really support the idea that the Police salary should be increased as has been recommended, because it will take a policeman – (Member timed out)

12.29
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I want to thank the committee for the good work done and I want to pay attention to page 13, where it is said that “… payment of pension and gratuities: People who served in the defence forces of Uganda prior to the rising of the UPDF after independence and before 1986 and left without getting their pensions and gratuities are entitled to their terminal benefits at the rate of salary of operation at the time they left the forces.” 

This is very inhumane because if you consider the number of times that our economy has gone through inflation, and you put the payments basing on the amount of money each individual was getting at the time, it is really very inhumane and it does not make any sense! I appeal that the Ministry of Finance reconsiders this and pays them according to the current rates because it was not their own making that they were to be paid in such a long time.

Secondly, I also want to say something about the payments of gratuity including the death gratuity of those who fall during the pursuance of their duties. It is really taking very long. I do not know whether it is the policy of the Ministry of Defence because a number of people really cry; families are left without any help when their beloved people fall and getting their death gratuity is a problem. I think there is need for the minister to consider a way of helping these bereaved families after the death of their beloved ones. 

I want to also look at page 27, observation 5.3. The committee made an observation that money has not been provided for computerisation of the records in the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration. This should be given priority. We have a problem with the immigration board. The immigration board is so loose in letting people into the country that we find a number of people working here without authentic work permits. And not only that, the insecurity in our country is increasing day by day. We find some awkward and abnormal activities taking place in our country that had never happened before. It is because of letting people in the country without authentic permits.

So, I would call upon the ministry to ensure that the immigration board is transparently adhering to what the law says and make sure that all those who come in the country have the authentic documents allowing them to come in here. A number of people are coming in here without documents and they are at large and they do work which is meant to be for the citizens of Uganda. As we talk, we have a number of graduates who are not employed but these people are working and that is why we have a problem with our employers in that employers tend to lay off our own citizens and employ others and we do not know the aim behind it. It is very unfortunate. So, please the Minister of Internal Affairs should look at this and see how it can be rectified.

Then, when we look at page 36 under the anticipated challenges during the financial year 2008/09, it is mentioned that there is inability to enhance salaries for its staff over the years to address the high cost of living, long hours of work and risks while on duty. This is under Police. It is very unfortunate that these brothers and sisters of ours really work long hours. I know the nature of work that these people do. Indeed, they are supposed to work long hours but they should have rest because Uganda is a member country in the United Nations and they have a right to rest. They have a right to work but they should not be considered to be animals that they do not get tired. They should rest -(Member timed out)

12.34
MR SAMUEL BYANAGWA (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me commend government for the good performance because of the releases that were given to our security forces. The range is from 93 percent to 114 percent. In the past, when government released funds up to 50 percent, it was a miracle but now I think it is becoming the norm. Thank you very much. 

However, these releases were made possible because of the supplementary budgets. I think the levels of the MTEFs are very low. In future, they should be revised particularly to take into account new ventures like ICT which is the way to go for all the ministries. 

Two, Pan-Africanism. I wish to salute our gallant soldiers and other security forces for the role they are playing outside Uganda in pumping sense into certain nations which cannot come together -(Interjections)- yes! However, it remains to be seen - we have seen our people being killed there. Let me propose a revolutionary trend here. (Laughter) You remember, I think the AU wanted about 8,000 to 10,000 soldiers there but as you know, the giants in Africa like some states you know fear to walk where the UPDF can tread. I am going to propose that Uganda be allowed to take 10,000 soldiers there to fill in the gap, to protect our people who are being killed and to create employment for our people. America is doing it elsewhere; in the East with their people busy there. Why can’t we raise the number?

Three, Madam Speaker, the referral hospital for the army. I think when you hear that the Clintons are sick, they are rushed to army hospitals in America; the state of the art hospitals. But when our people here, the big shots, get sick they are rushed out to the state of the art hospitals. I think now it is high time that our gallant soldiers got a hospital befitting their status. And I am sure we shall save a lot of foreign exchange when it is in place. 

Madam Speaker, land titles. This is a common topic now everywhere. Public land is being grabbed left, right and centre. I propose that instead of fragmenting the exercise of surveying, government makes it a project and it is done once for all so that the public land is known and it should not be encroached upon. 

Madam Speaker, the unresolved Juba peace talks. Some people have called them jokes but I do not think so. The Northerners deserve a better life; they have suffered enough and I think where we have reached, it should be irreversible for everybody so that we attain peace for every Ugandan to enable development become uniform for all of us. We cannot have two worlds in one; there will be conflicts. Therefore, the way I see the Juba thing, I am not a military man, but I think the LRA is exhibiting the kicks of a dying horse and as such fighting Kony should be continued. I thank the MPs from the North who really have tried to be there for everybody. I also thank every good Ugandan who loves peace. Let us be one nation in practice not in theory.

I will not talk about the issue of the police welfare, but I am tired of seeing shanties; the police homes are shanties. Even the ones at Kiira where I stay – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, before we continue, I just have two announcements. One, I would like to ask the Members of the shadow cabinet who have got responses for the rest of the committees to have them printed and circulated. 

Secondly, I want to ask you to join me in welcoming scouts from Anyeke and Bamwangi primary schools, and Atapara Senior Secondary School. They are from Oyam District and have – (Applause) – just won the inter-school scouting competition, which has been on at Kaazi. Those young people will represent us in Tanzania. They are represented by hon. Lagada and hon. Ishaa Otto. Congratulations and thank you! Okay, let us have hon. Kabonesa.

12.40
MS JULIET KABONESA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the committee and specifically the new chairman, for his very good maiden report. (Applause) I have a few observations and I would like to specifically talk about prisons and the Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters.

Madam Speaker, as much as I appreciate the resource envelope, but when you look at the budget votes for Uganda Police force, the Ministry of Defence, the Uganda Prisons Service and the UPDF, you actually sympathize with the Uganda Prisons Service. Because of the interests I have, I happened to go around with the Committee of Internal Affairs under the leadership of hon. Namayanja and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, and actually visited the cells at CPS, but I can tell you that it was so horrible. How can we compromise feeding, fellow MPs? The deficit in feeding is actually 4.3. So, how do we expect these prisoners to feed? How can we compromise sanitary towels? How can we compromise beddings? In my view, I totally agree with the committee’s recommendation especially the very last one, which says that subject to the accommodation of the funding gaps in these votes, we really have to re-allocate to cater for these funding gaps. 

In fact, if you look at pages 45 and 46, it is clearly stated that feeding has remained a challenge to the prisons management. Since there is this deficit, some people actually go without food. We must really reconsider this. We must be mothers and fathers of this nation by not compromising issues of feeding –(Interruption)

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, hon. Kabonesa, for giving way. Recently, the resident judge of Masaka had to send home all the prisoners in Masaka prison due to lack of feeding allowance facilities. So, the issue of feeding is very important; we must actually address it. Thank you.

MS KABONESA: Thank you so much, hon. Mawiya, for that information. I think we should adopt strongly the recommendations of the committee because, for example, there are some prisoners who have actually stayed in prison on remand for seven years or even more yet our Constitution is very clear; it is 48 hours. Therefore, when we reconsider some of these issues, I think we shall get rid of such problems.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about the achievements of Ministry of Internal Affairs and their vote at the headquarters. But I specifically want to tackle the discipline, courtesy and hospitality issues. Ugandans are actually well known for being very hospitable, but I wonder where the immigration officers get the – I do not even know how to refer to them. But they just do not have courtesy to deal with people who visit their offices especially the department of passports. 

Madam Speaker, I was a foreign student in Kenya, but I can tell you that each time I went to their passport department, I would be welcomed. I was always received well and given the study visa with very good public relations. This always encouraged me to stay in Kenya. I do not know whether the immigration officers know that some of the people they deal with are actually not Ugandans. Some people want work permits, others want study visas and some want passports. 

I was a victim of one of these officers. That officer actually harassed me at the headquarters. The gentleman harassed me while I stood looking at him and not mentioning any word. But when he got to know that I am a Member of Parliament, he then tried to practice courtesy though panicking. But I told him that I was there for his services and not for him to deal with me in that manner. I actually later on reported that matter to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs.

Therefore, under your achievement, Minister, I can see on page 19 talking about training – (Member timed out)

12.46
MR PIRO SANTOS ERUAGA (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also would like to thank the committee for the good report presented to us.

However, Madam Speaker, I have two points: My first point is on development activities of the prisons. Long time ago, the prisons used to have agricultural farms, but today this sector is totally neglected and very little funds are allocated to it.

Madam Speaker, we have a prison farm in Adjumani, but if you visit that farm today, you will find that there is one old tractor which is not actually performing very well and that is why the production of the prison farm has gone very low and yet the products of the prison farm used to help in feeding the prisoners and even the staff; government complains about the resource envelop being very small. So, I am appealing to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to increase the budget of the prison so that the agricultural sector can be reactivated to produce enough food for the department. 

There also used to be a department in the prisons which used to manufacture saucepans and furniture. But these days, this sector is completely dead; the workshops no longer supply furniture for sale to improve the income of the prisons. 

Madam Speaker, I want also to talk about the land for the prisons. It is appreciated that investors are coming to this country and prisons land is being allocated to investor. But the Ministry of Internal Affairs should put in effort to source for more land for the prison as a replacement so that the activities of the prison can go on.

I also want to talk about production in UPDF. We used see a UPDF farm in Kigumba; we no longer hear about it. Actually during the time when there was no war, without diverting the mandate of the UPDF of protecting the territorial integrity of this country, the UPDF should be kept very active like in construction. In developed countries like China, you find that when there is no war, the military are engaged in active production like construction, manufacturing – we even see some of them coming here in this country. The people who come here are soldiers. 

So Ministry of Defence should try as much as possible to engage UPDF in production so that they do just sit in the barracks waiting for us to allocate money. And getting involved in production will keep them active instead of sitting there in big numbers without contributing to the economy of this country besides most of these soldiers are young men –(Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable for giving way. I thought at this time, I would put in a small dose so that everybody sleeps with it. In all countries, the army is normally and very productive force, but we should also appreciate that the country we are in now is just stabilising and the work of fighting is just ending. And I am sure that with the peace that is coming, we should be able to train the army not only in the art of fighting but also in different skills and they will be productive forces including production of food, construction of roads, schools and so on. Thank you.

MR SANTOS: Thank you, for that information. Madam Speaker, I was saying that I appreciate the Luweero industries, the NEC industries under the army and this is in the right direction. But government should put in more money so that this becomes a reality.

Madam Speaker, to conclude, I would like to talk about the Uganda Army and the ULA. These forces, we have been reading in the new papers, have taken government to court because they were summarily dismissed and it was not their fault. When the successive governments overthrew the previous regimes, these armies were actually brandished against the governments that were overthrown and as such were not incorporated in the UPDF. They are complaining and I would like the Ministry of Defence to brief this august House on how far the ministry has gone with the settlement of their dues which they are claiming for. We read in the new papers that this matter is supposed to be settled outside court and it affects us also as politicians who represent the people. 

12.53
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute. I would like to thank the Committee on Defence for their report.

I would like to commend the UPDF for working very hard to ensure that the LRA, who have been disturbing Northern Uganda, are deposited to Galamba and they are not coming back. I support the increase of the budget because without funds, we cannot contain the rebels. Therefore, nobody should say that the budget for the army is too big; without it we would not have succeeded. So I thank you very much for that work. And I would like to remind you that we have just pushed them outside so they can reorganise any time. So, we should remain vigilant and ensure that they remain outside there and we continue with the process of peace.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of gratuity and pension for the ex-soldiers. I support the committee for including the Kings Rifles Army to be compensated because in West Nile, we have a large number of ex-soldiers who are still waiting for their pension and gratuity. And actually I would like this pension and gratuity to be expedited so that they are settled once and for all because whenever it is time for voting, then they talk about it and when the voting is over, nothing happens. I have no words to explain to the people who are waiting. 

Number two, I want to comment on the West Nile Bang Front. I am happy that you have mentioned something about them. But I would like the ministry to explain how much money and what other benefits you are giving them in concrete terms. These people negotiated with the elders and with the people like the MPs and they came out without any conditions. But now they have taken them for granted; they are telling them to go and form an NGO and be supported there. They are very angry because they also need to be given something as we have done to UNLF and other rebel groups. Actually, if they are not taken care of, then we are sitting on a time bomb and they are very many. They feel that even if it means going back in order to be compensated, they are ready for it. So we should do something to settle them. I know that they are now very peaceful and they are willing to develop. So, let us pay them off and forget about them.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the Police. I would like to commend the work of the police. They are really working very tirelessly. Many of them lose their lives during the process of arresting criminals. But for sure their benefits are not enough; their welfare is not catered for. The Shs 160,000 to be increased to Shs 200,000 I think is nothing. This Shs 200,000 cannot cater for their children’s school fees, food and so on. You find that most of the policemen and policewomen, who are staying here in Kampala, send their children back to the villages to schools that charge low fees. Therefore, if their salary is increased, they will work better. 

And I would also like to ask a question, which the minister should answer. Once criminals are arrested, after a day or two, they are out to do their same bad jobs; the killers, the robbers, the thieves. What happens along the roadside? Is it the problem with the justice system? We are recycling thieves – coming out, in and out. When shall we get rid of those who have been arrested? We should imprison them and they face justice other than them coming back to disturb us again and again.  

Lastly, -(Member timed out)

12.58
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. However, I want to comment on a few issues. One, Namboole. Namboole has now almost become more than a police barracks or any barracks because it is now a place where you find all the dirt yet it was just supposed to house people during sporting events.

I have been informed by a well placed officer in the Ministry of Internal Affairs that each person uses Shs 60,000 per day in that area, like a per diem. Now, if there are 4,000 people, how much is that per day? And if we got all this money and we hired unipots and put them in the different barracks around Kampala, I think it would be cost effective. So, Mr Minister, I would wish to call upon you to look into this because we are making the area dirty; we are making it very inhabitable. The facility is not supposed to house such people; it is supposed to be for sports. 

Madam Speaker, I would also want to look at the district prisons. Some of the district prisons were condemned, including that of Bundibugyo. Prisoners sleep on stones instead of on a cement floor; and it has cracks. It is not supposed to have anybody there. So, I would like to call upon the minister to quickly look at the prison of Bundibugyo, that is, Bukwanga prison. It is condemned. 

I would also like to comment on the general allocation of funds to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and prisons. When you look at the two ministries, the Ministry of Defence, which is increasingly having more allocations and you look at Police and prisons, you are left wondering. 

I have also taken time to visit some of their health centres. I hope the Ministry of Defence is going to allocate some money to some of their health centres. Because we visited Kakiri health centre and we found that the laboratory was in a container. A laboratory cannot be housed in a container because when it heats up, the chemicals will become poisonous. That is not supposed to be done in that area. 

I visited another health centre in a police barracks in Mbale. Mbale police barracks is supposed to cater for the regional area but what I found there leaves a lot to be desired. In fact, I wondered why the committee had to bring the report to Parliament before it did proper reallocations. So, I would like to call upon this Parliament to make major reallocations within this budget of Defence and Internal Affairs so that it really reflects where this money is going. Because even in the Uganda prisons, when you look at some of these police posts where they keep – (Member timed out)

1.03
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Madam Speaker, I want to start by thanking both the ministries of Internal Affairs and Defence, and the government of Uganda for supporting the Juba peace process. I have to say this because in Northern Uganda now, we are proud because many people are back home. (Applause) 

We are proud that the resettlement process has began and that we can now talk about the implementation of the PRDP. And so we pray that the peace talks conclude or if it cannot conclude that the war in Northern Uganda comes to its logical end so that the people of Northern Uganda can be focused on rehabilitation and reconstruction of their infrastructure. I want to thank the government. 

Madam Speaker, I want to go to page 13 of the report, which talks about auxiliary forces. We have passed two supplementary budgets, and the last supplementary budget was supposed to clear all the auxiliary forces in the North and northeast. It is sad that up to now, for example, in my district of Apac, the auxiliary forces have not been paid; not even one. Even the ones that have been verified to be on duty have not been paid. And yet the report is saying, “All auxiliary forces who were verified present on duty were paid all arrears.”  I want the minister to be very clear whether auxiliary forces in Apac were paid, even those who were verified to be present on duty. But even beyond that there are those who were on duty -(Interruption)

MR TOSKIN: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving me this opportunity to give some information. What the hon. Member is saying is true. There were people like the LDUs who were incorporated into the UPDF. There were those who were sort of laid off but with numbers. All documentations were done but most of them have not been paid in Kapchorwa zone, in Bukwo zone and I am sure even in Sironko. So, can the minister actually clarify what is actually being done? Thank you. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you for the information but my reference is very clear because the LDUs are a little bit more separate from the auxiliary forces that were recruited for emergency support to the UPDF for the war. So, hon. Minister, we had even agreed, Madam Speaker, that when the minister is carrying out the verification, he would liaise with the MPs, the area local council and chairperson of the district so that the issue is resolved once and for all. But I am very sure and correct to tell you that what the minister is talking about did not involve the local council, not even the MPs. 

So, I think it is quite unfortunate and I have not scrutinised to see whether additional funds have been put on this. But if we had already put it in the budget; the supplementary budget was to cater for all the auxiliary forces and it means that the supplementary budget we allocated has some how disappeared somewhere. And it would be wrong to add additional resources in this budget when we know that we passed a supplementary budget to deal with the entire issue of auxiliary forces. Where has the money gone? It means that there are some people within the Ministry of Finance who have eaten this money.

So, we want clarity because for me I am tired of people eating money in the name of the North. Everywhere you find in all statements “Northern Uganda” but when you go on the ground there is nothing. So, this issue of every time “Northern Uganda” but we do not see what is on the ground, we do not want. And this should be the last issue of reference to auxiliary forces because it will now be a conduit for siphoning money. 

Madam Speaker, I want to go to page 11 where they –(Member timed out) 

1.09
DR LULUME BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I agree with the previous speakers in respect of the welfare of the prisoners. But I know that this service is being frustrated by the judiciary not to cater for what they should do and prisoners having long terms of remand and consuming a lot of resources, catching diseases and being unproductive in this country. 

A case in point is of Buikwe South prison. I saw prisoners packed like sardines; all of them afflicted by skin diseases; they get bouts of bloody diarrhoea   and there is no treatment for them. This is a matter of human rights, Madam Speaker, and it can be dealt with if not this financial year, in the next policy statement we should see a policy to decrease the prisoners by cutting the budget like it is today and placing the money so saved in the prevention of crime by educating people on the small crimes that they do so that to prevent them and avoid being remanded for a very long time especially in rural prisons where the judiciary is a nightmare to see. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue is in respect of the Police force and the Army. I want to agree with all Members who have contributed and thanked the UPDF and the Uganda Police Service. However, I would also want to concur that the salaries of our uniformed men and women should be increased. I want also to concur that the salaries of the policemen and policewomen be increased a little bit even more than Shs 200,000 because there is an education level attached to their training as well. 

I also want to agree that our uniformed men and women need more training and retraining not only in political education but also in law and human rights particularly because they have been involved and they are continuing to be involved in service with the Police and they are working concurrently.  

Lastly and very importantly, there is a creation of a gateway for corruption to occur particularly when we do not question issues about classified expenditure. In this budget, I have seen the purchase of assorted weapons and I would think that it would be naive for Parliament to believe that classified expenditure cannot be described to its entirety. For if it is not described and Members of Parliament cannot question - because I heard yesterday issues of classification were not to be articulated in this Parliament and for the public ear. But let us be sincere with ourselves that if –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform you through you, Madam Speaker, that there is a procedure through which classified expenditures are checked by the Parliament whereby the Office of the Auditor-General together with the Public Accounts Committee check the classified expenditures and they are supposed to get a final decision and comment in as far as those classified expenditures are concerned. I thank you. 

DR BAYIGA: I have taken that information but I do not want to concur with you that I won’t be naive to believe that everything left to those mechanisms would not create a range through which money can be lost by issues of classification - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is just expressing his opinion; he has not said anything else, no. 

MS KIBOIJANA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the Public Accounts Committee, of which I belong under the chairmanship of hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, with Members who included me and hon. Peter Mutuluuza have just gone through the classified accounts. So, it is not true that they are not vouched; it is not true that they are not thoroughly scrutinised. Thank you. 

DR BAYIGA: Madam Speaker, thorough scrutiny by some Members of Parliament is not enough when all Members of Parliament are not aware and cannot account for this money in Uganda. (Laughter) This could be explaining the inequality there is in the salary and wealth that exists within this kind of service. 

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have finished.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, the record cannot stand; a Member of Parliament cannot disown a committee of the House; it is procedurally wrong. The committee transacted business and actually that is why the Constitution said that in a multi-party dispensation the oversight function is for the Opposition. So, is the Member disowning this and questioning the ability of hon. Nandala-Mafabi together with the committee to scrutinize this with the Auditor-General?

1.22
MR ISSA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all I want to thank the committee for giving us a comprehensive report that can help guide this Parliament. 

However, on page 5 of this report I am actually reading down here it is written: “It should be noted that the release balance of Shs 0.97 billion was not approved in the supplementary provisions nor the approved budget for Financial Year 2007/08”. Madam Speaker, we have been having a number of debates on attempts by ministries and the government to use fraudulent approaches to acquire money meant for government activities. 

I want the hon. Minister for Finance and the Minister of Defence to give a substantive explanation as to why they got this money – the Shs 0.97 billion without passing it through Parliament for approval. This is where we have always been crying out as Members of Parliament that it appears as if there are some strategies deliberately designed to siphon money, which is meant to benefit Ugandans, to benefit a few individuals and these are some of the sources.  

I am more concerned about the issue of land versus Defence, Police and Prisons. Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Minister of Defence or the Minister of Internal Affairs do not own land in this country. The Government of Uganda as a state, through the Land Commission under Article 239, owns all the land in this country on behalf of government. But I would like to inform this House that the Minister of Defence has been moving around in some lands, which belong to the community and claiming that the land belongs to them. Unfortunately in this report they have now informed us that there is a plan to acquire titles for the Ministry of Defence.  

I am being more cautious on this particular matter because recently we had a big problem on a government farm called Adyeda Group farm in Loro sub-county, Oyam District, where the Minister of Defence, during the time of insurgency, occupied some portion of the land temporarily. Unfortunately now there are claims from some military officers who have even been reported to the Minister of Defence that they are actually dragging the community off this land and are continually harassing and intimidating them and destroying the crops that have been planted by these communities.  

Madam Speaker this is very unfortunate; the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Internal Affairs should have a clear demarcation of land that belongs to government through the Land Commission and we should have clearly demarcated barracks. The Minister of Defence should not move anywhere, settling there and claiming that land the next day because that is going to spark off another spate of violence in this country.

On the same question of land the Minister of Defence in many areas especially in Northern Uganda where there had been war occupied land and the Army destroyed peoples’ property. Adyeda Group Farm is claiming from government Shs 343 million. The Ministry of Defence was taken to court; they were defeated in court and were meant to pay the money. Since then they have only paid 10 percent of this money and government is deliberately not willing to compensate for the property that the Minister of Defence destroyed through the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces.

1.22
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Allow me join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson of the committee for a comprehensive report, which will guide the House in debating matters concerning Defence and Internal Affairs. 

I want to start on page 5; the last point, which was raised by hon. Otto about Shs 0.978 billion given to the Ministry of Defence. According to the chairperson of the committee yesterday, Defence is denying receiving that money. So it is a clear fact that the Ministry of Finance should account to this House where that money is and to whom the money was given. If not, we would be forced to cite Article 118.  

On page 9, point No. 3 under the recurrent activities to be carried out in the Financial Year 2008/09: “Recruit more troops and enhance training and re-training programs.” Madam Speaker, my concern on this point is that we should come out with the maximum number of troops that we want to have as a country so that we have a limit of recruitment because year in year out we are recruiting. One may say that we are recruiting and at the same time we are retiring so many of our troops who served and reached retirement age. But when you look at the number of recruited people compared to the number of retired people, it is not proportional. So, we really need to come out with a maximum number of the troops that we want to have in this country so that we have proper planning. 

It is very unfortunate that if you asked the chief of defence forces for the number of the troops we have in this country, he does not know! Not even the Minister of Defence can tell – you can challenge me by telling me the number of troops we have in Uganda – yet we are busy recruiting.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Madam Speaker, we who are in charge of the Army know the Army we are running, we know the numbers and it is on that basis that we are able to bring here a budget proposal. Is the honourable member in order to state that we do not know the size of the Army we are supervising? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Oyet, the Minister of Defence knows how many people he has and that is the basis upon which he comes here with a budget. So you are out of order.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just seeking clarification from the honourable minister. It is a well known fact in this country that we have had ghost soldiers. There are matters in court concerning ghost soldiers. There are officers who have been arrested concerning ghost soldiers. The President has alluded to it a number of times, making statements about ghost soldiers and these ghost soldiers - in effect to the lay man he would understand that money was being sought for in this House and paid for air, to soldiers who are not there.

Would the minister, therefore, clarify where these ghosts were coming from, why they were taking these officers to court because of paying ghost soldiers? Because to any Member of Parliament, he would therefore say that what is being sought for here is actually being sought for without real knowledge of the number of forces on the ground.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I understand what the Member is talking about but he should not say that the minister does not know because he is not in his head. The minister believes that he knows the number of people that he has -(Interjections)- you say that you do not know the figure but do not say the minister does not know because you are not in his head. He knows what he has. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Precisely, I thought hon. Okumu really would have put his clarification differently, to come to the conclusion that there are ghosts means you expect a certain number. Precisely! And the fact that the former army commander is in court for that problem indicates that we know what the numbers should be and that we know someone has played games. (Laughter)

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not disputing the submission of the minister but my concern is about the numbers. If it is this Parliament that has approved the budget for recruitment then it is imperative that this Parliament is also informed about the number so that we plan properly. We do not do it in bad faith. Nobody would wish to see the country get back to the situation of instability the way it was. That is why all of us are looking forward to seeing how to make this country a better place to live in. It would be very unfortunate for us to come out with a big size of the troops that we fail to maintain, and that is what we should really be concerned about. It is not about recruiting like the Government Chief Whip is talking about. If you recruit and you cannot sustain, what will come next? Instability; which you are trying to avoid!

Page 13, auxiliary forces, I do not want to repeat what my colleague has mentioned but I want to say one thing: let us try to be human in handling the issue of the auxiliary forces. These are young men and women who sacrificed voluntarily to serve this country, to beef up the security, to beef up the defence forces, and to bridge the gap. Now they are not being acknowledged; their contribution is not being acknowledged. There are people who are just here in Kampala enjoying themselves and they are the ones eating on their behalf. It is very unfortunate. In the whole of Acholi sub-region, none has been paid -(Mrs Kabakumba Masiko rose_) you can challenge me, I have all the figures. For you Government Chief Whip you are in Bunyoro, you do not know what is happening with the auxiliary forces and you are not in charge.

Page 14, the committee recommends that Ugandans who served in the Colonial Government should also receive their pension and gratuity since at independence government took over the country’s assets and liabilities. Madam speaker, I was a bit disturbed yesterday when the chairperson of the committee was presenting this and when he reached this point, the way the Minister of State for Defence, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa reacted as if she is not a mother! 
My grandmother was a victim of the very thing we are talking about. My grandfather served in the KAR and my grandmother was labouring alone to raise my father, whose product is now talking in Parliament -(Laughter)- that should really be the spirit under which we should look at these people who served. We should not look at this government; we are talking of the government that will be in place even after the NRM Government –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noted that there are many of you who want to speak, but we have other reports to deal with. We shall share opportunities with other reports. I will now invite the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to respond and then the Minister of Defence -(Dr Suruma rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, you have information on money? Let us first hear from the Minister of Finance.

1.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to explain the apparent discrepancy in the expenditure outturn. The figures in the National Budget Framework Paper are projected outturns because at the time when it was published, the year had not ended. So, we can only project the outcome. The actual outturns for the Ministry of Defence in the wage bill were Shs 99.99 billion spent, with a balance of only Shs 26 million and in the non-wage the outturn was Shs 99.96 billion with a balance of Shs 87 million and there was some reallocation from the development budget to the non-wage. As a result, in the Ministry of Defence there is Shs 360 million that was not spent by them because on the development expenditure, so the outturn was 99.12.

I am sorry for the apparent problem - it is only apparent because we are projecting the outturns when we are publishing the budget frame work paper since we published it before the year has actually ended. Thank you very much.

1.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First of all, let me say how happy and gratified I am at the support and the words of encouragement from virtually every contributor in respect to improving the welfare of Police and Prison officers. I am extremely happy. At the ministry we share your concerns. I have been to many of these facilities and may I use the word “shudder”? At times I really feel very sorry and very bad when I witness what those officers are going through especially in terms of accommodation. It is very unfortunate! Therefore, as a country, we really must address this issue of facilitating and giving appropriate accommodation facilities to those deserving public officers. 

I also wish to express my thanks to the chairman of my committee and the members for the manner in which we deliberated the issues pertaining to my ministry. We were frank and forthright with each other although the press fraternity in one of the issues said that we had been kicked out of Parliament. We were never kicked out of Parliament or the committee. We agreed very amicably that we would postpone our sitting until the following Monday if I remember very well. 

Going to the specific issues that have been raised, let me begin with the one of hon. Byandala. He has only given thanks and I have acknowledged those thanks. 

Hon. Obua said that money for computerising the passport office section should be found. I wish it was found yesterday. When I joined this ministry, one of the departments I toured was that very one and I felt very sorry for what I saw. But we are making progress. I want to assure Members here that we are computerising now and the intention is to link the headquarters with the various outposts: Malaba, Entebbe, Busia, Katuna, mention it so that if someone is entering Uganda at Malaba, somebody at the headquarters here already knows who that person is. He can see his face on the picture, can tell the country from which he is coming and can even get the passport number of that person coming to our country. 

Hon. Balikowa said police stations look like IDPs. Surely that is true and that is what we refer to as “mama ingia pole”. I look forward to the day that I can see “mama ingia pole” extinct from the police stations. 

The Shs 150 billion versus US $50 million for the data project, the Shs 150 billion is for the entire project. The project has got several components: there is a component of data capture and storage. There is the component of processing that data and ensuring that it is stored and the final product is the IDs and other usages that this project is designed for. I would like to inform this House that there is a difference between the entire project and the ID issuance project. In order for us to arrive at a position to issue IDs, we need US $56 million and in order to have the entire project operating, we need Shs 150 billion. 

Why hire a team of consultants to help you? The hiring of this team is not to show us the way forward. It is to show us the extent of the problem and how to proceed about it. We felt that within the ministry we did not have the technical capacity to show us the various stages and components and how we can procure. And we thought we should get a consultant to help us in this respect. 

Hon. Mugyenyi talked about Police housing but I want to talk about Namboole. Let me give the background on how we had to take these young men and girls who had been training in Kabalye. This was during the CHOGM days –(Interruption)

MR BARTILLE: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. I thought when hon. Mugyenyi was contributing, she talked about the Interpol and the failure to follow up stolen vehicles, which are brought to this country and given to people. Could you say something about that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you are also pre-empting the minister. Let him respond.

MR KASAIJA: He cut me short and I was coming because hon. Mugyenyi did not raise only one point. As I said, we had to bring these trainees to Namboole on what we call the probation police constable course for us to be able to man Kampala during the CHOGM days so that we could effectively manage the policing work within the city. The trained police officers that we had at that time were not sufficient in number to ensure that security was well maintained within the city. 

Two, we wanted to give an opportunity to the young officers - we now do not train merely in theory and we wanted to give them exposure and practical experience. We negotiated with the Namboole management and we have a valid contract with them. We have paid part of the money but we still owe them some of the money. We are there with the approval and the consent of Namboole management. But as I told the committee, now that these people have passed out, we have already started deploying them and sooner than later, Namboole will be free of these officers. I want to assure this House on this. 

Interpol: they are not doing their job; stolen vehicles from abroad; people are being fleeced. We have got a whole office of Interpol here, well manned, maintained and facilitated by Interpol International. We would be very grateful, hon. Mugyenyi, to get specific cases where people have not been helped and then we handle them accordingly.

Security companies that are deploying Ugandans as security guards abroad especially in Iraq and Ugandans are being fleeced. My comment on this one is very simple: this is a matter of supply and demand and it is a matter of willing buyer and willing seller. These Ugandans are not being forced to go and undertake these responsibilities. If they feel that they are being cheated, then they should terminate the contract they are not being forced to go and undertake these responsibilities. If they feel that they are being cheated, they should end the contract. In fact if I were the one and those people had come to me seeking passports in order to travel there - I have always advised them and said, “Get a written contract so that by the time you leave, you know exactly how much money you expect and if you don’t get it, you can take legal action against the company”. I don’t think government has much to do concerning this -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for giving way. In the past there was a complaint from the same Ugandans that they were being denied the opportunity to go to Iraq and the explanation by the ministry then was that this was a private arrangement and that their only responsibility was to issue documentation. It is strange to hear that the people who were yearning to go are the very same people now complaining of having gone. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether as a country we should not officially export our people. In the Philippines, they are officially exported. Actually when you arrive at the airport in Manila, those people who are officially exported have a separate queue; they are not treated like other people. Let us help our people. There is unemployment and we know that so why don’t we assist and negotiate official agreements so that our people are protected? I think that is what Mary Mugyenyi was talking about. I don’t think it is right to say, “Willing buyer; willing seller”, no. These are Ugandans and they want employment. What does the government do? Let us protect them by getting involved. I think that is what Mary Mugyenyi is asking for.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, maybe as a country we need to make a policy and as far as I am concerned, that is a labour policy, which I would leave to the ministry responsible for that sector. We can take a position as a country and not merely as a government. When people are looking for jobs outside this country, how are they to be assisted by the state and we are different players in this case? I will issue a passport, someone will help them negotiate a contract maybe the Attorney-General or the Ministry of Labour for that matter. I entirely agree that we could but at the moment and as far as I am concerned, in the absence of a labour policy on how to handle Ugandans when they are going out to look for jobs, I want to reiterate that it is a matter of willing buyer, willing seller -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I think the concern here is that it is not only about Ugandans but also about the future stability of this country. These jobs in Iraq are a little bit unique and not like any ordinary job. These are security jobs, people get trained and they go abroad. I thought that the Ministry of Internal Affairs would take additional interest in how these people get recruited, the kind of people who get recruited. And through Ministry of Foreign Affairs, because they cannot do it alone, you should be able to make a follow up to see how these Ugandans are serving abroad. When they come back, I thought that we would take broader interest than just narrowing it down to this.

MR KAKOOZA: I think that since these are private companies and there is no policy, this is where the private–public partnership comes in. Once the policy comes in as a broader perspective because these are children who are educated by the government and these are people who are using resources within government, there must be a delivery policy between those private companies where government can strategically intervene. This is a way of creating employment and exporting labour and it is incumbent upon the government to protect us. These are fellow Ugandans and citizens of Uganda and the government must be questioned on whether the rights of Ugandans in Iraq are being infringed upon. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should look into bringing a policy with a broader perspective and since this incorporates a global trend of public-private partnership, it can be accepted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I don’t think it should be the Minister of Internal Affairs. I think the Leader of Government Business should coordinate this activity. We need employment and our people should be protected where they are, like other countries do, so it should be the Leader of Government Business to coordinate. The details can be worked out by the government. We are not going to conclude that matter here. We are simply giving proposals for the government to take up.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry that I insisted but this matter can be handled when the policy statement for the Ministry of Gender comes because there were petitions to the Labour Department by those who were in Iraq, copies of which I received. Since this matter has come early and the minister is in the House, it would be good that the minister prepares an appropriate response because her ministry officials have been handling these complaints.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know we are talking about the petitions and those jobs but there is also the other element of the official export of Ugandans so that they are able to work abroad officially with the protection of the government. That is a broader issue and that is what we are talking about.

MR APILIGA: Madam Speaker, the passports that we hold state very clearly that wherever we go, we will be protected in the name of our President. Wherever Ugandans are and they hold Ugandan passports, their interests have got to be looked after. This is a very serious matter and if there is no policy, we really need to implement what is stated on our passports because when Ugandans go abroad and wherever they are, our country has an interest in those Ugandans. As such, the office responsible for the passports and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should head what is happening because it involves other areas. We may need the Prime Minister - or since the passports are in the name of our President - it may have to come from the top but it is a very important issue.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we are very concerned and we do take care of the interests of Ugandans especially in terms of their personal security. The issuance of a passport is recognition that this is a Ugandan so whichever country you go we say we have sent that Ugandan there - maybe I am using the wrong words, not sent. We recognise that this is a Ugandan and ask the country to please look after that Ugandan according to the laws of that country. We are very sure about that and we do that but to say that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should get involved in the negotiation of wages, salaries or terms and conditions of service of Ugandans when they leave this country, I think that is going beyond our mandate. I think that we should leave this to the Ministry of Gender. They will respond appropriately. I prefer that I end there as far as my job - once I have given them passports and I have cleared their way to leave the country, I think it is good enough for the time being.

The hon. Member for Ayivu, the deployment of Kale Kayihura in the Police is a blessing surely, and I would like to link this up with another comment that was made yesterday that we are trying to militarise the Police. It is not a question of militarising the Police. You see in my own language -(Interjections)- you do not know? From the great kingdom of Bunyoro -(Laughter)- we have a saying that when an anthill changes - you know we people –(Interruption)- not the Banyankole; the Banyankole do not eat white ants - when those little holes through which the ants come out change direction, you also change the little hole from which you collect. I have forgotten what that hole is called in the Northern Uganda language but it is a very interesting word for all I remember. 

Equally -(Interjection)- yes, it is called pony. Equally, you have to look at the challenges. What are the challenges of the Police today? The challenges of the Police today are not the same as those 20 or 40 years ago. Yes, they are not the same. So the deployment of Kale Kayihura within the Police is not because he is a military man per se; it is because of his administrative capacity to be able to build a Police for us. 

Really colleagues, I would like you to rest assured, please, rest your heart; we are not trying to change the Uganda Police into another Army, but at the same time we are propelling the Police to be able to - for example the crime complexity they have to face today, my Police have to face armed thugs. How do you do that? So they really must be trained in a manner that they are able to face the current challenges [Mr Okello-Okello: “Clarification”.] Okay, I will allow that clarification. Please, go ahead.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one?

MR KASAIJA: The one of my brother, Okello-Okello over there. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the minister for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. After my A’ Level I worked as a clerk at the Army headquarters in the records office for almost ten months. I know the kind of training that the Army goes through. I also know the kind of training that the Police personnel go through. They train - including in law - the Police training is not the same as the military training. Now here is a minister telling us that swapping or mixing them is actually an improvement. How do you get an army man who is not trained in Police work to go and head the Police? He doesn’t know the training that the Police force goes through; this is what is worrying us. 

For further information, on the eve of the last elections in my constituency, three lorries of soldiers were carried from Pajemo barracks, about 8 kilometres away, brought to the Police barracks and dressed in Police uniform. In fact they had no room to change; they were changing outside. (Laughter) So I was called - my office is not far away from the Police station in question - I was called to go and witness. I saw these people change into Police uniforms. The DPC was not around, the OC barracks was not around; deliberately, all the officers had been sent away. [Mrs Mukwaya: “Point of order”.] So what we are worried about is the idea of militarising the Police. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I have finished, thank you. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, as a former Minister of Justice under whose mandate was the Electoral Commission; this Parliament sat here and recognised that we did not have enough Police to man the elections. We decided that the Police could call on the Army or any other force to assist them. Therefore, those two lorries in his constituency where I do not think they have enough manpower for both prisons and Police, if the Police called on the Army to support and reinforce them, definitely they had to be –(Interruption)- yes, is he in order to insinuate that we were hiding the Army in Police and yet he was told [Hon. Members: “He saw”.] He did not see; he was told. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, just concentrate on the important things and conclude your response. 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I will concentrate on my response. 

Promotions within the Police force and Prisons services: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you know, just a couple of weeks ago we commenced the promotion of Police officers. We have come up with a policy; maybe at an appropriate time I will come before this House and read to you what we have now evolved in terms of promotions. 

Hitherto, we had a very funny system within the Police and I heard very hard words for some Police managers, of someone applying for a promotion. I am a student of management; promotion is not asked for, promotion is earned. Your supervisor recognises that you are doing a good job and he recommends you to be promoted, but not you to write a letter and say, “Mr Boss, would you now please promote me from this rank to that rank?” So that is now history and definitely we will come out publicly with this policy and you will begin to see. 

Were it not for the financial constraints, we had actually ordered the Police management to make promotions across the board. It is very amazing; you find that for 20 years, a Police officer has never been promoted; you find that a Police officer has been serving in a certain position for 15 years and there is no promotion! Then what use is it? Either that officer should be told he is no good and sent home, we retire them or something –(Interjection)- You want to clarify? Why don’t you allow me to continue so that I can finish?  (Laughter)

Unpaid SPCs: as I alluded to earlier on, we have had two problems in terms of keeping up to date with payment of salary. One was the Local Administrative Police (LAP). When the LAPS and local administration prisons were integrated into the main forces, we had two main problems: One, to avoid ghost police and prisons officers we had to verify whether the number and the names submitted to us by the districts were correct. So, we had to undertake a countrywide exercise to verify. We actually head counted to verify that these people as submitted to us by the district authorities are correct. That took a bit of time. 

Two, originally some of these people were paid by cash including the SPCs. We would send money to the District Police Commander and he would pay cash. Now, according to the new financial regulations, that is not acceptable. Every employee of government must be paid through the bank. It took time for some of these officers to open a bank account and to send us their account numbers. Moreover, some of them were not ready to open bank accounts so they would send us a colleague’s account and when the salary went there, it would appear that money was going on one account and the bank would reject that arrangement. So, that is what has caused the delays in terms of payment for SPCs and LAPs if that has happened. Now I am told that this matter is being handled well.

Creation of a new immigration post between Arua and DRC: Indeed, if money allowed me, I would want to create many more immigration posts. As you know, we have got a porous border. We do get a lot of non-Ugandans walking into our country freely and unchallenged simply because we have got a few gazetted immigration posts. 

Power installation in Arua Prison: I think if you check in our policy statement, that is taken care of but it will also depend on how money is given to us. 

Hon. Magoola was talking about the poor conditions in which our officers live. She raised a very interesting point that pregnant and breastfeeding mothers should not be incarcerated and that we should develop a law. Well, I do not have much comment on that but I do not know whether that will not be giving a licence to expecting mothers to commit crime because they know they will not be committed to prison. I really do not know. It is a very interesting point that we could talk more about.

Not selling land for Police and Prisons: Now, honourable colleagues, it is a question of “what do I do?” Here I am, the Ministry of Finance cannot give me all the financial resources I need but I have an asset here, which is land, and which can generate sufficient money for me to be able to meet my need. So, what do I do? 

Now there is a new thinking that we should not sell the land. I think at the ministry for us we are convinced that we should not sell the land. There is what they are calling Private Public Partnership or PPP. The experts in this arrangement are trying to convince us that you do not have to sell the land or -(Mr Okello-Okello rose_)- More information, hon. Okello-Okello? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I think conclude your statement. We have another minister.

MR KASAIJA: Let me finish, hon. Okello-Okello. We are told that in this arrangement you do not have to sell your land. All you have to do is to get into an agreement with an investor and part of your contribution towards that project is your land. In that case, it is kind of a sub-lease if you may wish to call it that. Once the agreement has ended, you can retrieve your land. Equally, out of the profits that the company makes every year, you as the landlord also get a share of the profits. That is what the experts of PPP have told us and at the ministry we are buying this very seriously. If that can work out, that can be the best thing as far as I am concerned. 
	
The honourable woman MP from Moyo raised a question of the creation of new border immigration points. I have already covered that one and I do not need to go into it again. She has also talked about increasing the wage of the police and prisons. I would be the happiest if that were to come true because I feel very sorry for those officers for the jobs that we do expect from them and the amount of money we are paying them. I would be the happiest to do that.

Shanties around police posts: Surely, I do not want to see those shanties around the police posts if funds can allow me.

Hon. Kabonesa said that we must increase the feeding budget of prisons. Absolutely! In fact when we were debating this matter in the committee, we wondered how we were going to feed the prisoners for the entire year when we have got such a big gap. So, definitely, I will pray to my brother, the Minister of Finance, to look into this matter. If we cannot get an appropriation immediately, definitely he can be assured I will go for the supplementary request because there is no way I am going to keep those prisoners in prisons without feeding them. I am not ready to have dead bodies on my hands.

Maybe let me take this opportunity, Madam Speaker and colleagues, to say that congestion in prisons and the number of prisoners, especially those that are on remand, is not a Ministry of Internal Affairs issue per se. Our job as Ministry of Internal Affairs is to arrest you if you have committed a crime and we deliver you to a police station. The Police together with the DPP will take you to court. Court will either remand you or will free you on bail or will do whatever is legally acceptable. 

If you do visit prisons - and I encourage you please to visit as many of our prisons - you will see what goes on there. I was in Lira and I found that more than half of the inmates there were on remand on defilement. Now there is a problem; because we do not have sufficient judges and there are not enough court sittings, people remain on remand for a long time. The issue maybe when we are looking at the -(Interruption)
 
MS AKELLO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. My clarification only concerns the way you transport the prisoners to the courts of law. According to your budget, you are using Shs 1.016 billion, but I was wondering why you do not liaise with the Ministry of Justice to bring these services nearer to the prisons. 

I would like to give an example of Nakasongola. The nearest high court is in Kampala and it is quite a long distance and yet there is a well built court in Nakasongola, which can be upgraded to a high court and have some of the cases handled there. I feel this could be one of the biggest problems that are causing some of the prisoners to be on remand for a long time without being tried. I suggest that you liaise with the Ministry of Justice to at least bring services nearer to places where we have a big prison, for example, Nakasongola. Why don’t you bring the services nearer so that you do not have to use a lot of fuel, transport allowances? I can see some of the money being used as allowances paid to staff yet if the high court was near the prison in Nakasongola, it would be just a walking distance. I thank you.

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would only want the minister to throw some light on something, which was raised by the committee, but no recommendation was made on it, that is the scrapping of the special branch. Now the police rely on the investigative organ of the military. What is it that the special branch used to do that now has been handed over to the military investigating organ?

MS AKELLO: Honourable minister, I want to entirely agree with you when you say it is not your responsibility as far as congestions in our prisons is concerned. However, I want to find out whether it is also not your responsibility to provide facilities such as pit latrines and toilet facilities. I am asking this because in some of these prisons sincerely, prisoners use buckets to pass faecal matter and in the morning they pour it in the bushes around. So, isn’t that also your responsibility really, honourable minister. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Of course, once somebody is brought into my hands, it is my responsibility to make sure that I look after that individual. Surely I was very politely reminded yesterday that we did not mention anything about pads for our lady prisoners. I can assure you we shall take care of that because they need it anyway. For beddings and so forth, we shall see how we tie that in. I agree with you.

On the question of the police special branch, I have a whole statement with me here. I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for me to read it or I will do it on another special day if given a chance. I have a statement about the special branch; with your permission, I can read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, I will give you time specifically for that.

MR KASAIJA: Very good. Thank you. About lack of courtesy by some of my officers at Passport Office, well, I want to say that hon. Kabonesa did report that case to me and I have taken it up. I am yet to find out what the supervisor of that officer who mistreated you has so far done. Definitely, we are not taking it very lightly; we shall definitely do whatever is needed in order to bring that officer in line. We are a public office and we must exhibit friendliness because we are selling a service. In business, I am told if you want it to do very well, you must be courteous to your customers. So, you being part of our customers, we are supposed to be very courteous to you. So, I apologise for what that officer did to you but I can assure you that we shall definitely do what is necessary for him not to repeat it.

There was a query on the training of immigration officers to enable them handle the public a lot better. I agree with you on that entirely. Indeed we are trying to develop a syllabus and this will be part of that. We have just recently graduated about 45 new immigration officers and part of their training definitely was in how to handle the public.

Hon. Santos asked something about reactivating the prisons industries and farms. Absolutely! I cannot dispute this; it is agreeable and as a ministry together with the prisons services we are definitely for this. I have been to some of these industries and we have agreed with the Commissioner-General that as funds allow, we should be able to re-activate them in order to put them where they used to be. Indeed I have even made arrangements for the Commissioner-General to travel to a country called Denmark where I was a few months ago and happened to have visited some of these facilities. I saw what they are doing there and I would like it to be replicated here in Uganda.

Hon. Baba Diri sought a clarification on recycling of wrong elements within our society into prisons. Well, our job, as I have told you, is not to determine the length of period you stay in the prison; it is the courts to do that. So, maybe this is a matter that could better be addressed to the Ministry of Justice and the courts of Uganda.

Hon. Alisemera said that Namboole is being turned into a barracks. I think I have already talked about that so I do not have to repeat it. I am not sure whether we pay Shs 60,000 per day. All I am sure of is that we have a monthly rate agreed upon in a formal contract dully signed and executed. However, as I have told you, we are soon moving out of that place.

Let me say something about the condemned Bundibugyo prison, which we are still keeping. I wish I did not have to keep my prisoners there even tonight. We are moving slowly; I do not have the details with me, but it could be one of the prisons that we must definitely renovate in this financial year. 

Hon. Bayiga said something about crime prevention as a way of sensitising our people to reduce on the people who go to the prisons. Absolutely, I agree with you 100 percent. I wish all of you, honourable members, could join me in this crusade of educating Ugandans to live within the law and to behave in accordance with the law, and we as legislators give example that we must live in accordance with the law. I know of a good case of a friend of mine when he was being arrested – maybe I should also take this opportunity to share this with you. At times the Police have been accused of brutality, and you know that this is now a subject of investigation by a committee formed by this House, but let it suffice to say that that police will arrest you in the manner in which you present yourself. If you are cooperative and friendly, then the police have no cause to be difficult to you. So, I appeal to you that when they come to you, the first thing you should ask for is identification and once they have identified themselves, just say “here I am”. We do not kill people or even beat people. We only beat in self defence. 

May I also inform this House that my police officers have been killed, stoned and shot at – (Interruption)  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister for Internal Affairs was supposed to be responding to queries regarding his budget. However, given the trend of his argument up to the point where I stopped him, the minister is pre-empting the work of the select committee of Parliament which is investigating the conduct of the Police. If those assertions are true, according to the police, he would best take them to the committee rather than him doing it here. Otherwise, we would procedurally demand that if he is saying that, we also respond to circumstances under which police has shown excessive brutality and unjustified violence, which is the cause of that select committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, yesterday one of the members rose in objection, wanting us not to deal with this budget until the committee has reported. I said let us leave the committee matters - we trust them - and deal with the budget. So please focus on the issues that were raised in this House. Do not go into those other areas. Otherwise, I will have to open the Floor for others also to contribute. Just focus on what was in budget.

MR KASAIJA: most obliged, Madam. Crime prevention, honourable colleagues, is actually one of the objectives of our new policy of community policing to which we invite all of you to participate. At an appropriate time, we will be inviting some of you to come and share with us on shaping this policy.

Lastly, it was said that law and order plus human rights should be inculcated in the minds and behaviour of our police officers. May I say that law and order plus respect of human rights forms a part of the syllabus at Kabalye Police Training College and we give it its rightful share. 

May I also end by saying that this ministry is really geared to turning the police into a pro-people police. We want a friendly police, a force that you will feel comfortable with as soon as you land in their hands. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.24
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I thank the honourable MPs for the debate we have just had on the Floor. I am going to respond according to themes so I may not refer to colleagues all the time. 

First, on the question of level of expenditure of the UPDF, I think we need to be consistent with our debate. First, there are members who have correctly pointed out that the issue of welfare in the Army needs to be improved, but at the same time there are members who felt that the budget of the Army needs to be scaled down in order to give something to the Ministry of Internal Affairs or to the Police. At the level of Parliament, this is a very fundamental issue and I want to give some clarification. When we are comparing the expenditure in Defence, the issue is not how much Ministry of Internal Affairs is spending; the issue of the Police can be made in its own right because they are doing a specific job. 

However, in assessing the expenditure to the Army, I think we need to look at parameters. Number one is how we compare with other comparable countries. We are not the only country with an army. Two, what is the position of Defence expenditure in relation to the whole government. Three, how does the Defence expenditure relate to the GDP of the whole economy. 

Let me start by giving a few illustrations, Madam Speaker, in regard to what I would call comparable countries and how they are spending. I will just give about five examples in the interest of time and I will lay on the Table the source of the information.

As we speak now, in the past two or three years the Republic of Kenya has been spending at the level of US$ 280 million on defence. This was the figure in 2005. In that same year, the expenditure in Uganda was US$ 192 million. Uganda was still grappling with the issue of insecurity and the issue of insurgency and yet it was using a much smaller budget than Kenya.

The Republic of Botswana, in Southern Africa spends at the level of US$ 325 million on defence and all of us know the population of that country and how stable and peaceful that part of our continent has been. The Republic of Malaysia spends US$1.7 billion on defence expenditure. So, those are some comparisons which help us to be able to –(Prof. Latigo rose_)– Can I finish this point? Let me put it in full context. 

The second comparison is the issue of GDP; what fraction of our GDP are we spending on defence? The current figures that we are asking Parliament to spend constitute 1.7 percent of GDP. However, what we have asked Parliament to spend this financial year will be the equivalent to 1.7 percent of the GDP of this country. I will give you three other African countries just for comparison. Burundi is spending 5.9 percent, Angola is spending 5.7 percent and Mauritania is spending 5.5 percent. 

The third issue that I would like colleagues to look at is the level of quantum of expenditure positioning. Where does the Army stand vis-à-vis other sectors of the economy? From Financial Year 2003/04 backwards, year in, year out the Ministry of Defence was number one. From the following year up to date, Defence has lost the position of number one. Do we think that is how it should be? Provide stability so that other sectors can grow. This year, number one is the road sector, as you all know, with Shs 1 trillion, followed by the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance and Defence comes as number four or five because I think Ministry of Health is now slightly ahead of us.

The point I am making, Madam Speaker, is that compared to other countries, the defence expenditure in this country is still relatively below where it should be. Two, that over the years, defence has given way to other sectors, in terms of ranking as far as the expenditure is concerned. 

This now will take me to the second point, the issue of welfare, because it fits in very well. Members have pointed out very well –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of Defence. Just to help us appreciate the progress that defence has made or the country has made in shifting our budgetary allocation from defence to other sectors, you gave figures and I think hon. Oyet wanted to intervene at that time and I had also hoped that you would help us. The figures of the Kenyan expenditure; what percentage of their budget is that and what percentage of Uganda’s budget was it in that year when you compared?

Secondly, if we look at what it was in the 60s - I do not know if you have those figures - if I can remember well, it was in 1969 when defence had a slightly lower budget than law and order. I think this is where we are coming from. 

More importantly, if you look at the allocation of the defence budget, how much in shift has moved away from recurrent, assuming that things like bullets etcetera are part of the recurrent cost in the Army during war, given that for two years now we have had peace? How much of the recurrent cost associated with the conflict have we saved and transferred to capital development in terms of barracks etcetera? That would help us to see whether the trend is okay and whether we can accelerate it to support the rest.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Rt. Hon. Leader of the Opposition. In the medical school whenever we made a statement, we would be required to quote the authority. I was unable to bring the specific equivalence in Kenya because the literature I used did not specifically quote the GDP equivalent in the case of Kenya, and the figures I have quoted are in the literature. 

Apart from the GDP, as I argued we also need to look at the quantum because eventually as you said, it is bullets, guns, fighter planes, barracks and those have a unit cost. So, even without looking at the GDP, when you look at say the figure for Kenya - and they are not in war - you can quickly deduce that really their welfare and other aspects must be better.

Now, in shift, I think that is a very important point. We are now at peace so what dividends are we seeing? I think at some point later on, we will be a little more quantitative but I can give you a qualitative answer. Because of peace in main northern Uganda, we have been able to concentrate efforts in Karamoja because it is the same region. In fact, when we had started disarmament in Karamoja and then Kony returned from Southern Sudan, we had to shift the forces back from Karamoja into Northern Uganda. The fact that we have had stability in Northern Uganda has given us time to concentrate on the Karamoja sub-region. 

Secondly, if you look - and we have made this point before - at the rate at which the barracks are being built now, it is obviously much higher than three or four years ago. Again, because we have had this relative peace –(Interjections)- But as I said, at an appropriate time, we should return and be able to speak more on that issue.

On the issue of welfare, I made the point before and at that time hon. Reagan was not in the House. I think that is why he came back. Welfare in the Army is not just salary; it takes other things as well. It means food, health care, pension, recreation, etc. When we are talking about welfare in the Army, we are including all these elements. Just as I have just clarified to the Leader of the Opposition, because we were busy fighting, we needed money to buy the priorities as far as fighting is concerned. The welfare of the Army suffered to a great extent but now things are definitely changing, as I have said, in the area of barracks, uniforms and food. Fortunately, UPDF is an army that is not only fighting but also understands the economy and the politics of the country. So, when there are difficulties, they do understand. 

There is no way we could have sent soldiers on leave during the time we were so busy fighting. The reason we enlisted the Arrow Boys, Amuka Boys and LDUs in Acholi Sub-region and Western Uganda is because the Army did not have sufficient numbers at that time to fight and it would not have made sense for us to send soldiers on leave at that time. However, as I speak now, over the past one year or so, soldiers have started taking their due leave and this has also coincided with the time we now have a limited duty-free shop where we have started selling to soldiers mabati and cement and nails for putting up a roof. So when they go for their leave, they are able to start up some small personal housing.  

My third comment relates to the issue of pension and gratuity. First, this is an issue we handle with the Ministry of Public Service. By duty allocation, it centrally belongs to the Ministry of Public Service which handles pensions. However, as far as the issue of soldiers is concerned, we have to work closely with the Ministry of Public Service. 

Until 2005/06 financial year, the Ministry of Defence was never given any money for pensions. It was not until 2006/07 that through negotiation with Public Service and Finance, some re-allocation of Shs 10 billion was availed and we started doing something small. Fortunately, this year ended and we got to up to Shs 44 billion to Shs 45 billion. This coming year, the allocation in relation to the Army is Shs 53 billion. So, honourable Members of Parliament, in terms of paying pensions, in terms of paying survivor benefits to the survivors of the soldiers who have died, we are really just starting. If this curve that the Public Service has given us of rising allocation is sustained, then we should be able to do very well. 

The estimated number of people that should be on pension payroll now - soldiers, ex-servicemen - is 80,000. By law, Parliament has decided that we start from 1962 and also we include other freedom fighting forces that fought at one point or another in this country. Now, out of this estimated 80,000 currently on the payroll with the Ministry of Public Service, we have only 14,000. So that gives you the scale of need, the scale of difficulty out there with the people who should be paid. 

The forces that we are paying or that will be considered for payment as by law, the UPDF Act, are the following: FEDEMO, FRONASA, FUNA, Kikosi Malum, NRA/UPDF, SUM, Uganda Army, UFM, UNLA, UNLF/AD and UNRF. This is the full list of the forces that qualify for pension payments. We are working on the list to ensure that we have clear verification and clear details of the people alive and those who died, so that we pay at the right rates and to the right people.  

There was an error in the report of the committee and two honourable colleagues have expressed concern; it was said that when calculating the pension, the salary at the time of departure is the one which will be used. This was an error. The formula in Public Service uses the equivalent salary at the time you are being paid. So, if you were a colonel for example in 1962, maybe you were drawing the equivalent of Shs 10,000, now if you were in service, you would be getting Shs 800,000 and that is what is used for the calculation. So that was an error in the report and I am sure the chairperson will get it corrected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I am sorry to interrupt you. You read a long a list of the people you are going to pay but I have not heard you talk about the Kings African Rifles. Are you going to deal with them? You invited them to Bombo, they travelled and filled forms; this is like four or five years ago. (Applause) 

On Monday when we were listening to Public Service, the minister declined to deal with that matter and said it is your business. So, honourable minister, I think you should tell the country who is going to pay the Kings African Rifles.

DR KIYONGA: I was coming to that, Madam Speaker. I am surprised because I was not here when my colleague of Ministry of Public Service was responding, but I can speak on behalf of that ministry and mine. 

I have just stated clearly that the issue of pensions is centrally an issue of the Ministry of Public Service but we relate to them when it comes to soldiers. You are right, Madam Speaker, people who worked pre-independence were soldiers and therefore we should have some interest. We have been pursuing this matter and I was thinking that was part of the reason why they were called to come and sign up. However, when we checked both with the Ministry of Public Service and the British High Commission, the following information is what we were given and we have required that it should be put in writing: Number one is that at the time of Independence, the people in service then were given the option to retire at that time or to continue with the new Uganda Army. Some opted to go home and they were paid their gratuity as at that time, there was no provision for pension. This is the information I have been told. 

Those who continued then became members of the Uganda Army and subsequent armies and therefore they would qualify under this listing. So, since this is not in writing, I have asked my officers to liaise with Public Service so that we should get clear clarification from the British High Commission. We should get the list of the people that served in the Army up to that point. We should get a list of those that were paid and went home. We can then return to the House with a new proposal on how we should handle the matter. 

The issue of paying people who served before independence is not a matter for a decision by the Ministry of Defence; it is a matter of law and it is this House which can make a law and say, handle it this or that way. So, our job will be to provide these details and then the House can make the appropriate decision.

MR TOSKIN: Madam Speaker, I have followed what the minister is trying to explain to us and to the nation. However, you have already made a point, Madam Speaker, that it was government that invited these people to come from all over the country and bring their records. These people are old; most of them are between 70 to 80 years old. They sold the little property they had and they came and they have their records here in Bombo. So, can the minister be a bit clearer so that the people can know what they expect and what they do not expect. This should actually be made very clear.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I just want the minister to clarify further, especially in the areas of identification. When you talk about FRONASA, Kikosi Malum, SAMU; all those groups eventually constituted the UNLA.  The clear record you can get will be basically when they took over power as UNLA. When you talk about UFM, or FEDEMU, also the clear record one can get is when the NRA eventually took over power and they constituted a national army called NRA. 

Now, if somebody comes and claims they were in Kikosi Malum but never arrived at the UNLA, maybe their father died, how would you verify? What about if somebody comes and says: “I was a FEDEMU but we never arrived there, but I fought as a FEDEMU”; FEDEMU and Kikosi Malum were rebel groups.  So, I really want to get clarity from the minister because this is going to raise so many concerns outside there - how people are going to come up to start claiming. How will you verify? In the recent announcement, you made calls for the past armies to come and register; how were you verifying these past armies? How were you categorizing them and what method did you use to really identify and prove that these were really our past armies?

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleague has alluded to this and I had some small experience with ex-service persons. One of them came for the Queen’s visit and he made a presentation to the British High Commission about them being paid pensions. I can assure you the answer from the British High Commission would be the kind of answer you give; in other words, they ceased to be responsible at some stage.

The important thing is that these people remain Ugandans and that at some stage, the Ugandan Government committed itself through an invitation that something could be done. This remains a hanging political issue. It is not a civil service or public service regulation or administrative issue; it is a political issue. We find a situation where those who were registered by the government came to Bombo - they did not even go to some Nubian camp in Bombo, they went to the barracks and they were registered formally and they have records of that process. Truly they spent money, but the worst thing is that so much expectation was raised in them and this is persistent. 

We as the Opposition could say that this government has failed, but I think this is a national responsibility; we do not want to tap sides in regard to defence. Could we find a situation where we agree on some minimum payment, whether Shs 1 million for each of those people, so that the matter is settled and then we carry on with something rather than having to recur periodically?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether they are really very many. Can they be ten thousand? I do not think they are even very many.  

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, first I am very grateful for the way the Leader of the Opposition has given the information. You can see that elder of ours who really knew the facts; he knew the Queen was coming, he came himself and said, “I want pension from you.” So, it kind of validates what I was saying before - the information that we have.  

You saw two of my brothers here saying, “You Defence, how did you spend Shs 0.9 billion without authority?” That was a good question. I am glad hon. Suruma came and bailed me out. I think you were about to stop our budget.  

So, this is a matter of law as I have suggested.  We have to agree here collectively. I am proposing that you give us some time, we give the full facts with the proposal and then we decide together. However, it cannot be just Defence unilaterally to go and decide to pay someone so much money and another not to be paid. I think what is on record is that we undertake to work up this issue and bring up a proposal through Cabinet to the House.

My next point relates to deployment abroad. First, there is the issue of our troops in Somalia. I think Parliament has done very well. Almost without exception, everybody who has stood up has said, “We commend the Army for the good job they are doing in Somalia”. We need to show that we believe and act in accordance to Pan-Africanism. It is true that we are now there with our brothers and sisters from Burundi. 

Although the decision that we should deploy a force in Somalia was taken at the Summit of the African Union, it was not only Ugandans deciding. It was a collective decision; all the countries of Africa decided that they would send troops there. They even made pronouncements which we announced here. They were initially six to seven countries but as the white man says, “The taste of the pudding is in the eating.”  At the eating, only two have turned up - Uganda and Burundi. 

We have not been quiet about it because we are not just proud to be in Mogadishu. We want to be there and make a difference. We want to be there and liberate our brothers and sisters in Somalia. So, when our other colleagues from the African Continent do not come, it is not good news but we understand each one’s problem. The problems have included resources. We have reported in the policy statement that even us, although people promised us money, sometimes the money comes late - a month, two months - and we have to do some borrowing within our budget to cover the gap. Currently, what is going on is that we are all putting pressure on the UN. This is really the responsibility of the UN. The UN must come to Somalia and act. Once the UN says, “yes, the resources will be there”, I am sure more countries will contribute.  

It is also good news that the rebels and the government have made some decisions. About two or three months ago, they met in Djibouti and very soon, they are going to initiate an agreement they reached and this would expedite the participation of the UN. So, I would request colleagues, Members of Parliament, let us continue giving morale or support to the Army. We must stay put while we ensure that we get beefed up from the UN or other supporters.

PROF. LATIGO: Just two pieces of information on the Somalia question. First of all, yesterday it was announced in the media that the Somali groups reached agreement on the peace process. However, also last night, the UN Security Council extended the mandate of the peace group in Somalia and I think this would then be an opportune time for us to press for other partners to come in and join, but the UN Security Council approved the extension yesterday.  

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, hon. Latigo. Now, the deployment brought by my good friend, hon. Reagan, suggested that we should revalidate the authority to be in Southern Sudan. I went and checked to see if Reagan had a point and my conclusion is that he did not have a point, legally. We have found that the troops went under the law in operation that time. According to Chapter 307 of the laws of Uganda, the Commander-in-Chief was authorised to deploy those forces in consultation with the high command. The present law now in the UPDF Act came into effect later and was not given retrospective application. So, we find the authority is still valid. It is not in any way contradicting our Constitution. 

The matter is also being handled very openly. Recently, the President of Southern Sudan was here and had a discussion with President Museveni and they indicated that we need to continue working together and our presence in Southern Sudan was spoken to in a positive term. So, from the sector of Defence, we do not think it is necessary for us to return here for revalidation.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking further from the minister is, when did that law come into effect, which law are you referring to and when were the UPDF deployed in the Sudan? As far as we know, the UPDF went to Sudan in 2002 and that was after the understanding with Khartoum. Unless the deployment had taken place much earlier than that, I still think that there is validity on the issues I raised yesterday. The Constitution provides for that and I think the Constitution is more supreme than the other laws.

DR KIYONGA: Yes, you are absolutely right, hon. Okumu. The troops went around 2002; that is correct. In that time, the law was Chapter 307 of the laws of Uganda. The present UPDF Act came into application on 2 September 2005 and as you know, unless an existing law is contrary to a new provision in the Constitution, it is allowed to continue. So our reading is that there is no contradiction here. First of all, the UPDF Act as presently formulated came into effect much later than the troops going to Southern Sudan. If we need a formal legal opinion, we can obtain that from the Attorney-General, but I thought we should respond to that point. 

Lastly on that point, I thought hon. Okumu would be fair. Yesterday, he made a statement and I heard a chorus from both the Opposition and the Government side. He said the Army of Amin were more respected and I heard people saying, “no” and hon. Okumu did not want to retract. Clearly, the Army of Uganda under Amin is not something we could go by. They brutalised our people, the little money that was available was just used by soldiers; we cannot use them as a standard –(Mr Okumu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not have this. No, please. Minister, please conclude.

DR KIYONGA: We will discuss outside, hon. Okumu. On auxiliary forces, by arranging with hon. Kasaija that he speaks first, it helped me to cool down a bit. Some of the colleagues really were too strong on this issue as if we had been completely irresponsible, which I object to. This matter had been long standing and we have worked through it in collaboration with our colleagues in Cabinet and in the House. In my view, where we have reached we should be hearing from the House that we have made progress, not really to be condemned, although more needs to be done. 

Hon. Amongi stood up and said we never consulted anybody. That is not true. First, we came and announced to this House that we had this problem. We brought an estimate of how much money we needed and asked for a supplementary, which the House approved. After that, I travelled to Teso and held a meeting which was attended by Members of Parliament from Teso sub-region. That meeting was attended by chairpersons in the districts of Teso sub-region, councillors and chairpersons of sub-counties in Teso sub region. We told them what we were going to do, what the difficulties had been and what procedure we would use. Later on, my colleague, hon. Nankabirwa, travelled to Lira with Gen. Katumba and repeated the same. Here in Kampala, we formed sub-committees - one headed by Eng. Amuriat - so that we would keep consulting with the Teso sub region. The one of Lango sub-region was headed by hon. Okot Ogong. We had wanted hon. Ben Wacha but he declined.

I can tell you we have been on phone with hon. Okot Ogong and even in the corridors with my brother from Oyam. We have consulting on this issue and where we are, Madam Speaker, we are no longer in the days of ghost soldiers. That is finished. When we went to pay after thorough verification, every person who got money signed. We have presented to the committee and to the outgoing chairperson of the committee signed lists. Hon. Kyanjo can bear me out on this one because he was in that meeting. We brought books and books where people signed. We have arrested officers who were found interfering with this activity. 

When our colleagues came back to us to say, “you say you have paid but there are still people complaining”, we went back to the field. We have not said we have stopped. We have just been in oyam and we have just been in Teso sub-region as I reported before. So, I want to assure this House that we are trying the best we can on this matter. The money is not fully spent; we still have more than Shs 1 billion to be able to pay those we may find who had not been paid. I will take clarification from hon. Amongi and then Hon. Oyet.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for giving way. Honourable minister, I agree with you that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa travelled to Lira and held a meeting attended by Members of Parliament and local councils, including even the Rwot Nyaci, the paramount chief of Lango. It is in that meeting that we agreed on the operational framework that when they are coming back to pay, they would still inform the same structure so that they become the framework for information and mobilisation. We then tasked hon. Okot Ogong and his sub-committee to liaise with you when you are ready for the payment and inform each one of us to go back to the constituency and give information. At that time, and even up to now, people had been demobilised and some of them were already at home. 

In Oyam - I come from Minakuru Sub-county - you have paid people but there are many people in Minakuru Sub-county who genuinely served, have their numbers but they have not been paid. This is because they did not get information on when they were supposed to go to the centre for payment. The issue I am raising is; why can’t you liaise with Members of Parliament and district councils to give information on when you are going to pay? That way, we can tell our people that payment is ready so that they go to the centre and collect it. We even at that time agreed on the question of demobilisation and said we should inform the people who could have gone with guns mistakenly and assure them to report back with the guns and hand them over. We said they would go with their IDs and numbers and so on. However, when you were paying, you went without informing the necessary people that we agreed should have been informed. That is my point.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way and accepting my clarification. One, you went to Teso and Lango sub-regions, why didn’t you go to Acholi sub-region and hold a similar meeting with the stakeholders regarding the affairs of the auxiliary forces? Two, do you have any plan for those people who died in the process of serving this country as auxiliary forces? They have left dependants, orphans and widows and nobody is taking care of them and they have problems. Do you have any plan for them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please finish up.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and indeed I am about to finish. I am happy about the clarification that hon. Amongi has given and when you read the Hansard, you will see the difference between your two contributions – what you said before and the clarification. 

As Members of Parliament and ministers, we are at the strategic level and we are not paying officers. Even me, I do not pay. The principle we agreed on is that we liaise with information, we go and verify people and compare lists. We have 1,000 people, for example, and we want to make sure these are paid. That is why we brought lists to the committee; somebody can go there and say this person does not exist. 

The point I have made, hon. Amongi, is that we have not finished. Let me say what I have not said before; the process of recruiting these people was not so organised or easy. If you look at the Arrow Boys in Teso sub-region, for example, and the way Kony suddenly entered, we just called up people to fight and we could not be so neat in writing up the people. Now we have to use the good intentions of the commanders like hon. Ecweru, hon. Mukula and other people in the field. Fortunately, because Ugandans are free, if they are not reached they are able to speak out and say, “we are not being reached.” So we were being careful to go and do something and if there is a complaint, we return to the field. I want to assure you that the final verification is not yet closed. Of the money passed here - Shs 16.2 billion - we still have close to Shs 1.5 billion in store in order to mop up this process. 

On the issue of people who died; yes, there is consideration for them and when we go out for verification, we do receive information as to who these people are and they will be paid something.

In Acholi sub-region, the arrangement was different, hon. Oyet. In fact, the report from the commanders was that the people who stood consistently and firm were the LDUs in Acholi sub-region. When we heard stories that people had run away because they had not been paid, most of the boys in Acholi did not run away. Secondly, we still had the issue of Kony hanging over our heads. So the decision was that we do not disband the LDUs in Acholi sub-region. As we speak, there is a budget line for Acholi sub-region so that they should be getting their regular monthly pay. So, when I hear that some are not paid, then we are concerned and we have to cause correction. We could not do as we did in other regions because we were not disbanding that group yet.

On the issue of land sales, I would plead with members not to throw away the baby with the water. I know that we have general problems with land management, but that should not mean that every time we hear something about land, we become over sensitive. We should listen to each case and deal with it on its own merit. In the case of the Army, for a long time we have had substantial amount of land in Mbuya which used to be a barracks mainly. It is now headquarters of the Ministry of Defence and the Army leadership. The Army has to be out of Mbuya for deployment elsewhere. Secondly, we think we have reasonable resources allocated to us. 

It is true land does not belong to us. This money belongs to Uganda and the taxpayers and we just get allocated. Likewise, we are allocated some land and in trying to use our land and other resources most effectively, we came to a conclusion, knowing the treasure, that we can exchange part of the land on which we are for some money so that we can improve other aspects, for example, building barracks, building a referral hospital. This was after a long time of pleading with the Minister of Finance. We were convinced that really he did not have the money so we agreed that we sell some of the pieces of land which we have indicated and that our MTEF should be conditionally increased so that when we sell, then we can use that money. 

Last year, our MTEF was increased by this Parliament by voting by over Shs 20 billion. By implication, it meant you were with us in this decision that we can get rid of part of the land. I told this to the chairman in the committee, that we are not asking the committee to sell the land, because we had discussed this last year and it was implied in the budget.

Cabinet in agreeing with us has directed that Defence will not sell the land. Just as hon. Oyet was saying, this is not Defence land. They said the land will be sold by Uganda Land Commission and they added that Uganda Land Commission must sell this land by open bidding. So, do not throw away this baby with the general water of the problems. It is very clear and it has justification. 

I do not agree with my elder, the honourable member from Iganga, who was saying, “Do not give land, where will the prison warders dig some potatoes?” You cannot exchange potatoes for factories. To have idle land in Mbuya because we do not want to get rid of land is not economic management. Therefore, I plead with this Parliament and the committee that the well considered plan from the Defence sector be allowed to pass. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Does the chair have any concluding remarks? 

DR KIYONGA: The Chief Whip has just reminded me that because of the ruling by the Speaker, I have complied by not responding to the specifics concerning katebe promotions but as I told you, we have the facts. Let us go back to the committee first and then we will see how we come back to the House.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to sincerely thank honourable Members of Parliament for the detailed contributions that they have made in as far as enriching the submission of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs is concern. I would also like to thank the ministers for the responses that they have made to the concerns of Members of Parliament. I have just a few issues to highlight as we conclude this debate. 

As we submitted, there were a number of concerns in as far as general welfare is concerned. I would like to sincerely appeal to Ministry of Finance to discuss in detail with the various ministries in terms of considering, possibly at a later stage if it is no longer possible now, catering for supplementary considerations in as far as welfare especially of prisons and some of the gaps in police are concerned.

I would also like to emphasise the issue of productivity of our forces. It is mentioned now that Defence has relative peace at play and so we need to engage our armed forces to be more productive in economic ventures. I think this is a very serious consideration that the ministry should put into place, to ensure that even our back of the neck industries begin to generate some non-tax revenues, which would support and supplement the budget of the Defence sector.

Lastly, where you find salaries for Ministry of Internal Affairs, I would like to highlight that Directorate of Immigration are not catered for whereas they generate up to UShs 15 billion. I think that is an area of consideration in terms of the non-tax revenue that they generate. We should be in position to cater for their recruitment requirements. I think it is a very serious consideration, which I think the ministry should take up to ensure that part of the proceeds that this department generates are realised in terms of improved service delivery in the various security sectors.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to thank you very much for the contributions and I want to assure you that we are going to have very good cooperation with the ministries and we hope that our contribution will improve the service delivery of those sectors. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Minister of Internal Affairs, I was happy that you have finally remembered to include sanitary towels in your budget. They should appear separately, not as medicine and not as utilities. Let them appear separately so that we know that you have provided them. I now put the question that the report of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am delighted to introduce to you people from Nawandala sub-county, Kigulu North Constituency, Iganga District. They are up here. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Baliddawa and hon. Magoola. Honourable members, I suspend the House to 4.20 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House was suspended at 3.19 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.29 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that I am delighted to invite the first female chairperson during this session to present her report.

4.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Ms Winifred Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Articles 90 and 155 of the Constitution and provisions 133 and 166 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates the committee, amongst other things, to examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under its jurisdiction and discuss and review the government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them. 

In line with this mandate, I now have the honour and pleasure of presenting, for your consideration and adoption, the report of the Committee on Natural Resources in respect to the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the Fiscal Year 2008/2009 covering the following votes: Vote 017, Energy and Mineral Development; Vote 019, Water and Environment; Vote 150, National Environment Management Authority; Vote 157, National Forestry Authority. 

The procedure that was used is as follows: we formally invited the respective ministers to present their policy statements. We analysed the statements together with relevant materials regarding the sectors, that is, the policies, laws, regulations and write-ups. We raised questions on the policy statements for clarification by the ministers and we held meetings with autonomous bodies that take policy guidelines from the ministries.

The committee’s report highlights the following aspects: sector mission, the performance of the previous budget, the achievements in the sector of the Financial Year 2007/2008, planned activities, projects and programmes for the Financial Year 2008-2009, funds requested from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to implement the planned activities and also the committee’s observations and recommendations.

I now have the privilege of presenting to this House the committee report. 

Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 
The mandate is as stated on page 3 of the report and the structure of the ministry is as follows: it is politically headed by a senior minister and two ministers of state. The ministry consists of one technical directorate made up of four departments namely:
i) 	Energy Resources
ii) 	Petroleum Supplies
iii) 	Petroleum Exploration and Production; and 
iv) 	The Geological Survey and Mines. 

These are supported by the Finance and Administration Department and others as you can see on page 3. 

The ministry supervises five autonomous bodies and these are:

1. 	The Uganda Electricity Generation Company
2. 	The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited
3. 	Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited 
4. 	Rural Electrification Agency 
5. 	Kilembe Mines. 

We also have the Electricity Regulatory Authority, though it is legally independent in its operations. It takes into consideration policy guidelines issued by the minister in managing the electricity industry. 

The major priorities of this ministry were:

1.	To put in place and implement policies and legislation, which enable the acquisition of skills, technology and flow of capital in the energy and mineral sector.
2.	To increase electricity generation capacity. 
3.	To increase access to modern energy services through rural electrification and development of renewable energy.
4.	To promote efficiency in energy utilisation. 
5.	To conduct petroleum exploration and development in order to achieve local production.
6.	To ensure competition and security in the supply of petroleum products; and 
7.	Acquisition of geological data for attracting investments. 

In the Financial Year 2007/2008, the overall budget performance of the ministry was at 97 percent. This was due to the underperformance of the wage component which was at 76 percent. The non-wage component over performed at 113 percent. This was due to a supplementary expenditure of Shs 1.165 billion Government of Uganda counterpart funding for domestic development which performed at 97 percent.

There were key planned activities for the financial year 2007/2008 and they are on page 5. I hope you had already come across them as we discussed in the last financial year.

Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about some achievements of the sector. In 2007/2009, some of the achievements included:

1. 	The policy formulation 
i) 	We got the Renewable Energy Policy for Uganda put in place.
ii) 	The Atomic Energy Act, 2008.
iii) 	The Energy Fund, which came out as an instrument drawn by the Ministry of Finance from the Finance Act, Section 9.
iv) 	The National Oil and Gas Policy was also approved by Cabinet in January 2008. 

2. 	Another achievement was increased electricity generation capacity and promoted efficiency in energy utilisation. 
3. 	On page 7, the third achievement was the access to modern energy and rural electrification and the different issues that were achieved are underlined there. 
4. 	There was also the Petroleum Department, which achieved several issues such as: 12 new companies were issued a petroleum operating licence; and the rest can be read on page 8 up to page 9.

Madam Speaker, I will talk about the proposed activities for the financial year 2008/2009: 

1.	To supervise and monitor the construction works at Bujagali power project. 
2.	Package construction works for Karuma Hydropower project.
3.	Supervise and monitor construction works for small power projects.
4.	Supervise and monitor the development of rural electrification schemes to district headquarters, community and agricultural rural electrification schemes. 
5.	Supervise atomic energy programmes.
6.	Monitor and regulate the work of oil companies licensed to undertake petroleum exploration and development.
7.	Build and improve capacity for manpower required for petroleum exploration.
8.	Promote regional cooperation in the upstream sub-sector.
9.	Improve petroleum product distribution.
10.	Provide insurance coverage for Jinja storage tanks.
11.	Establish, evaluate and disseminate geo information on the mineral potential of the country.
12.	Promote and monitor mineral exploration, development and production by the private sector.
13.	Implement the 250 Megawatt Bujagali Hydropower project.
14.	Implement the Karuma Hydropower project.
15.	Implement the Isimba Hydropower project.
16.	Develop power sector investment plan.
17.	Build an improved capacity for infrastructure required for petroleum exploration and development.
18.	Implement the Early Production Scheme.
19.	Commence the creation of new institutions as provided for in the National Oil and Gas policy; and
20.	The construction of the laboratory and office blocks. Below, there is the budget provision for that.

We shall continue with the committee observations on page 10. The committee made several observations and it is important to note that we met the ministers responsible and the autonomous bodies and discussed these observations with them. You will allow me to mention some, though I may not have to read all the observations that we made. They run from page 10 to 12 and 13 are the recommendations. 

One of the observations that was made is that the cost- benefit analysis of the balkanisation of the former UEB is yet to be realised as there are still increased power losses and higher electricity tariffs. 

There was an increase in power losses from 32 percent in 2006 to 35 percent currently. The government continues to invest in thermal power inspite of its costliness instead of exploring into renewable power sources. 

Power tariffs are still very high and hence not affordable inspite of the government subsidy of Shs 11 billion per month on power.

Government policies do not promote small local private investors in power generation and institutional support is still very low. 

Banking institutions are not willing to finance the energy sector and this discourages investors, especially local investors. 

The staffing levels at UEGCL are inadequate and they have to rely on outsourcing which is costly. 

The appalling conditions on the bridge of Nalubaale power station need urgent attention and repairs.

The committee further noted that Bujagali Hydropower project costs are so high at approximately US$ 799 million for the total project cost as compared to other regions. 

The committee noted the delay in the construction of Karuma Hydropower project. 

The committee further noted the low coverage of rural electrification at five percent and the non commitment to cheap options of other generation mixes.

Concerns were raised about the status of the Jinja petroleum tanks. 

Concern was further raised over the status of the mineral prospects in the country. 

The committee observed a raw performance of rights of power coverage which stands at 10 percent for national electrification and 5 percent for the rural coverage. 

The committee noted that the terms of reference of the escrow account were unclear.

The committee is still concerned at the unresolved issue of Amber House, which is being occupied and rented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in spite of the fact that it is government-owned. 

The committee noted that there is limited access to development finance in the energy sector due to lack of relevant policies. 

The committee noted that there were no budgetary provisions for the feasibility studies of the Muyembe and Esia Mini Hydropower project. 

The committee was concerned that in this financial year, no funds were allocated towards fluorescent bulbs.   

•	The committee noted the need for government to carry out frequent energy audits.
•	The committee was also concerned that Bujagali power project was not employing Ugandans on a large scale as previously thought. 
•	The committee was concerned about the conflict arising from Busoga and Buganda over the entitlements of royalties when the Bujagali hydro power project gets underway.
•	The essence of the Lugogo thermal power plant which is producing only 50 MW and yet so costly.
•	The committee raised concern over why Karuma construction lines have to feed through the national grid at Kawanda transmission plant first.
•	Concern was raised as to why funds allocated for rural electrification were reallocated in the previous 2007/08 financial year’s budget.
•	The committee was concerned about the criteria used for selecting personnel for training in petroleum exploration, development and production. 

The recommendations

i.	Funds allocated for rural electrification should be used for that specific purpose and not diverted as in the previous financial year. 
ii.	Ministries should plan for other sources of funds for rural electrification instead of depending on government releases annually.
iii.	UMEME should introduce the prepaid billing system as this may help in curtailing the escalating power losses.
iv.	Government should review the terms of reference of the ESCROW account and in particular the UMEME agreement.
v.	Deductions of funds for defaulting government ministries and departments in electricity bills should be deducted at source from their budget by the Ministry of Finance instead of UMEME withdrawing from the ESCROW account. 

vi.	The Electricity Regulatory Authority should encourage and promote local private investors in the energy sector.
vii.	The Electricity Regulatory Authority should make regulations in regard to way leaves as stipulated in the Electricity Act Section 15 (1)(c).
viii.	Government should invest and encourage more investment in renewable energy sources and not limited to hydropower generation which is increasingly being affected by unpredictable climatic changes. 
ix.	The Electricity Regulatory Authority should look into prospects of waste energy resources considering that the city and the municipalities are littered with solid waste.
x.	There is need for policy reviews to empower the electricity organs which were rendered powerless by the balkanisation of the former UEB.
xi.	Government should boost institutional linkages and strengthen the institutional framework to loosen bureaucracy in order to allow more private investors.
xii.	Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited should take the advice of the Auditor-General and employ relevant staff instead of outsourcing which is costly.
xiii.	Government should prioritise repair on the Nalubaale Bridge.
xiv.	The contract between UMEME and government should be reviewed.
xv.	The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited should be given the leverage to invest.
xvi.	Linkages between government ministries should be strengthened as most of them are interlinked. For instance, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Works, Energy, Mineral Development, Water and Environment.
xvii.	The government should put in place the relevant policies in the energy sector in order to increase the access to development finances.
xviii.	Government should come up with policies for preventing oil resources and spearhead the adoption of an open oil policy which clearly spells out benefits for all and step up information dissemination on oil.
xix.	The ministry should make budgetary provisions for the feasibility study of the Muyembe and Esia Mini hydropower projects.
xx.	The ministry should work towards phasing out diesel thermal plants for cheaper renewable energy sources.
xxi.	Government should explore the possibility of a multipurpose hydro generation project.
xxii.	Government should be advised to explore options of local private/public partnership in the energy sector.

The budget for the ministry as will need to be approved is as shown there underneath.

Now, Madam Speaker, allow me to go to Vote 109. This is Ministry of Water and Environment. 

The mission of the ministry is as stated on page 16. The structure of the ministry is clearly put and also the other three autonomous bodies that we look at, that is, National Water and Sewerage Corporation, National Environment Management Authority and National Forestry Authority.

The budget performance starts from page 16 to page 18. Overall, the budget for the Ministry of Water and Environment performed at 94 percent. This was due to underperformance of the wage component which was at 81 percent. However, the non-wage component performed at 100 percent.

On page 17, we look at the key planned activities for the financial year 2007/08. I am sure we went through all those and then also the achievements. I will briefly talk about the achievements:-

i.	They provided sustainable rural water sanitation facilities.
ii.	Viable urban water supply and sewerage/sanitation systems were improved.
iii.	Effective use of water for production facilities provided.
iv.	Sensitisation on integrated and sustainable water resource management throughout the country was carried out.
v.	Effective planning, coordination and management mechanisms for the water and sanitation sector was provided.
vi.	There was improved productivity of the natural resource base.
vii.	Integration of environment concerns/issues at national and local government levels.
viii.	Increased access to environmental education, information and public education.
ix.	Strengthened the institutional capacity of NEMA to perform its mandate.
x.	Enhanced the national, regional and international partnerships.
xi.	Empowered communities to sustainably harness natural resources.
xii.	Reviewed the national wetland policies, among others.

We did not write all of them.

On page 18, there are the pending or ongoing activities and programmes of the previous year. Most of these have been carried into this year. 

Page 19, we look at the planned and proposed activities for the financial year 2008/09:- 
i.	In this financial year, we are going to carry out inspection and visits in 70 districts.
ii.	Review the forest policy and finalise the forest regulations.
iii.	Review the various policies and regulations under environment and natural resources.
iv.	Set standards and guidelines under environment and natural resources.
v.	Review and consolidate the water and sanitation sector investment plan.
vi.	Build a new office block for the ministry.
vii.	Revise gender and HIV strategies for dissemination and implementation at the centre, districts and local government.
viii.	Train 80 staff from district local governments and the centre.
ix.	Disseminate messages on water and sanitation.
x.	Ensure effective coordination and adherence to the implementation of the environment and natural resources and sector investment plan.
xi.	Develop project proposals to mobilise resources for implementation of the environment and natural resources sector investment planned priorities and also carry out several development programmes as indicated in the policy statement that was availed to each one of us.

Then, below we have the budget provisions for that.

Vote 150, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)

Its mandate is clearly stated on page 21. The major priorities are also stated on page 21 and the achievements of the sector during the financial year 2007/08 are also stated:- 

i.	Compliance and enforcement according to the three points that I have put there. 
ii.	Integration of the environment concerns/issues at national and local government levels.

iii.	Increasing access to environmental education, information and public education. 
iv.	Strengthening institutional capacity of NEMA to perform its mandate.

Then, the proposed activities include the following on page 23:-

i.	To enhance environmental compliance and enforcement through environmental inspection, audits, monitoring and environmental impact assessment.
ii.	Establish institutional and regulatory frameworks for the oil and gas sub sector and establishment of environmental sensitivity atlas for the Albertine graben.
iii.	The management of solid wastes in urban areas.
iv.	Increase restoration of fragile eco-systems, wetlands, river banks and lakeshores.
v.	Identify ecologically sensitive eco-systems for strict protection.
vi.	 Increase support to districts to enhance environmental compliance.
vii.	Increase public education for stakeholders’ participation in environment compliance and enforcement.
viii.	Enhance policy planning review and integration at central government and local government levels.
ix.	Build the capacity for environmental planning, monitoring and management with partners, central government agencies, institutions, civil societies, private sector, districts and community.
x.	Promote environmental education awareness and enhance access to environmental management information.
xi.	Enhance national regional and international networking for effective environmental management.
xii.	Improve on the NEMA internal management systems for effective service delivery with NEMA and its clients.

The observations and recommendations are combined with those of the National Forest Authority, but below we have budgetary provisions for that sector. 

Vote 157, National Forestry Authority.
The mandate and the mission of the National Forest Authority is to manage the 506 central reserve forests covering over 1.8 million hectares and to contribute to a sufficiently forested, ecologically stable and economically prosperous Uganda respectively. 

So, the key planned activities are on page 25:

i.	To maintain the 5,000 hectares of forest plantations.
ii.	100 percent of forest reserves will be managed according to the approved FMPs to guide and the investment needed in the forest estate.
iii.	 Over 1,124 kilometres of forest boundary will be resurveyed, reopened and boundary marks established. 
iv.	At least 100,000 cubic metres of round wood will be assessed and demarcated in felling coupes in various plantations and licences to private saw millers through competitive biding process.
v.	600 kilometres of conifer seeds will be imported from Australia, South Africa and Brazil.
vi.	2,050,000 seedlings will be produced for NFA planting and the private sector at the national seed tree centre.
vii.	3,500 kilogrammes of locally collected seeds of various species will be procured.

Then the pending activities are mainly Northern Uganda Forestry Development, and the details are mentioned there on page 25 at the bottom. There will also be boundary opening as an activity on page 26. They will establish regional tree nurseries and their budgetary provision is also shown on page 26.

Committee observations

The committee made the following observations

i.	The committee expressed concern over the long outstanding problem of poor sanitation in the country and wanted to know what strategy the ministry was going to use to rectify the situation.
ii.	A concern was raised over the status of rain water and underground water harvesting.
iii.	The committee noted that it was prudent that the Ministry of Water and Environment to bring on board other sectors and ministries.
iv.	Concern was further raised over the increase spread of Hepatitis E in the districts of Northern Uganda and the ministry’s plans in helping in its reduction as it accrues to poor sanitation.
v.	The committee noted the ministry’s continued reluctance in the facilitation of the meteorological department. 
vi.	The committee further noted with concern the gross mismanagement of funds in the water departments in most districts.
vii.	The committee noted that the Mabira forest issue was not yet resolved.
viii.	The committee also noted that government decisions on forests were paramount to disempowering the National Forest Authority.
ix.	Concern was raised over the ministry’s plans for alternative sources of water designs other than drilling boreholes especially in water stressed areas. 
x.	The committee noted that polythene bags that were banned were still in circulation.
xi.	The committee noted that there was a high rate of deforestation in the country and wondered what the government plans were to restore these forests.
xii.	 The committee noted the high rate of timber deficiency in the country and wanted to know whether there was any other tree planting days outside the official designated days.
xiii.	The committee noted that drilling boreholes is not viable in areas where water is scarce, given that water levels fluctuate frequently and the level of borehole breakdown is high and repairs costly.
xiv.	The committee observed lack of plans for water stressed areas.
xv.	The committee raised concern over the high rate at which wetlands were being reclaimed around the country.
xvi.	Concern was raised over the high rate of pollution and occupational safety issues in Tororo and Hima Cement industries. 
xvii.	Concern was further raised into how NEMA can integrate their sectors and government agencies in the management of the environment.
xviii.	Concern was raised over the role that NEMA plays to ensure that the Peace, Recovery and Development Programme (PRDP) addresses the management of fragile ecosystems in the IDP camps in northern Uganda.

The recommendations that the committee made were as follows on page 28:

i.	The ministry should encourage water shade management in dry areas.
ii.	Government should prioritise the issue of enforcement on the ban of the polythene bags.
iii.	 The National Forestry Authority should through government vigorously promote access and availability of affordable seedlings for afforestation projects and programmes as an affirmative action.
iv.	The Ministry of Water and Environment should work closely with the Ministry Of Energy over the usage of water for energy.
v.	The Ministry of Water and Environment should adopt a more comprehensive strategy to source for more funds in the sector.
vi.	Water stressed areas should be prioritised by the ministry.
vii.	The committee retaliates its last year’s recommendation that VAT be exempt from water in order to make it affordable.  
viii.	The ministry should involve the community in the core management of wetlands in order to safeguard them from unscrupulous investors.  
ix.	Government should promote the development of bio-fuels since they are substitutes for diesel and would add to the meagre incomes of farmers. 
x.	NEMA should explore the options of placing caveats on the wetlands to avoid their reclamation by unscrupulous business people.  
xi.	NEMA should make an on-sight inspection of Tororo and Hima cement industries.  
xii.	NEMA should encourage other sectors and government agencies into management of the forestry.  

Madam Speaker, the detailed budgets of the Ministry of water, NEMA and National Forestry Authority are as shown on pages 30 and 31.
  
Madam Speaker, the Committee on Natural Resources commends the work performed by the two ministries under their jurisdictions and I recommend that this report and the budget of the following votes be adopted: 

Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Minerals

Recurrent budget, Shs 5,665,704,000;
Development budget, Shs 539,352,662,000.
  
The Ministry of Water and Environment. 
Recurrent budget estimates at Shs 7,065,414,000; 
Development budget, Shs 101,853,710,000. 

Vote 150 - NEMA 
Recurrent budget estimates, Shs 4,398,921,000;
Development estimates, Shs 1,130,000,000. 

Votes 157 - National Forestry Authority 
Recurrent budget, Shs 200, 000,000 and nothing for development budget.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. (Applause)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Can we have the shadow minister’s response?

5.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  I rise on behalf of the Opposition to give a very brief response to the report of the committee on the 2008/09 ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for ministries of Energy and Mineral Development and of Water and Environment and the associated autonomous bodies.  

The appropriate shadow ministers, hon. Ali Kasigwa and hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar are unfortunately not here, but I convey their apologies to the House.

Hon. Members, I have to thank the committee. I got this report and when I knew I was going to respond I had to go through it very quickly. But I thank them for a report that is basically very well done. (Applause)  

I would like, however, to point out two basic things, which created a lot of confusion for me and I believe also for many Members. If you look at the title of the report, you realise that it reads thus: “The Natural Resources Committee on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2008/09.” So, if you found it lying there, you would almost miss it not knowing it is about the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and Ministry of Water and Environment. It would help a lot if the title on the front carried the ministries involved because that allows people to quickly grasp its content.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I got confused on two things. The committee in numbering sequentially, their consideration of last year’s and this year’s issue almost comes together, for example in 7. I said, am I reading the same thing? And when you go at the end and look at the recommendations - I kind of picked out NEMA, which stood out easily.  I wish the recommendations came under the different votes. This would allow us to weigh the recommendations and observations against what is budgeted for. It makes consideration much easier.

Having said that, let me just raise a few issues on the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We appreciate the work being done on mineral mapping, oil exploration and development, and the development of hydro-power stations.  

We however, seek clarifications on the following: First, on rural electrification. We note, on page 8, the extension of electricity to Kanungu and other places and with specific reference to this power supplying the tea estates.  

Madam Speaker, I recently received a complaint from a senior citizen of Kanungu, Mr James Musinguzi.  He said that sometime ago, on his own accord, established electricity supply for Kihihi town and supplied it to everybody regardless of their political affiliation. It now turns out that, this power supply to Kanungu bypassed Mr James Musinguzi’s tea factory and then he has major tourism investments and he has not been able to tap into this power supply. He is a citizen who is not able to speak for himself here in the House and therefore I would like the minister concerned to clarify on this complaint because of the nature of the investment in the place. 

Secondly, on page 11, the committee were worried about the cost of Bujagali hydro power project which they quoted at the cost of $799 million. As we pointed out in our response to the Presidents State of the Nation Address, we are very aware that since the commencement of the project, there is escalation in commodity prices which obviously must have a bearing on the final cost of Bujagali. Could the minister let us know whether this escalation in commodity prices has affected the cost of Bujagali and if so what is the projected variation over and above what has been estimated.

And because of these difficulties, I am sure that the initial financial estimation was also based on the initial estimated cost and therefore the cost of mobilising additional funds would also affect the duration of the project. Could the minister tell us whether Bujagali would still be on schedule and if not, for how long will the delay be.

I would also like to refer to their committee report that makes reference to mini-hydro electricity sites for development; and they mentioned many sites. I would like to ask the minister – and I raised this matter when we were in the Committee on National Economy with the Government Chief Whip. Aruu Falls, which is at the centre of Agago and Aswa River in Pader Districts, was one of the sites that Amini had actually initiated to develop. My question is, why is Aruu Falls not being mentioned at all, whether in consideration or in the process of development given that a dam in that place –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The late Idi Amini himself physically went to Aruu Falls. And now that we are talking about Aruu Falls, I wonder if any of the ministers responsible even know where Aruu Falls is. (Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Okello-Okello. I am very certain that hon. D’Ujanga knows where Aruu Falls is because we were in Sir Samuel Baker together with him in Gulu –(Laughter) – so I am just asking. Aruu-Aswa River does not only have the potential for power development, but also irrigation development because we have large expanse of land in that place and therefore damming for hydro electricity would also help in development irrigation for that area.

The other matter that the committee raised was the Karuma power line evacuation. They were wondering why the power from the Karuma should be connected to the national grid in Kawanda, just outside Kampala. I am aware that government is developing the power plants in Hoima and it may be the argument for that. But I also know that a major station intended to supply not only the North but in the long term planning of the sixties, to supply of also the Sudan and the Congo is Lira. And Lira is far nearer to Karuma. Why would the government plan on taking the  power from Karuma and evacuating it to Kawanda before it is distributed when it could take it to Lira and cut on some many other things including loss on the grid etcetera.

The last one on energy is that over the last two years, the President made reference to construction of Ayago Hydro power extension with its over 450 mega watts potential. In fact, it was even stated that an Indian company, or an Asian company, was willing to develop this power station. In this report, Ayago Power Station has disappeared. Could the minister tell us what has happened and what your plans on this are? 

Turning to the Ministry of Water and Environment, I first of all thank my two sisters here for the work they are doing. And I would like in particular to thank NEMA and the National Forest Authority for the work that they are doing, being a professional close to their field, I appreciate the challenges they face. I have just also looked at their budget and I appreciate the circumstances under which they work. I just have few questions. 

The first is on page 18. On section 4.22, you have a list of sites for construction of water supply systems in rural centres. Madam Speaker, when you look at the list of those names, some times you get worried when such projects come and they are considered nationally. I know for a fact that one of the presidential pledges was for the water supply to be extended to Palabek in Kitgum District and Patong in Agago County, Padre District and I remember Mr Ngoma Ngime one time wrote to us to submit to him the Presidential pledges in our areas.

Each time I go to Patongo, they look at me – you know, the problem I have is that I come from Kalongo. And Patongo and Kalongo are like twins. And in our culture, if you buy a shirt for one of the twins and you do not buy for the other, they will twist your neck. So, I constantly have to suffer from the pain of a twisted neck because I cannot account for one of the twins. Can the minister tell us what is going on with these presidential pledges?

And secondly, Kalongo as a rural growth centre has just been made a town council. The water supply system was designed and then the issue of building the water supply just disappeared. I therefore get concerned when you have this list and you do not have any commitment or assurance that something will be done in other places. It does not reflect on our nationalism sometimes.  

On the National Forestry Authority, Madam Speaker, the committee on page 27 noted that the Mabira forest issue was not yet resolved. It is very unfortunate because - hon. Beatrice Anywar is Mama Mabira, and would have articulated the Mabira concerns better than I can do. But could the minister please give us this unresolved position. What is going on? Should we prepare for another set of demonstrations -(Laughter)- or should we just relax and say - And I believe that the timing would be very good given that the police is under investigation; they may be more restrained and allow us to demonstrate. So, could the minister give us a position, particularly when the President in his State of the Nation Address actually said, “Do not worry about these other guys, we will sort out the matter.” Why this Mabira, Minister?

And lastly, there is something that I have repeatedly said about the two loans that we have had to deal with recently. And it is that we sit in Parliament and make recommendation for changes in projects, which then have no legal effect and they never get to be changed. There was this loan enhancement of farm productivity which created hell in the last Parliament. Ultimately, we had even insisted that all the money should be given for forestry development. They agreed to certain elements and they said, “Yeah, this money will be used for tree planting.” 

I looked at the development budget for National Forestry Authority, it is Shs 200 million. They have to deal with reforestation in the North, boundaries of forests and so many other things. Could the minister tell us the extent to which this particular project is helping her ministry and the National Forestry Authority to implement the recommendation that we as Parliament gave in respect to that loan? Otherwise, I thank you very much and wish to support the recommendation of the committee on the budget. (Applause)

5.23
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work done in this good report. But I have a few concerns. One of the major priorities of the Ministry of Energy is to increase access to modern energy services through rural electrification. But unfortunately, as the committee observed, it stood at five percent. I want to put a case here that since I came to Parliament in 2001, every time I get an opportunity to speak, I point out the rural electrification scheme for my sub-county called Busana; a power line from Kayunga town to Nabuganyi, where the ferry which has been procured is going –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been procured?

MS NYOMBI: The ferry has been procured but now the power line going there –(Laughter)- What has been procured is a ferry, that is Ministry of Works. Now, Madam Speaker, they should not confuse you because we share this with you; the power line; the rural electrification – the ministers know. I see them nodding their heads but I think I have really said this over and over again and I am getting – you know, 2011 is coming closer. What am I going to tell my people of Busana this time round? (Laughter) I strongly agree with the committee when they observe that there is really low coverage in rural electrification. 

Secondly, the funds of last financial year were diverted. It is my humble plea and request, hon. Migereko, do not divert the funds for rural electrification this time because I need to assure my people that before 2011 that power line of Busana will be there, please hon. Minister.

Secondly, I agree with the committee when they say the Umeme contract with government should be reviewed. What goes on in Umeme is a nightmare. You know, you apply for a new line for your house, then they give you 30 days, which turn into 60 days; then it goes on and on. What is happening? I think government should have a hand –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Sarah Nyombi and Madam Speaker. I want to inform honourable members that it is not only 60 days. If you apply for inspection, it takes three months. And if you apply for a pole, it takes six months and onwards, even after paying for it. So, the situation is not actually good, it is worse.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, my dear sister. You know it is really pathetic, Madam Speaker. Now that that information has been given I will leave it at that.  

Madam Speaker, when you look at the Ministry of Water and Environment, it has done a good job, but there is a clarification that I am seeking. The inspection visits are going to be done in 70 districts yet we have 80 districts. Instead of giving us the list of 70 districts where the inspection will be done, I wish they would give us the 10 districts where inspection will not be done so that we know whether Kayunga is not part of them.

Lastly, NEMA. Madam Speaker, I have seen a number of wetlands where certain people, maybe strong or weak people, take trucks of murram and use it to fill up the swamps. Where is NEMA, and its environmental impact assessment at this time before buildings crop up? I thought that it is the mandate of NEMA to go on supervising all wetlands in our country. But this is happening and the wetlands are being eaten away and houses crop up and we get floods here because water carriages are being blocked. So, I wish NEMA and the Ministry of Water and Environment, could follow up and supervise buildings as they fill up our wetlands. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.28
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the committee for the good job they have done and I want to concur with them on a number of recommendations that they have made. 

On page 14 the committee recommends that there should be linkages between government ministries and they give the example of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Works, Energy, Mineral Development, Water and Environment. I would like to add that there ought to be linkages between these ministries and the Ministry of Education because one of the problems that we are facing in this country is lack of consciousness of the population in waste disposal. 

Last year around the time of CHOGM this country witnessed an unprecedented level of cleanness in Kampala. And all of us were very proud that our country because we had a very clean city but I am afraid that we seem to have forgotten. I think Ugandans believe that cleanness is for outsiders only and not for ourselves. And, therefore, I think the Ministry of Education - right from the word go - ought to teach our children and we as parents also ought to instill a culture of seriousness so that we do not grow up throwing things anywhere and anyhow. And the worst part of it is to observe a gentleman or a lady in a beautiful Land Cruiser or Pajero throwing things through the window as the vehicle travels along the road. I really think it is a great shame! So, we should really strive to inculcate this culture of keeping our environment clean into our children right from the word go. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to agree with the committee on page 28 where they observed that there is a lack of plans for water stressed areas. I do not know when as a country we are going to seriously tackle the question of the challenges we are facing today of climate change? Hon. Members, we are living in a time when we are faced with challenges. The pattern of rain in this country has changed and changed drastically. We are having a situation where we are getting rain but which is falling furiously and really destroying things. 

Right now as I am talking I am sure the Leader of the Opposition will agree with me since both of us have just come back from Amuru looking at our farms -(Interjections)- what is happening there -(Interjections)- yes, the Leader of the Opposition is doing wonderful farming in Amuru and I am glad he is doing so and I am also glad that nobody is saying that he is stealing land; I am very happy about that. 

So, both of us will agree that there is a lot of rain right now up there and it is raining so much at this time and I am worried that come the beginning of the second season, which is usually around September/October, the rain may not be there. But the question is: who has prepared the farmers?  Who has prepared the women who are the greater people who cultivate food to cope with this change? 

Our people are still depending on the old pattern of rain. They know that you start planting at such a time and you harvest at another, yet the rain patterns have changed. So I am asking: how are we preparing our population to adjust? Not only that but also when we get plenty of rain, it falls and runs wasted  –(Member timed out)

5.34
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the report and thank the Members for the report that has been presented to us. 

I would first of all like to comment on the report in respect of the Ministry of Water and Environment. I would like to thank and recognise the staff of the ministry particularly the engineers for the way they attend to us, their clients which is in great contrast to several other government ministries. (Applause) I recognise that and thank them and I hope the ministers convey our regards and gratitude to their staff members. 

Having said that, I just have a few comments to make: one is on the matter of water provided to small towns and also to rural areas for which funding has been secured to provide water and the users are supposed to finance the water sources. Many of these potential users are in need; they need safe water but unfortunately you find that on a number of occasions they are not able to afford the water sources. You find in some cases that the cost of land for water sources runs into hundreds of millions and it is very difficult to mobilise that type of money to help these communities to access this water. Is it, therefore, possible that the ministry or government may look into the possibility of funding even the water source because it does not make a lot of sense to budget and get money to provide water when you cannot get the water sources to have this water running to users?  

Anther matter is that of safe water for rural communities. While efforts are being made to provide more water to people, I want to report that also at a similar speed many of the water sources that we have secured are actually running out of use. Many shallow wells that were made are out of use; many boreholes are in a state of disrepair; and from my own experience, we have made appeals and the districts tell us that they do not have enough money to repair the boreholes. Is it not, therefore, useful that you should go down and make a census of the water sources and boreholes that you have made available and also how you can have them in use so that you do not run and make progress ahead by making more water available but at the same time losing the capacity that you have previously created?

For energy, I think the matter of UMEME has been put clearly by hon. Nyombi. I think the minister should look very seriously into the way UMEME handles its work. I have personally written a complaint. You pay; they disconnect you. They actually disconnect users and the people who do not pay are the people using power. They go around - you are telling us about the losses that are incurred but, Mr Minister, I want to inform you that actually part of the losses are encouraged by the employees of UMEME. If they find you paying your bills, they will even come and approach you and ask you how they can help you to pay less by making illegal connections. And at the end of the day, it is us the users of power that pay for those losses.

Another thing is the matter of connecting LC III headquarters to power. We are aware that with decentralization, a number of responsibilities have been delegated to LC III governments. But many of them do not have power. In fact if we are talking of Bonna Bagaggawale, we are supposed to have in place an information management system  –(Member timed out)

5.39
MR HENRY BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this debate. I also want to thank the committee for having done a very good job, covering many issues that really concerned the people that we represent. I have some issues that I would like to talk about and particularly to the Minister of Water and Environment. Most of Mayuge District is surrounded by water and areas that are surrounded by Lake Victoria are water stressed. All the efforts made to drill boreholes along the lake line have been futile and our people have gone ahead to use and consume water directly from the lake, which is not treated. When you go to health facilities, most of the diseases that our people are suffering from are waterborne diseases. 

We want to thank the ministry for laying a line from Jinja to Iganga. We are requesting the ministry to consider giving Mayuge District piped water because I think it is easy to cover the water stressed areas in Mayuge.

Secondly, the committee observed the high rate at which trees are being cut down. I want to give an example in Busoga region, I do not know when they were designing the project for BIDCO - BIDCO has become a problem in Busoga. Everyday I think BIDCO is buying over 200 truck loads of wood and people are cutting down every kind of tree that comes their way and it is a mess! They are going for the coffee husks, rice husks, and they are competing with farmers who use the coffee husks for mulch and now the trees. Why don’t they use electricity? It is really terrible.

On the issue of encroachment, my colleague hon. Nyombi talked about encroachment on the wetland areas. I want to give an example: the area opposite Spear Motors. It is clearly a wetland but when you pass there right now, it is being filled by murram. We do not know what is taking place right at their nose and they are seeing this. It is painful.

On the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, UMEME like my colleagues have said, has become a menace. The committee has noted that they bought energy saving bulbs and distributed them and the power consumption went down. But in Mayuge people who managed to buy their own energy saving bulbs, when UMEME comes and discovers that the previous month the bill was higher than the current month as a result of energy savers, they just cut off the power, call these people and give them a heavy fine. So we do not know whether UMEME is interested in people using energy savers or not. It is a real concern.

Then UMEME has gone ahead to centralise its offices in the whole of Busoga region. You have to go to Jinja because all the other offices in Kamuli, Iganga, Kaliro were closed down. What is the essence? Was this part of the agreement? You have to walk distances to get the services. It is painful. Is it a problem for our people to get power?

Lastly, the people of Mayuge are in pain. The government and all of us are proud that Kakira sugar works is co-generating electricity and posting 12 MW on the national grid -(Member timed out)

5.45
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to register general appreciation of the institutions under consideration that actually these institutions are very important, dealing with a public good and I think all of them are performing very excellently. Thank you very much, the ministries and departments that are involved. 

Let me refer to the observations made by the committee especially as far as balkanisation is concerned on page 10, that actually balkanisation has not helped UMEME to save. I think this is from common sense especially as far as economists are concerned that there are no economies of scale. That is why there are a lot of problems in pricing the electricity. And as a result the public is the one suffering with payment of very high costs and pieces of electricity used. 

Therefore, I would like to make a general appeal to government that balkanisation has not happened in energy only but many institutions have been broken down into small institutions and as a result a lot of administrative costs are created, there are a lot of needs for facilities to be used like housing, motor vehicles and a lot of things are needed because of breaking the institutions into small groups. And I would like to make an appeal to government to think about this and look at the costs.

Let me also refer to the fuel prices. I want to get a clarification from the minister whether he has got a price range as far as fuel prices are concerned because the public is being cheated and meeting a lot of unnecessarily high costs. The price of fuel defers from petrol station to petrol station even if they are just next to each other. What brings about this variation in prices?

The other point is for the Ministry of Water concerning boreholes. Actually, I would like to call upon the minister at least to save some money for repairing boreholes. A lot of areas have boreholes but they are not working. People do not have access to water and I do not see in the budget money, which is reserved to train local artisans to repair these boreholes. I think we should target repairing boreholes rather than even setting up new sources of water. Let us first repair what we have. 

Another thing is about the banning of the polythene papers. This thing happened when I was not in the House but I could have stood up to oppose the banning because it was done irrationally and abruptly without having any cost analysis to see the effect it is having. The first question one could raise is whether Uganda has told all its trading partners not to use those polythene bags that come wrapping the imports we get. How are we going to destroy those ones? How are you going to tell them, “We have banned this”, and that they should not bring them into the country? 

That thing was done irrationally and I think that is why there has been an observation –(Interjections)- yes, I am saying this and although the East African region has gone ahead to say that, “We are banning”, we have not done enough research to see the effect where this ban can be implemented. I would like to stand strong on that, Madam Speaker.

Let me refer to NEMA. I would like to take a personal effort to thank the leadership of NEMA, their professional approach to management and whatever they have done. I cover a lot of their work on the lake and on off shore land  -(Member timed out)

5.50
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to respond to and make comments on this committee’s report. I want to thank the chair for the very good report and the ministers for their support. However, I want to make a few observations. 

This idea of rural electrification; I do not understand the concept. During the 2001 and 2006 presidential election campaigns when the President came to my place in Bubulo East, he said, “This place is dark and there is no power.” The next day, poles were being brought and fixed. Of course the people in our area have benefited, especially the young ones to know that these poles are supposed to transmit electricity. But the poles have been there since 2006. In Bugobero near the health centre IV, the poles just pass in front of it. They have put there wires and we have a theatre there but there is no power. Recently the President was there and he said, “This one is going to be done”, and we clapped because our President normally tells us what happens. 

At Lwakhakha, our side is unfortunate that we are neighbouring Kenya and sometimes our colleagues in ministries think we are in Kenya. The Kenyan side in Lwakhakha has electricity. For us in Uganda, we do not have electricity. I was sharing with the Minister of State for Energy and he was my colleague on the Committee of Natural Resources. I asked that, “If it is very hard to bring power from seven kilometres away, why don’t we tap from across Kenya”? We do not care where it comes from but we should also have power to be at the same standards with Kenyans. And our people know that this power comes from Uganda.

I thank the ministers of water; they are very friendly. When you go to the Ministry of Water, you are assured of very good reception at all levels and whenever you invite them to your constituency, they come. But we have a problem: In the colonial days the government constructed a pipeline of water from my constituency up to Tororo to provide water for the steam engines. And this remained operational until 1998 when we had the El Nino rains. During that time, the ordinary people were able to make connections and get water. During the El Nino rains, this place was blown away. 

If you look at our NRM campaign manifesto for 2001, that scheme was captured. Now when people die of Cholera because we drink water from Lwakhakha and Manafwa rivers, the ministers say, “No, it is because they eat faeces”. But we have to drink that water because it is the only source we have. If that scheme were captured, it would serve three districts plus Tororo. And the pipe is there. These colonialists who were not even pro-people were able to put there a pipeline -(Laughter)- but our own people cannot do it.

When you look at these policy statements, they are saying they are designing 25 systems for small towns. In my place they designed a scheme for the water in 2001 and then they made another one later and they have made another one now. The money spent on designing schemes for 25 small towns, 61 towns for monitoring if put together, can provide physical water for two towns. And even the towns are not mentioned here. There is something being hidden and in future you will not even able to know that this is what they promised and this is what has been done.

I was looking at the committee report on NEMA that it should visit Tororo Cement Industry. When I was a member on the Natural Resources Committee – hon. Dombo is around - we went to Tororo Cement Industry with the Executive Director of NEMA and we found people mixing cement with bare hands. And they told us that when they saw us coming, they tried to bring these things for covering the nose and they were not enough. Five years down the road, the committee is recommending that they should visit that place. But last time we went there and after five years the situation is the same.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the Leader of Opposition was talking about these mini, hydropower stations  –(Member timed out)

5.56
MRS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to others in thanking the chairperson for the detailed report. In the planned activities of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, there is a component of the early production scheme of petroleum and during the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech we were informed that by 2009, this country would be producing oil. I expected the committee to take note of this but they have not. 

As a representative from Bunyoro, I am concerned because we had to raise concerns in this House before we were consulted on the oil and gas policy. It was only after that that the minister came around consulting the stakeholders. As we speak, we are not informed when the law on petroleum is going to be produced before Parliament. May I know from the minister when this law is going to be brought?

Secondly on the National Forest Authority, the key planned activities for this financial year include re-surveying and re-opening of boundaries. My concern lies with those people who have been evicted by NFA yet they have been on this land for more than 30 years. I want to find out from the minister in charge since the NFA representatives cannot defend themselves here. What plans do you have for these people who were settled on this land before the boundaries were marked? Specifically I am talking about the people of Kasongoire in Masindi District. We also have the Ik from Karamoja who are in the forest reserve and when it was demarcated, these people were encircled within the Timu forest. What plans do you have for them? 

I want to thank the Ministry of Water for the work done. I would like to inform and find out from the minister whether they are aware that as regards the boreholes, which we are talking of repairing, there are some unscrupulous people and scrap dealers who have started venturing into borehole spare parts and are selling them to some factories here in Kampala. Are you aware that these unscrupulous people are there? I will give you a case in point. 

Over the weekend I had to ring the RDC Masindi and the Police after my people called to inform me that there was a certain van, which had loaded spare parts of one of the boreholes in my district onto a vehicle. I wanted to find out what mechanism you are planning to put in place to make sure that if such people are caught, they are made to pay heavy costs to deter others.

I want to add my voice to hon. Nyombi’s especially about UMEME. UMEME has become a menace and is discouraging and frustrating investors who want to invest on this country. This is because if it takes one six to eight months to get a pole installed on your site after paying all the costs, then people will end up not investing in this country. Although we are talking about investment, people are going to move away from investing in this country.

Hon. Minister, I remember consulting you. Can you inform this House about the mechanisms that you have in place to rectify this situation? I am not ashamed to say that when we had UEB, one would get power on their premises or factory within a month but now the privatisation scheme has turned into a disadvantage to investors. Can the minister help us and Ugandans and put our fears to rest by telling us what he intends to do to address this saga?

Lastly, I want to say that Bunyoro is happy that Karuma Hydro Power project is going to be started this year and we want to tell the ministry that when this hydro power plant is constructed, those areas around that region must be given the privilege to receive power. I am saying this  -(Member timed out)

6.02
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also join my colleagues to thank the committee for this good report. Arising from the report, I have a few concerns. When you look at page 11 of the report, No. 9 is talking about the condition of Nalubale Bridge. I have a concern over this bridge. You are well aware that I use this bridge because I also come from the far East. They have always said to this House that this bridge is going to be repaired. 

I am getting scared, Madam Speaker. When will this bridge be repaired because when you look at the Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance, he indicated that the Government of Japan was going to build a new Nile Bridge, but he is so reluctant! What about repairing the Nalubale Bridge? I want them to put the minister responsible to task to explain to us how urgently this can be done. 

In the report it is also indicated that there have been no feasibility studies on micro power project areas. I want to cite a case that is indicated: Miyembe. Miyembe River is quoted but there is no budgetary provision on this as well as many other rivers. Another example is in my districts of Kapchorwa-Bukwo and Sironko where we have great water falls, which if tapped would produce a lot of hydro power that can serve the communities around and even export some to Kenya. 

Hon. Wopuwa said he can import power from Kenya. I am also saying we can have an opportunity to export power to Kenya if these resources are harnessed. I want to know why the ministry has not budgeted for these micro river projects because I see across the country that there are other rivers that have been mentioned and -(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Those falls that you are talking about are very far from this side so they cannot be seen.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Mr Wopuwa but I don’t think that you are giving me a very good reason by saying that they are far and that does not account for why they have not been put in the budget. But I vividly guessed your concern.

The third issue is about the Rural Electrification Programme. You will realise that many people are going to talk about this and I do not want to pre-empt them. Even you, Madam Speaker know that this is a very big concern. I will talk of the concern particularly of my constituency. We have the national grid but there are health centres, sub-counties, community places and even agro-processing centres that need step-down transformers so as to add value to their crops. 

For example, I have a women’s group that solicited funding from the American Embassy. They constructed a very big maize mill but the maize mill can only be run by electricity. They need a step-down transformer, just one! Hon. Migereko, I just need one transformer for my return  –(Laughter)- just one transformer and I say this women’s group – the American embassy is even concerned because during the last five years, they constructed and gave us a mill but we have failed to get a step-down transformer. I am very sure, hon. Migereko that you will be able to give me that one transformer.

As regards the Ministry of Water and Environment, I am very grateful to the ministry because they have extended water to Kapchorwa Town. However, as I talk now, the work is at a standstill. On Monday I was in the district and the contractors are not doing any work. So maybe the honourable minister would be in position to explain why work has stalled and yet if they had continued we would now be opening taps for water courtesy of this programme that was given to us by the Ministry of Water.

Finally, I also have water stressed  –(Member timed out)

6.07
MRS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I also thank the Committee on Natural Resources for the good paper they have presented. However, I have three issues and they are all about the environment. One of them was raised and it concerns the banning of polythene papers. Unlike my colleague who said that polythene papers were banned irrationally, I beg to differ that they are not banned irrationally and it was the right thing for Parliament to do. However, the problem is that we are not enforcing the laws we make and neither are the administrators co-ordinating well with us to make policies, which can implement what we pass in Parliament.

On that matter, I appeal to the ministry concerned to make efforts to sensitise people because polythene bags are not good for us, they are not good for the future of our country, not good for our soils and not good for our towns. I would appeal to the ministry concerned to make a policy to sensitise the people and to enforce the law. 

I took a leaf from our neighbours in Rwanda. They banned polythene papers and were very serious about it. They protect their environment to the extent that if you soil a compound with your shoes, you are punished. Here people go around throwing polythene bags everywhere on the streets, in the gardens yet I think they can be disciplined. It is really a matter of discipline and I believe it is implementable because other countries have implemented it and Uganda may be left behind. 

Polythene papers cause a lot of dirt around. If you look at Nakivubo Channel and other parts of the city, polythene bags really degrade the environment. So the way forward I believe is to enforce discipline to ban polythene bags completely and if people insist on throwing them around, they should be dealt with by the law. I think we need to make a more serious law. 

Second is the issue of deforestation. Everywhere and in our view, people are building night and day in the wetlands. They are cutting forests everywhere and yet there is a Land Act and I believe it says that forests and wetlands do not belong to individuals, to the community and to the government. However, people have taken them individually, sold and bought them and the responsible organs of government are just looking on. Likewise, Parliament is also looking on as if we condone this and are pleased. 

When NEMA goes to take action - I remember I heard that in so many years they acted on only on one man, Mr Yakama and then what happened? Why have they left all the others? Is it corruption all over again? I think we have to find out and  –(Member timed out)

6.13
MS OLIVE WONEKHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Natural Resources for their report. I would also like to thank the Ministry of Water for providing water on the slopes of Mt Elgon in Bududa District. The women there are relieved but I only say: please, continue so that all the women on those hills are served with water because we have plenty of water that can be provided by gravity flow in those mountains.

On the issue of the Meteorological Department, for the last seven years I have been here, the Meteorological Department has never received attention in terms of funding and so what happens is that we have FM radios in this country and that take it upon themselves to predict the weather for us and we all know how they do it. Is this the way government is going to manage this particular issue? We know that there is climatic change and it is a big global issue. Really, are we just going to treat this matter the way we are? I think it is time the metrological department is given attention and the necessary resources to do their work.  

On Mabira Forest, the committee noted that the Mabira Forest issue was not yet resolved. We know very well in this country that where there is a gap in information, we have people who will quickly fill in that gap. We do not want to go into the chaos of demonstrations again. We would like government to tell us exactly what the status of Mabira Forest is right now.  

On polyethylene bags, one only has to look at the Nakivubo Channel when crossing that area; it is pathetic! It is terrible! When you look at the poor people who live in the slum areas of this country - what we see on TV is just a tip of the iceberg - they are faced with the issue of polyethylene bags. They use them because they are available. They are also used as mobile toilets; this you know. So, what does that mean? When there is a cholera outbreak, where does it start? In this city of Kampala - the only city of this country - is where the problem is most accentuated.  

When we come to deforestation, Mt. Elgon slopes are denuded of forests. So, what happens? Every time we have heavy rains like we are having them now, there are landslides. I do thank government for giving us relief every time we have landslides but I think we can do more to prevent those landslides by doing the right thing - aforestation. What plan does government have for us to see that not only the slopes of Mt. Elgon are afforested but wherever we need trees to be grown, they are grown? 

The budget for the National Forestry Authority is Shs 200 million. Members, let us be honest; we are asking for aforestation, is this the amount of money that this authority is going to use to attend to the demands that we are making? When landslides do take place on Mt. Elgon, it is not only the mudslides but you have riverbanks being swept away and there is a lot of soil erosion. What happens in a district like Butaleja is that they get floods - a lot of floods – and while the floods are on, they are really stressed. Of course when they subside, then they have a lot of fertile soils from the mountains but is this the way we are going to handle our affairs?

On the issue of seedlings, I would also like to add my voice to those who are for enabling the National Forestry Authority and the ministry concerned to provide seedlings for aforestation-(Member timed out)

6.18
MR ABOUD KITATTA (NRM, Bukoto County West, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of other members to thank the committee for the report. 

On page 28 of the report, the committee recommends that water-stressed areas should actually have a priority. As far as water-stressed areas are concerned, sometimes when there are programmes, these programmes are extended to districts but not specific water-stressed areas. My constituency, for example, lies within the cattle corridor yet my neighbouring districts - Lyantonde and Ssembabule - which also lie in the same area normally get special consideration and my constituency does not. 

We have a water source which is within the neighbourhood of Lyantonde District, and that is Bulimbaale Dam. I am sure the Minister of Water and Environment is fully conversant with that area, but that area is being shared by the district of Lyantonde and my district. In other words, areas like my constituency are not yet considered. So, I would like to request the minister to not only consider the districts but also some areas of that nature.  

Secondly, I have some hilly areas which do not benefit from valley dams or even from boreholes. Such areas can only benefit from water tanks but water tanks are rarely provided to such kind of areas. In my case, I have Busumbi and Bijaaba; those are hilly areas and you cannot actually drill a borehole nor can you have a valley dam in those areas. So how can such people benefit from their taxes as far as water is concerned?

I would like to talk about rural electrification. As far as rural electrification is concerned, we have some towns and those towns have some power lines passing by them. In my case, I have Kalekelo and there is another nearby town through which power lines pass. I would like to suggest that there be a special programme to provide transmitters to such towns so that people do not simply see power lines passing them by but they also benefit from those power lines.  

Lastly, I have an observation on tree planting. On page 25 of the report, the ministry is talking about providing so many seedlings, actually thousands and thousands of seedlings. I would like to suggest that probably the ministry could provide some seeds to Members of Parliament so that we can go and raise those seedlings ourselves in our constituencies. I figure that could be cheaper - (Applause) - and again it would be an easy way for our people to get some of these seedlings. I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.23
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report that has kept us on our toes. 

I would like to comment on the proposed activities for this year. Last financial year, the phosphate in Tororo was budgeted for. May I know right now whether this planned activity is going to take place because the same writing was there last year, that it was a planned activity for the last financial year? 

On UMEME, I also remember I stood here last year to condemn the cutting of wires and this cutting of wires has continued. They say UMEME is directly involved in these activities because they see the vehicles ferrying the wires away. 

I would like to agree with the recommendations, which the various sectors should take seriously, regarding the high cost of the project of Bujagali. This cost is high, if compared with other costs in the region, like the Merowe Dam in Northern Sudan which is supposed to generate 1,250 megawatts was cost at Shs 2 billion. This Shs 2 billion catered for an airport, it built a hospital, it was transmitting electricity, it had road networks and there was also compensation of the people who were concerned. Now, will this high cost of US$ 799 million also cater for similar activities in Uganda? That is what I want to know from the honourable minister. 

Another thing is about water. The water sector has done very well and I would like to commend them. (Applause) I remember last week we rejected a loan which was supposed to be for the Public Service and – (Interruptions) – No, there was a loan which was rejected, about US$ 57 million. This loan can be renegotiated so that it can work on the water. There are some areas which are water-stressed and we need affirmative action for water-stressed areas so that – (Ms Mugerwa rose_)

MS MUGERWA: Colleague, thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, the entire world is calling for free water for consumption because water is mainly used by women who are the managers of homes and do not have salaries. Water is a basic need and because of that, even the VAT which has been recommended to be removed from water should actually be encouraged and water should be accessed by almost everybody. I just wanted to give this information.

MR EBONG: Thank you for giving way. Unfortunately this year, the ceiling of the budget of the Ministry of Water has been reduced by half and yet water is life and 75 percent of disease infection in Uganda is essentially waterborne. So, a deliberate attempt to increase access to clean and safe drinking water would have also dealt with the health issues in this country. So, I support your idea for reallocating any loan to the water sector.

MS OBURU: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I would like to commend the work done by the water sector for considering water tanks for schools, which they use for water harvesting. If we use water tanks in schools, the water that would have gone through the drains is captured there and that helps them. Instead of digging boreholes, we have the water tanks. So, I would like to commend them for that and I want them to increase the availability of water tanks in schools especially because the children cannot compete with villagers when they go for water at the boreholes.

Regarding monitoring -(Member timed out)

6.29
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. Greetings from Kooki County (Laughter)

In the first place, I would like to thank the chairperson for this report. However, I am disappointed because for Kooki County, which is seriously water-stressed area, there is nothing mentioned about the bulk water pilot project. It is very unfortunate that my sister, the honourable Minister for State in charge of Water, is a representative of that area and it is not mentioned here. What do I tell the people of Kooki because we cannot even have boreholes in Kooki? The water is highly mineralised; there is just no way you can use that water. It is very unfortunate that I have got to put the minister at task yet we hail from the same area.

Two, Madam Speaker, Kooki County is a hilly area and the President mentioned or stipulated that we shall have aforestation for the bare hills in Uganda but the aforestation rate in Kooki is very minimal. I support my comrade, hon. Kitatta, for asking for seeds instead of waiting for seedlings from the ministry because they will never be enough and yet five years are just about to end. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I have got to mention this again; they will be going around getting titles for the forest reserves. Kooki happens to belong to that category and I am worried. Although we have been to that place with the minister and he has affirmed that the people there are not going to be destabilised, I would like to know from him how the ministry is going to handle it so that our people do not get disturbed.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development have mentioned exploration of petroleum and whatever, but nothing has been said about Kooki yet it has got one of the most industrial minerals called kaolin. I am worried about what to tell my people. Will I tell them that Kooki is not being considered yet it is endowed with natural resources? I would like the minister in charge of minerals to respond to that.

Madam Speaker, I would like to move to one very pertinent issue and that is the issue of electricity charges – UMEME. It is not a sweeping statement, but most of the Members of Parliament, including some ministers, do not use electricity for cooking because it is too expensive. So, if the ministers and MPs cannot afford to use electricity, who can? The result of this problem takes us to using charcoal, firewood and causing damage to the environment yet we are the leaders. What kind of example are we setting to the people we lead? We are actually destroying the environment.

Madam Speaker, I would like to move a word of thanks to the Rural Electrification Authority because it helped me to extend power to where I set up a small maize milling factory. However, I can assure you that the first bill that came was of Shs 5 million. When I complained, it was reduced only to Shs 2 million. These charges are not pro-prosperity for all. What are we doing if we cannot even implement the very theme of prosperity for all because electricity charges are too high?

6.35
MS FRANCA JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by commending, very highly, the honourable madam chairperson of the Committee of Natural Resources for the very good work done. This is one of the committee reports I have not yet seen in this House. This is my first time. Our work has been made so easy because they made their recommendations in line with what they really observed from the policy statement. So, I really highly commend you and your committee members for that.

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to start from page 11 of the committee’s observations where it says, “The committee observes the low performance rate of power coverage of rural electrification.” Madam Speaker, you had the opportunity to visit Pader District and you were able to see with your own eyes what the people there go through. You also had the advantage of visiting the only girls’ secondary school in Pader District, which does not have power. For your information, that is where I went for my O’level, but I can tell you that although at that time we used to read using candles, to date the practice is still going on. What is rural electrification doing? We have to make sure that village schools also access power through this rural electrification programme. Without that, we are almost doing nothing. Hon. Minister Migereko, please open your eyes widely.  (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, allow me to go to page 18 where the committee says –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, honourable colleague. The member holding the Floor is the Woman Member of Parliament for Pader District. Just allow me to remind her that on the way from Lira to Kitgum, after you cross River Aswa, there is a place called Purang. This place used to have electricity, but something happened to the effect that UMEME came and carried their transformer and that was the end of the story. They have been without power for I do not know how long.

MS AKELLO: I really thank you so much, Leader of the Opposition, for that very useful information. Although we now have in this year’s budget the power extension from Corner Kilak to Abim, I strongly request that this promise be honoured. I am saying this because several times we have seen these projects on paper but they have not been implemented. So, I request this one is effected. I also request that other power lines are worked on, for instance, the one which connects Acholi Bur to Atang, to enable schools that are along that line access power.

I was going to comment on something that appears on page 18 where the committee talks about detailed planning, documentation and designed work for subsequent development of water supply systems in the 24 small towns and rural growth centres. I am wondering which 25 rural towns and centres they are meaning. I am asking this because in so many big towns and districts like Nakasongola, I see people carrying water on bicycles from long distances. What are you doing about extending water, Madam Minister, to such places other than small towns? Do you know that even big towns still lack water?

Allow me to also comment on something on page 17 where the ministry says that they have already achieved effective use of water for production. Madam Minister, you talked about water for production just last week. I would like to request that you extend water for production to Karamoja as well because people from this area have been disturbing us time and again. Just yesterday, they disturbed our cows because of lack of water. So, please allow them have water for production so that they are able to produce whatever they can and stop crossing borders to disturb others.

My last comment is on the Karuma project. This project has also been ongoing for so long and I see it reflected in the committee report. I just want to find out, which funds you are going to use to construct it because I see it appearing here? I am asking this because we hear that we already are going to use the money for the PRDP to construct the Karuma Dam. I wonder why money for PRDP went there instead when this programme already existed. Why wait until when there is money being sourced for PRDP and then this comes forward. I want clarification for that from the minister.

Finally, on the environment, what plans do you have to restore the environment that was badly destroyed by the heavily congested IDP camps? Now you are asking people to go back to their homes, but what plans do you have in your ministry to ensure that these places that were wasted are restored back to there usefulness? 

With these few words, I beg to stop here and not be cut off. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I invite hon. Sebaggala, but before that, I also want the Minister for Energy to tell us why he has kept the girls of Kamuli Girl’s College in darkness for so many years despite providing poles there for so many years.

6.43
MR ABDLATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise and one is about Mabira Forest. If you may recall, the Mabira Forest saga started as a rumour that government had intensions of selling off Mabira Forest and what followed was a big demonstration. Now, when we look at the report, the committee has also told us that the position on Mabira Forest is far from being clear. There is no way we can talk about protecting the environment and yet the Executive is out to do harm by disposing off Mabira Forest. Why is it that the Cabinet is not firm enough to tell us that, “Sorry, we had bad intentions; we are now moving towards the right step and we have abandoned the idea of selling off Mabira Forest”?

Madam Speaker, the rumours we are getting right now show that the issue is not about Mabira Forest. There is something under that arrangement. It is rumoured that there is petroleum in that forest. It is said that the issue is not Mabira Forest but petroleum. Unless the government comes out and tells us the reason why they cannot abandon that kind of arrangement then I will be tempted to believe -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague, hon. Latif, for giving way. I want to inform you that that was Fools Day when they wrote that there is oil in Mabira Forest. Take it from me and from our ministry that Mabira Forest is not part of the areas which are earmarked to have oil. It was Fools Day and so they wrote that. (Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I remember that even rumours for the sale of Mabira Forest were on Fools Day, but they finally came out and told us that indeed the arrangement was there. However, my point is that, why can’t government come out boldly and say, “Our hands are off Mabira Forest”? We will be tempted to believe that there is oil in that area. 

Secondly, we read in the newspapers that part of it was given for electricity transmission. I do not know how much was given to UMEME for their transmission? Is it another trick to encroach on Mabira Forest by saying that now we are giving it to UMEME for its transmissions?

Thirdly, at the beginning of this year, I attended a workshop in Canada and I met with some serious investors. They told me that they wanted to invest in Uganda especially in the area of fertilisers – phosphates - but when they came to Uganda, they were frustrated. These investors known as Euro-Global have invested in Malawi and Ethiopia and they are now sealing a deal with Sudan. When they came here, they were told that investment in phosphate fertilisers was given to Madhvani. 

6.49
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a report well written. In fact, the teacher in me has been urging me to rate them, and I would give them “excellent”. If you see the layout, the formatting, diction and numbering, it makes for easy reading. (Interjection)- Even the content is very good. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to speak on energy. I was a little disappointed to hear or to read that the funds allocated for rural electrification in the past year were diverted. When I imagine that there are so many places in the rural areas that do not have power, it makes me concerned. 

Before the high voltage line which serviced the defunct Lira Spinning Mill was commissioned directly from Jinja to Lira, the power that used to service Lira passed through my constituency; it paased from Soroti into my constituency through Amugo, Abako, Aloi, and then through hon. Odit’s constituency before going to Lira. However, since 1986 when the NRM came to power, that was the last time we saw electric power. When you look at the North generally, we have retrogressed in terms of electric power. We knew power, we grew up with electricity in Aloi where I grew up from, but today our children do not know electricity. 

I shared with the minister concerned, in the presence of hon. Otto, and he told me that the problem was the resource envelope. I am now surprised that they are diverting funds meant for rural electrification. I do hope the minister will rectify such a situation. Our transformer was taken to where we do not know; we used to have a very powerful –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: I thank the honourable member, Madam Speaker, for giving way. I am just imagining; when the honourable member says that they had power all along until 1986 when the NRM came to power and then power all of a sudden disappeared, could this be because there was a situation of war in that area? Does everybody here have to believe that the NRM government basically disconnected power? I thank you.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: I thank you for your clarification but I would like to assure you that the Langi are very peaceful people. They took up arms but very briefly. Since 1987, the Langi gave up arms and there has not been any conflict in the area until very recently when the LRA incursion came into Lango. So, there is no excuse whatsoever for the NRM government not to service that area with power. I want you to take that point very seriously. 

Madam Speaker, I was gratified to learn that the National Forestry Authority would like to do some serious work of reforestation in the North. I would like to suggest to them that one of the best avenues to do this would be to reach out through schools. Most of our schools have large chunks of land, which could be used for planting a lot of trees. They should consider that. (Interjection) I think I am not taking that, my time is moving. 

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about carbon credit worldwide but I do not know what we are doing as a country to embrace this. The West, which emits a lot of carbon, is willing to pay back by buying the carbon. When forests are planted, they take away carbon dioxide from the environment so they would like to compensate by paying a lot of money to Africa.

6.55
MR ALEX PENYTOO (FDC, Gulu Municipal Council, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to show appreciation to the two ministries for working hard in the last financial year and also for delving into this financial year. However, I have a concern for the Ministry of Energy, especially in the sector of mineral resources. 

You are aware that last year and even this year, the ministry was carrying out surveys, in some cases even aerial surveys, in many areas of Uganda. Because of certain reasons, northern parts and some parts of eastern Uganda were exempted from this exercise. When are you going to carry out the survey in northern and some parts of eastern Uganda?

Traditionally, we had sites for mineral resources. Before colonialists came, the Acholi, the Madi and the Langi were mining iron in Meto Hill in Moyo. Even in the eastern part of Acholi, like Madi-Opei, they were mining iron. What have we done since the colonialists left Uganda to exploit these resources? We in the region along the River Nile are suspecting a lot of quantities of petroleum. What are you doing, especially on the eastern banks of the Nile in Acholiland, in Madi and the other side of West Nile? What is happening? We want to know the policy and the procedure you are taking. If you are not going there, let us also look for alternative sources. Honourable minister, you are aware that the colonialists also began to survey petroleum around Rhino Camp in Madi-Okolo in Arua. We want to know what has happened with the Madi-Okolo petroleum site.

Secondly, I would like to show appreciation to the Ministry of Water. Unfortunately, we have not seen much of the activities of the Ministry of Water in Gulu and in Acholiland. You remember very well that Idi Amin started to work on a new water source in Gulu but up to now all the subsequent governments have never done anything to that water source in Gulu. We are relying on Oitino River near the current airstrip in Gulu but that is not enough; the water is totally contaminated. If you go to Gulu – I came from Gulu last evening - people have now resorted to using boreholes because the colour of the water is almost blue - original blue, not light blue water. (Laughter) So, that is a major problem, and it smells a lot. The problem may be with the treatment of the water. A lot has to be done and we have to follow up Amin’s project. Let us not forget Amin’s project. Whatever Amin started should not be abandoned. Amin also did very many good things, you remember.

Madam Speaker, when people were camped in IDPs, the flora and fauna of the surrounding areas of the camps were seriously devastated and it impacted a lot on the environment. When you move around the camps, you do not see trees growing around and the streams, the rivers and the streamlets are drying seriously and this was not the case. What are the measures that you have in place especially for the reconstruction of the devastated war areas? What have you in place for these areas?

Honourable State Minister in charge of Environment normally passes through there from Gulu to Adjumani. Normally you see the devastation of the environment; what are you doing to revamp our environment? We want to go back to the normal situation. You see, because of the high population in those concentrated camps, there is a lot of silting that has blocked the valleys of the rivers and the streams and streamlets. That is why most of the streams have died out.

7.00
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start straight away first with the budget. When I looked at the recurrent expenditure of the last financial year, it is bigger than the recurrent budget of this financial year. In my mind, I always think that if the budget of the following year is bigger or smaller, then it should be because of the development budget, if the development budget the subsequent year is smaller, but this is with the recurrent budget. Even if the margin is small, I do not know really why the budget is smaller than the expenditure of last financial year.

Madam Speaker, on the rural electrification, I saw on page 8 some of the projects in place. Three years ago, even before I was in this Parliament, there was a lot of agitation and a lot of sensitisation for power coming from Kilak, that is, in Amuru District to Gulu District passing via Pabo to Gulu. I have not seen it here. I already saw in this report that there was a diversion or misappropriation of what was really for rural electrification. In my mind, the rural electrification which should have taken place in Amuru and Gulu should have been really implemented a long time ago. Why do we have a budget for rural electrification then? Why do we just take again elsewhere when the work is really needed on the ground?

Still on rural electrification, this is a project which is very important for us. Right now for us in Gulu we have a lot of exportation. Our people export to another country; charcoal burning is not allowed in Southern Sudan and so Southern Sudan depends a lot on our charcoal in Gulu and Amuru. This is something which is serious. If we do not take it up seriously, maybe if there was this rural electrification already in place then we would say, “No cutting of trees.” So, the deforestation which has been observed by the committee is greatly in the North; it is really bad. 

Just to emphasise what my honourable colleague from Gulu Municipality has said, those streams which feed the big river, River Aswa, are all drying out. We believe that it must be the effect of cutting down trees. You know we have been in a war and war leaves a lot to be desired. 

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to talk about charcoal. We have done research about the effect of charcoal on a woman who cooks lunch and dinner. Actually, if a woman spent three days cooking lunch and dinner in her kitchen using charcoal or firewood, it is like smoking three packets of cigarettes a day. So, that is the impact of charcoal and firewood. So, the sooner we stop the use of charcoal and firewood the better for a woman who uses it everyday. Thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, my colleague, for that information. This then makes me say that the honourable Minister of State for Environment and the honourable Minister in charge of Energy should work together. You really need to work together so that we reduce on this tree cutting.

7.06
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for sparing these very last minutes for me to raise one or two issues. I have listened to honourable members’ contributions but one key component is on National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Nobody seems to have touched it and it is here. Our committee visited these facilities and the complaint from the engineers is that whereas government is providing water for consumption, the sewerage component is not being utilised. Even here in Kampala, most constructions on the high hills do not cater for sewerage systems. They are using septic tanks and as a result, there is no way waste water can find its way to the sewerage system. It is seeping through and we are ending up with floods. Part of these floods are contributed to by the sewerage from the septic tanks and that is one serious matter which I think the government should be able to address. The sewage facilities actually being used here is less than ten or so percent; all the 90 percent is just wasted around and we have a lot of problems with that. So, I think the ministry should be able especially in urban areas to try and ensure that these useful facilities are made use of as well.

Madam Speaker, I also would want to touch a little on what the Leader of the Opposition mentioned. These two ministers were strategically identified. One from the source of power itself, hon. Daudi Migereko sits on the power which serves the whole country; and the Minister of State is about also to sit on the power from Karuma. That is another key source. Interestingly, when I heard hon. Bagiire complaining about lack of water and electricity around Jinja in Mayuge, I was surprised. 

Hon. Engineer D’Ujanga is one of those key electrical engineers in this country who are actually - you will not need to describe the area where the power lines passed. He is the one who can lead you, take you through all over this country. Now, the Leader of the Opposition said in the arrangement under NOPAK in Karuma, this power will be hooked back to Kawanda. It is terribly too far! (Mr D’Ujanga rose_) Before I allow, you will need to know that the eastern part of Masindi District is getting electricity from Lira and this particular one is going to fly over them, to come back to Kawanda. (Laughter)

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Odit, for the kind words. I am very aware of the power line from Lira to Masindi through Ibuje and Masindi Port. I took part in designing that system. I would like to inform this House that it is not true that the power from Karuma is coming to Kawanda only. As the minister will perhaps answer shortly, Karuma project has three transmission lines associated with it. One is from Karuma to Olwiyo, and now we have changed the plan of supplying Sudan from Lira to Olwiyo because of reasons which you can appreciate - geographical, proximity and so on. 

The other line is Karuma to Lira; for obvious reasons, it is better to reduce losses and things for scientific reasons to go from Karuma to Lira and supply the eastern part of the country. You would incur les losses and in that way you can supply back up to Jinja. And then the third line is this one Karuma – Kawanda, and this is intended to take the central and western part of the country. 

Madam Speaker, before transmission lines are designed, a detailed study is carried out and in the interest of time I will not go into the details. But normally we do not just put lines for the sake of it. We carry out detailed load flow analysis and this has been done in the case of Karuma. So, I would like everybody to rest assured that we are doing the best that the science can provide. Thank you very much.

MR ODIT: So, in a way, Madam Speaker, the minister has helped to clear the doubt which was reflected in the committee report and the good thing is that this Hansard will always be tracked. We shall always take it up and I am grateful for the assurance that the North and even part of the east will be covered under this arrangement. This is really what we need in this country.

Finally, I was very happy when I saw hon. William Okecho entering and I was catching the eye of the Speaker. In this House, when we passed the last budget, the House was excited with the ban of polythene papers. Hon. Okecho sent me a note in my office telling me that I was going to be part of the committee nominated by the Speaker, to which he is the chair, to go and look and under study the programme in Rwanda to come and report back to the House how polythene matters have been addressed in Rwanda for us to consider in this country.

It is one year now, we are still discussing the problem of polythene and I still have this letter. I want him to be accountable to this House whether or not he was really appointed to head that small committee and what he has done with that assignment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, I will continue to share out opportunities to contribute. So, I would like to close the debate now. However, there is one issue which we want to know from the Ministry of Energy. Who owns Amber House? Ever since the Seventh Parliament, this House has been telling you that the house belongs to the government. We do not know why we continue to give you rent to rent government property and pay. So this time please tell us. Why should we give you money to pay rent to government when it is government property? 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, in the presentation of hon. Odit, he mentioned a name of an honourable member who is present in this House. I think it would be procedurally right for the Member to clear his name.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I did not know that Members here select delegations. That is why I did not want him to say anything. That is the work of the Speaker. How did a Member of this House start organising delegations and taking them to Rwanda? That is the work of the Speaker. That is why I did not want him to say anything. Minister of Energy, please. And may be if you could answer thematically as the Minister of Defence did today. Do not answer, “This Member said this, and I am happy with this Member”- 

7.16
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I will follow your guidance, as I normally do. (Laughter) I would like to thank the chairperson and the Committee of Natural Resources for this report. I would like to state that as a ministry, we have received tremendous amount of support and cooperation from this committee now and in the past. This has enabled us to tackle the challenges in the energy and mining sector, despite the issues of funding and manpower limitations, which have been talked about coupled with the limited enthusiasm of the private sector to invest in the energy and mining sectors. Yet, as you recall, we had at one point envisaged that the private sector would bail us out on most of the projects that we need to drive our economy.

Madam Speaker, the failure by the private sector to develop interest in investing in the sector has happened in spite of the incentive packages contained in the sectoral policies. Fortunately, with the support of Parliament which has led to the establishment of the energy fund, the funding situation in the sector is improving.

The committee has made a number of pertinent observations and recommendations. The ministry, I would like to pledge, will be working on this in the course of the financial year. We shall indeed be advising Parliament through the Committee on Natural Resources on the progress in regard to our implementation programme.

I would like to respond to some of the issues raised in the report as follows; but maybe I should start with the issue of Amber House. Who owns Amber House? Amber House is owned by Uganda Property Holdings which is a company owned by Ministry of Finance. They are responsible for administering all the properties that should have been under the care of Ministry of Finance. 

We have raised the issue regarding to why we should have to pay rent to that Uganda Property Holdings. We have also raised the issue regarding why they should not allow our ministry take ownership of that property -(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think the minister is raising a very controversial subject which took my committee two months to investigate and the report after this budget is coming to the House. We investigated the status of Amber House. It is not actually under Uganda Property Holdings; it is a company which was established in 1954. It is one of the oldest public companies. Now, the shareholders at the time were UEB, Coffee Marketing Board and Lint Marketing Board. Following the divestiture, actually it was the energy sector which retained it. UEB retained the ownership of Amber House.

The funny thing is that, this Amber House behaved dubiously. First of all, it was behaving as if it was a private company, collecting rent and the ministry itself is the tenant in the building. There are many other tenants. Now they have also hired some property manager called Bageine and Company to start collecting the rent, receive the money, banking it in some funny account which we do not know. The Auditor General does not audit it and so finally this report will come here. 

It is true the ministry has always claimed and for a long time they have had trouble with the Ministry of Finance and even Bageine and Company because they claim that they should not be paying rent and yet they received instruction even from the President’s Office that they should pay rent. Now, the question is, where does this money go? We shall submit a report here, because it is ready, about the status of this organisation. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Odit appears to have much more information than I happen to. I would not like to add anything more. (Laughter) 

Our biggest problem in the ministry has been the limited power generation and supply capacity which had given way to load shedding, as you are all aware. This necessitated installation of expensive emergency diesel thermal generation capacity of 100 mega watts as a stopgap measure. Unfortunately, in the process of doing so, in order to address particularly the productive requirements of the country, we have found ourselves having to spend the bulk of the resources for the sector on procuring diesel for this power generation. There has been talk about diversion of funds. The funds have been utilised to ensure that the country is not totally engulfed with load shedding. 

Madam Speaker, I am glad to report that as per the committee’s recommendation, we are phasing out the expensive diesel thermal generators as follows: Around September this year, we shall have 50 mega watts of heavy fuel oil at Namanve. This will be followed by 10 mega watts of heavy fuel oil generators at Tororo by electro marks. This will be followed by 50 to 85 mega watts of HFO at Kaisotonya under the early production scheme in our oil programme and this will be followed by 50 mega watts of heavy fuel oil at Njeru. 

The heavy fuel oil equipment being procured will also be able to use natural gas from our oil fields as discoveries and production of oil and gas progress.

The committee has raised concern about non-attention to the following by the ministry:

1.	Energy mix;
2.	Renewable energy development;
3.	Lack of pertinent policy framework to encourage investment in the energy sector.

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that my ministry has attended to the above concerns. For instance, on page 7 of the report, the committee itself enumerates the renewable energy projects which are ongoing initiated and supported by the ministry. On page 7 they mention Kakira, its core generation power productions renewable - Nyagak, Bugoye, Mpanga, Buseruka, Ishasha, Kisizi and others which we shall be reporting on in the course of this financial year. 

It is clear that the work being undertaken with the development of the renewables, oil exploration and production plus development of the large hydro power stations will help us address diversification of our energy supply mix. All this is possible because our government has come up with the right policy framework and incentives. We are trying to see how we can improve on the incentives, for instance, the Private Sector Foundation financing the feasibility studies up front. 

There was the issue of Muyembe power site, which was raised in the report. We are - through the Private Sector Foundation under the Energy for Rural Transformation - facilitating the financing of feasibility studies provided the private sector approaches the Private Sector Foundation. It is, however, true that banking institutions and financial institutions in the country are yet to develop appetite for financing projects in the energy and mining sectors. This is something we need to work on with the Ministry of Finance and as government I think we shall be expending efforts to ensure that this is sorted out. 

The committee has expressed concern about the Bujagali costs and the committee is right. This matter has been raised a number of times on the Floor of this House. I would like to once again explain as follows: 

One, both the developer and contractor for Bujagali were procured through international competitive bidding. And the prices they offered are what we had to take. 

Two, there are a number of key considerations we need to take into account when we are discussing the costs associated with some of these projects and these are:

a)	The world price of materials like steel, cement and fuel. 
b)	Availability of construction contractors given competition from the rehabilitation work due to Tsunami, Katrina and the exponential economic growth in India and China. 
c)	The cost of private sector capital; and 
d)	Limited appetite of development finance institutions to finance our projects as I have already indicated. 
e)	The above tend to be reflected in additional costs like interest during construction, debt service account, high insurance premium, et cetera. All these led to the high development and EPC costs for Bujagali.

The Leader of the Opposition wanted to find out as to whether the ever rising cost of cement, steel and fuel will not lead to variations that will affect the pace at which Bujagali project is being developed. I would like to say one thing. We have not received any notification of a variation and I want to assure Members that the Bujagali project as I speak now is moving smoothly and is a few months ahead of schedule. It is difficult for me to tell whether at some point there will be no variation at this stage. Given our experience with Bujagali, government has taken a decision to finance all the big power projects on its own in future. This will be readily facilitated by funding through the Energy Fund. With this fund we can be in a position to undertake the financing of these projects by ourselves and avoid the incremental costs arising out of some of the components we have identified above.

There has been a persistent question on the Floor: where will the funds for Karuma come from? As of now, as indicated above, the financing of big energy projects will be undertaken by government through the Energy Fund. The financing of Karuma, therefore, will come from the Energy Fund. I am sure about this because I know what government has put aside for the Karuma project. It is not speculation; this is for real. (Laughter)

The committee raised concern regarding why this power from Karuma should be transported from Karuma up to Kawanda. My colleague, hon. Simon D’Ujanga has very ably explained that this power will not only go to Kawanda, it will go to Oriyo in Amuru District, and it will go to Lira. And our policy today, unlike the policy during the colonial period, is that if power is going to be generated from here, we must ensure that the areas within the vicinity of the power station also benefit from that power. So it will not be a question of delivering this power to those sub-stations. There will have to be a network to ensure that the local areas are taken care of so that the local population can have a stake in what we are doing and also directly benefit. This is the NRM thinking and we are going to make sure that this is done. 

On UMEME, two important issues have been raised. The UMEME/Government of Uganda Agreement –(Interruption) 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister. I am not up to question the NRM thinking. There is a clarification we sought on the development of power stations about the mini hydro plant in Aruu, and the Ayago hydro power proposal that came in the President’s State of the Nation Address and it disappeared. 

MR MIGEREKO: It is true the Leader of the Opposition raised the issue of Ayago that it does not feature in the report. And it is true that a lot of work has been going on in regard to Ayago, particularly sourcing for funds and determining the right technology that we should use in order to maximise power generation at that site. 

I would like to report that when our President visited Japan a few months ago, he reached an agreement with the Japanese Government that they would support us in developing both Ayago North and Ayago South and as we speak, a Japanese team has already been in the country, they have produced a preliminary report of their findings and we should be in a position to start on the feasibility study for the development of Ayago power station. There are a number of other sites, which you raised; we have taken note of these and we shall be in position to provide pertinent information about some of these sites later. 

However, I would like to take this opportunity and point out one thing. We have been moving up and down looking for foreign investors to assist us in investing in the energy and mining sectors. Our view in the ministry is that for some of these sites, which are less than 20 mega watts, we should try as much as we can to get local businessmen to take up some of these sites and invest. My view is that as leaders we should take the lead in marshalling communities in our areas to take on some of these investments. I know that the people of Kasese have decided to take on a concession in their area because of the right leadership being offered by the NRM leaders in that area. We think that this is something that we should all do as leaders and I can tell you that the licenses and permits are available to all Ugandans without any other considerations.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: I appreciate the minister’s very deep love for the NRM but I wish he could also volunteer information that I believe he knows. The proposal in your policy statement to extend power from Kona Kilak to Kalongwe and Abim - you know that area is where the Leader of the Opposition comes from and you can be sure that he has provided very able leadership. Hon. D’Ujanga knows that the proposal to extend that power was written by me and submitted to him when he was still in UEB. As I speak, the cooperative to take on the concession of supplying the power has been established so it is not only in NRM areas that these things happen. (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: I must take this opportunity to commend hon. Latigo because even at a time when everybody raised the issue of insecurity in the North, he mobilised local communities and ensured that work progressed in that area without the interference of anybody. I think that this has to go down on record. (Applause)

On UMEME, two important issues have been raised. On the UMEME/Government of Uganda agreement, I would like to table here in Parliament the Lease and Assignment Agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and UMEME Limited and the Support Agreement relating to the distribution and supply of electricity in Uganda as signed between the Government of Uganda and UMEME Limited. I know that these documents are already available in the Committee of Natural Resources because there was a petition, which required the committee to study these agreements but there was also a command here that I must table these in Parliament and I am obeying that command.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to report that we have requested the Electricity Regulatory Authority to study the agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and UMEME with a view to ensuring better performance on the part of UMEME. This will also involve a review of the escrow account provisions as has been recommended by the committee. However, it should be noted that once government departments settle their bills on time, there will be no need to draw in the escrow account. We have been trying to pursue this with the accounting officers in ministries and there has been some improvement but I think more can be done. 

The other issue has to do with losses. These losses are a source of major concern to all of us because they are costing the country enormous sums of money. They are due to dilapidated network, which is now being fixed and theft of power and the bulk of the loss is due to this. We had a stakeholders’ workshop on 18th July this year, which came up with a set of recommendations, which the sector will have to implement in order to stem these losses. 

These recommendations included installing prepaid meters as has been recommended by the committee, speedy connection of new applicants; there has been an outcry, rapid reaction to reported faults, vigilance on the part of security agencies and the population in dealing with those involved in theft of power and power infrastructure gadgets.

MR KYANJO: Honourable minister, I appreciate that you are looking at the side of power losses and the way to cut them down as has been proposed by the committee in their report. You want prepaid meters but have you comprehensively studied the implications of a prepaid service as opposed to the post-paid service where you may not generate power for a night or two and it does not matter? Because we are going to face lots of litigation if there is no care taken to that effect.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to assure our brother, hon. Kyanjo that this whole idea of prepaid metering is not new in this country. We have the Kanungu concession and we have the Kibaale concession and they are running on a prepaid metering system; they have not had any problems. I know UMEME has been talking about carrying out a study first, but I do not know what kind of study we really need and when they hear what you are saying, they will think the study is the most important thing. My view is that this idea of a prepaid metering system is long overdue and we are really coming up with serious arrangements to ensure that we do this.

Regarding what penalties to be suffered by the company in case there is no power, really we just need to put our act together and ensure sound performance of the sector and of the companies instead of fearing litigation and so on and so forth.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue, which I thought I should talk about, of power extension to a very important tea factory in the Kanungu area – the Garuga Tea Factory. First of all, I do not want to say that the concessionaire of who is responsible for that area deliberately left out this tea factory in Rutenga-Rugyeyo, which is a few kilometres from the main grid in that area. The fact of the matter is that the resources which were available at that time could only run in the areas where the network is at the moment. We have been having discussions with the proprietors of the Garuga Tea Factory and the concessionaire should be in position to extend power to that tea factory because our policy as government is to make sure that areas of major economic importance are served with electricity first and foremost. So, resources are being sourced to ensure that power reaches that area  -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, you know there is something that makes indigenous investors feel unhappy. There are people who come and they are given land worth billions of shillings to build hotels. Somebody has put up a factory and the only requirement is to extend power to that factory, without allowing for generations of stories about political biases. Can’t government really handle these things? Because “going to be done” is one thing and getting it done is another. Mr Minister –(Interruption) 

MRS WINIFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought I would give some clarification on this issue because I once represented that area. There was a bit of an error, with due respect, Leader of the Opposition, the lines do not over pass by. The factory of Rugyeyo is off; it is not where the lines pass. So it is quite close to Kyerima, which is the district headquarters for Kanungu. It should not be taken as if the lines were passing beyond and they did not connect to the factory. I do agree that it is quite close like a few kilometres but in the northern part of the town, but I would like to really allay your fears. We as a committee highly recommend that that factory gets the electricity and as the minister has said, we discussed it with him and he says that factory is going to get the power. But I just want to make it clear that it is not in the way of the electricity lines that we had already planned before.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you for that pertinent input. Madam Speaker, a number of honourable members, including yourself when you raised the issue of Kamuli girls - raised issues in regard to rural electrification. Our programme for rural electrification was affected by the fall in generation and supply capacity of electricity in the country in the last three to four years. Enormous resources, which ought to have been utilised for extending power to various rural areas, were taken up to address generation capacity so that industries could continue running in this country. I am happy to report that this is now being rectified and consequently we should be able to tackle the incomplete schemes, which had been started on top of handling power supply to vital economic areas like the tea factory hon. Latigo has talked about, district and civic centres, educational and health institutions. 

The funding will be sourced from the government within the sector, the energy levy, from development partners, the private sector and the communities. Given the pace of economic development, more funds will definitely be needed in order to do all that we would like to do for rural electrification. 

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, I just want to ask the minister to clarify one small thing. The report mentions a number of proposed areas for the Rural Electrification Programme but I do not see anything on the side of Mt. Elgon especially towards Bukwo. I haven’t seen it mentioned and I did not have the opportunity to say it before.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, you guided when I was just about to commence my submission that I should avoid discussing individual schemes. I have tried to go by the dictates of your guidance, otherwise –(Laughter)– Bukwo is definitely going to be handled under the African Development Bank funding but I think as a ministry we shall have to produce this information and avail it to Members so that all the Members can be in position to have this information and explain to their constituents what government is doing in regard to extending the various forms of modern energy to their areas. I can see we could spend a whole day trying to make sure that every constituency is mentioned and covered under this one. Yes, I have been given an opportunity to respond to the issues and we are always grateful when this happens.

The committee brought out the achievements of the energy and mineral sectors but it is also true that we have had major accomplishments in the mineral sector, in the oil and gas sector. As a ministry it would have helped if this were reflected on the Hansard in regard to what we are doing. I know there is an issue of time but it is also important that the House gets to know what the ministry has been able to do over time and what we really intend to do. I want to assure Members that a lot has been done on the oil and gas front and maybe if we are given time as a ministry we should be in a position to make a presentation to Members particularly those who did not have the opportunity to turn up in Munyonyo when we were discussing how to manage the proceeds from oil and gas once we go into production. Maybe we shall have to discuss this Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, on that occasion hon. D’Ujanga undertook that there would be an opportunity for the whole House because the Leader of the Opposition had complained that he was not at Munyonyo and we do not know why he was not at Munyonyo. So, I think you need to just activate it. 

MR MIGEREKO: I think we shall organise something; we shall come and discuss with your office so that information can be broadly shared so that everybody gets to know what we are doing.

There was the issue concerning recruitment and training in our ministry and particularly in the petroleum department. I would like to assure Members that we follow a recruitment approach which is very open and transparent. For instance as I speak now there are positions in the petroleum department which are being advertised by the Public Service Commission in our papers The New Vision, Monitor and so on, right from Monday. There are about 30 positions which have been advertised and we would like to encourage you to encourage your constituents to apply particularly those who have the requisite qualifications. We would like every part of Uganda to be represented so that this national resource is really managed by all of us. Otherwise, there is nothing that cannot be put on the Table in regard to the personnel that we have in that department.

There is the geological data infrastructure. Under geological data infrastructure, airborne geophysical surveys aimed at understanding rock formations and identification of mineral targets have been carried out and to date 627,163 line kilometres of magnetic radiometric and electromagnetic data have been acquired. Our teams are now in the districts of Kitgum, Gulu and Pader sensitising the leaders on the survey that is supposed to take place in that part of the country. It is true that in Karamoja work had to be halted due to insecurity but we should be in position to resume these surveys any time now. Currently 80 percent of the country has been surveyed and we believe that this exercise should end some time in October. 

Preliminary results of these surveys were released by my colleague hon. Kamanda on 13 December last year and these have helped us attract a good number of inquiries and investors in the sector. So far, the proceeds of non-tax revenues that have been generated as a result of this work that is being undertaken by the department have gone up to the tune of about Shs 3 billion. We believe that once this exercise is completed we should be in a position to see greater investment in the sector, creation of more employment for Ugandans and general improvement in the state of our economy. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to make this response. I would like to thank Members for listening to me and for the clarifications they have raised and I would once again like to thank the leadership of the Committee of Natural Resources for the support that you have given us. We continue to count on your support and I urge everybody to support the submission that has been made by the committee in regard to the financial allocation required by our ministry. I thank you for listening to me. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister. I propose that we pick up the water sector in the morning.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should receive the response of the water sector in the morning and then they - 

HON. MEMBERS: Now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to finish now? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, Minister for Water.

8.00
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the honourable members for accepting to stay longer so that we can complete our sector. Thank you very much. I also want to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for having taken us through this budget process and for the reporting that has been really excellent. They have summarised our ideas and our issues correctly. I also want to thank the Members who have made contributions on the water sector for having given constructive guidance on how we can improve our services.

Having said that, I would like to respond to a number of issues that have been raised. Of course a number of the issues that have been raised here on the Floor had been brought up in the committee report and I had prepared some answers but since the chairperson told this august House that they were satisfied with our answers and that there is no need to go through them, let me start by responding to the questions that have been raised here. 

The Leader of the Opposition started off by pointing at page 18 and a number of towns that are all in the West. He was wondering whether our ministry was being biased in the provision of water to only one side of Uganda. I want to assure the hon. Member of Parliament and everybody that that one is a small caption of the detailed report of our activities countrywide. That is a section we call the south western programme. 

We have got the northern, the eastern - I am sure you have heard of the eastern centres - we have got the RUWASA programme, we have the north-western and we have got the mid-east. So, we block our performance in terms of regions. These are according to the technical support units that we have. We have eight technical support units and eight programmes in the country. So, the committee picked out only the south-western, but when you look at our policy statement, you see so many towns that we have worked on and still so many that we intend to work on.

I want to assure you, honourable members, that North and north-eastern Uganda have got a full coverage for the financial year 2008/09 and our policy statement makes it clear. And I think it was the same question raised by hon. Wopuwa; but since I have answered that one as well, I will not repeat myself.

There was a question from hon. Tashobya on the participation of water users in securing land. This is required not because government cannot find money to buy land, but we want to commit the water users to own this land. 

Secondly, because most of our budget for water is donor-funded, the funders do not accept to fund landless projects. That is why they want the communities to sustain these projects by giving land. So, once we identify money, we write to the local authorities and ask them to make contribution so that they can own the projects. This is so because once we complete it, we pass it on to the local authorities; it is not because we really want to task the people. However, when we encounter a problem, normally the central government comes in to support the communities.

There was also a question from hon. Bagiire about the piped-water project for Mayuge. I would like to assure the honourable member that a design for Mayuge town council has already been done and we hope to tap water from the Jinja-Iganga pipeline. However, the ministry is still in the process of looking for funds for this project.

There was a Member who inquired about how we came to choose 70 districts for inspection by NEMA. We are going to inspect all the districts, but the 70 are the areas that require intensive monitoring because of the degradation of the environment in those areas. So, we are looking at the wetland, land degradation and destruction of crops, waste water management and solid management in those areas.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker, for steering us through this. I am wondering whether your ministry will be able to fulfil the commitment of going to supervise areas a distance away from here. I am saying this because for the last 12 months, I have been reminding you and your minister of state about the calamity that we face as water users. This is in regard to the people in Makindye West who the minister saw one time and agreed to come back to and make a demarcation between the extent of the water area or the wetland, and the settlement of the people. Though she has consistently been promising me to do this, she hasn’t done so yet these people have built their settlements including digging and constructing to close 175 pit latrines near the water treatment plant at Gaba.

The clarification I am seeking from you is whether you really will be able to move a distance away when you are unable to move seven kilometres away from town?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Member. I am sure you are aware that we have been to that area quite a number of times. One, we had to remove the so-called veterans and I think we succeeded in that. The problem we have now is that allocation of land is being intensified by Kampala City Council yet that is where they get the titles from. So, we are soon having a stakeholders’ forum with Kampala City Council because at times we have had our people confronted. I am sure you are aware of what happened in Kinawataka, where NEMA was confronted by stone-throwing people. And you know the Kinawataka issue is as bad as the Munyonyo one. So, this is the situation we have, but we must work with all the stakeholders. I have already written to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and that of Defence together with Ministry of Local Government to get into a joint effort because our staff alone cannot manage to confront people who are encroaching; they at times become very uncontrollable. However, we are almost there.

Hon. Wopuwa, raised an issue about the Tororo pipeline. I would like to assure my brother that I have been to Tororo a number of times and climbed all those hills in effort to settle this matter. I would like to say that this year the Tororo pipeline is under our budget. There is detailed plan for it and if you read the ministry’s policy statement you will realize that the project is to be done over a period of two years. This is because of the high costs involved. However, I would like to assure you that once the budget for this financial year is approved, work on the water project for Tororo-Lwakaka will start.

There was also a question from some hon. Member on the water supply to Kapchorwa. I would like to say that the water supply to Kapchorwa is now almost 90 percent completed; what is remaining is only the distribution. Work has not stopped; the contractor only slowed down because of the cash flow problems. But we are hopeful that with the passing of this budget, the contractor will be able to fast-track the implementation. We are targeting December; we will make sure that this project is completed by then so that it becomes our Christmas gift to the people of Kapchorwa.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, when it comes to gifts – (Laughter) – we get very alert. You know the hon. Minister talked about the North not being neglected. But I made specific requests about water supply to Patong, Palabek, Kalong and she said, “I assure you the North will be covered.” But now she is giving specific commitments; she has made commitments on three or four towns now. Can the minister make that same specific commitment – it can be the New Year or Easter gift in regard to the towns I talked about.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister. In line with what my Leader of the Opposition has said, I would like to add that though Pader District is so many year old now, the town itself does not have piped water. I have been looking through your programmes, both pending and those for the next financial year, but I do not see any indication about extending piped water to Pader District. When are we going to get water extended to Pader District?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, when you look at page 44 of the policy statement, you find Patong under design. But as I told you, we are still looking for money because we have so many towns designed. Once we get extra money, we will factor them in. Otherwise, Patong should be under the BADEA programme that we are hopping to get on board after September. 

Pader District headquarters is one of the priorities of our ministry. Before even we go to another town, we normally start with the district headquarters in a given district. So, I want to assure you that Pader District headquarters is guaranteed for water supply in the next financial year.

Now there was a question on Mabira.  Madam Speaker, the question of Mabira keeps coming back yet I think more than once I have stated the position of my ministry. We all know that the issue of Mabira was sent to a committee of Cabinet, which is chaired by my sister, the Minister of Trade, Industries and Tourism. This committee is still handling this issue. They made the first report, but they were told to go back and improve on it. Once they conclude, they will definitely report back. But I want to assure this House that Mabira has not been given away. I am saying this because the hon. Member who raised the issue seemed to think that Mabira has already been given away. Mabira is still a central forest reserve and according to the law, it is only Parliament that can recommend the de-gazettement of a central forest reserve. So, before it comes to me for de-gazettement, you Members of Parliament will have looked at it.  That is the position on Mabira.  

However, I want to say that while we are trying to protect Mabira, I would like to request hon. Members of Parliament present and those who are not, to kindly protect the so many forests across Uganda that are getting degraded the way you are protecting Mabira.

There was an issue on polyethylene bags. Members have expressed concern and the committee expressed concern over this same issue. But we all know that the 30 microns of polythene paper was abolished. The ban was put in place and this was after a thorough study within the three East African countries. We had hopped, as a ministry, that this financial year this ban at least would increase from 30 to 100 and that was our request. But looking at the regional balancing, it was maintained at 30 microns. However, my ministry, through NEMA and all stakeholders, has been able to enforce the ban by impounding imported microns that are below and even banning those we find in stock. We have also been working with other stakeholders like Uganda Revenue Authority, Local Government Ministry and trade associations like KASITA to make sure that traders comply on the ban.  

However, we have a problem because under the Ministry of Trade there is an allowance for importers to bring in packaging materials free of charge. And because our manufacturers in Uganda pay high taxes, the importers take advantage of this to bring polyethylene papers as packaging material and dump them into Uganda. That is where now we have to intensify with Uganda Revenue Authority to ensure this is not done. But also I want to ask Finance to revisit that provision because we are disfranchising our manufacturers and encouraging manufacturers from outside Uganda – India, Kenya and so on. That is something that we would like to request the House to note.  

There is also a possibility of getting the private sector to work with government to be able to control the collection and the recycling of the microns that will be allowed in this country. We are holding stakeholders’ meetings and working towards this.

There was a concern about the ministry’s reluctance to facilitate the Department of Metrology. It is not reluctance. Our ministry would very much want to facilitate the Department of Metrology, but in order to do so you must have an investment plan. I would like to inform the House that we are working with our neighbouring countries to make this department an agency. We have so far developed the investment plan and we are about to take it to Cabinet for approval. Once it has gone through Cabinet, we shall come back here to seek your approval to make the Metrology Department an agency like NEMA and NFA so that it can be independent in order to work with all the agencies within the region.  

This has also been delayed because of the new issues like the global warming, carbon markets and all that that are coming in. So, that delayed our finalisation of the investment plan.  But now we have it and we are just about to table it to Cabinet with the approval of the Minister of Finance.

There was concern over lack of plan for water-stressed areas. Rural water supply designs have been undertaken in a number of areas and I think that is where my brother, hon. Magulumaali, comes in wondering why we did not mention the programme of bulky water transfer in this report. I would like to say that we have designed a number of projects for places like Mbarara; we have one for Nakapiripirit, Nakasongola and Kooki, and we are now working on Bugiri and Yumbe.  

So, these have already been identified some of them with complete projects. The only snag is that we do not have sufficient funds. But for the purpose of my brother, who once again wanted to hear it openly, I want to say that we are starting with Kooki. That is for obvious reasons – (Laughter) - but also because of the stress in Kooki. In Kooki we do not have boreholes and springs. The only water that we have is from Lake Kijanibarola, which is very far from other areas and we also have a problem of underground minerals. The technical people, without even my participation, decided to start with Kooki to alleviate the suffering. I want to assure the people of Kooki that we are on the way and I think an advertisement is already in the papers for the contractors to apply.

There was also concern about whether NEMA has got a plan to ensure that the Peace Recovery and Development Programme of the North addresses the amendment of the fragile echo system –(Interjections)– yes, we have and NEMA has been participating in this programme. They have been able to mainstream the main issues in that programme. NEMA has also put in place measure of restoration of the echo systems in the IDPs and NEMA has participated in workshops for preparing the district implementation work plan under this programme. 

NEMA is also to ensure that the original environment status is undertaken. Pro-poor activities are being initiated like: tree plating, fruit growing, energy saving initiatives and all that. But apart from NEMA, we also have a project which people somehow talked about, which is the Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project. In the district of Lira, this programme is in three counties, that is, Adekwot, Bata and Namasale - we are going to be planting. Actually, we have already sensitised the people; we have sent the money to the sub counties, and we are now going to send seeds so that they can start nurseries. 

In Gulu, we are in Kolo, Butangila and Purong; so we are also there. In Kitgum, we are in Parabe, Patibe and Namakola. I have mentioned only those three towns –(Interruption) 

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I need to protest on the Floor of this House. In 1996, when Dr Paul Ssemogerere was campaigning, hon. Maria Mutagamba was in charge of the campaign and I was in charge of the security part of the campaign. But since moving to the NRM, she has completely turned her back on me and I feel this is unfair. (Laughter)

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Speaker, I really have a list of every sub county that we are going to be working on. Maybe I will make an effort to write a full paper and show to Members where we are going to be operating and even the people who are going to be responsible because I even have their numbers. We are really on the ground with this project.

There was also a concern that NFA should promote access of affordable seedlings for forests projects through government. And somebody raised an issue on the Floor here that rather than taking seedlings to the districts, we should give them seeds. Another one said that maybe we should start with Members of Parliament. I want to concur with the proposal; I would love to launch the tree planting movement in this House. So, I would like to work with the commissioners in this House to see how we can have the tree planting movement fast-tracked using Members of Parliament. 

Having said that, I want to say that NFA has established nurseries in Jinja, Arua, Gulu, Masindi, Mubende, Mbarara and others in addition to the national tree planting centre at Namanve. Government has also subsidised seedling to farmers in some districts under the farm income and this year we are targeting 99 sub counties and we are to provide 5.4 million seedlings. So, the activity of tree planting is on and I would like to call on Members to embrace it fully.

There are quite many concerns and I would like to encourage my colleagues not to only wait for this but please interact with us. There is a lot to learn and to take back to your constituencies when you interact with us. Thank you very much and thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a small matter on the Nalubaale Bridge, let me just allow the Minister of Transport to answer it.

8.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRANSPORT) (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was a concern expressed about the Owen Falls Bridge where the dam is located. As you can see in the policy statement, there is some Shs 5.0 billion to repair the bridge and we have already procured a contractor to start the work. But we have also been going on with the repairs. I should say also that the repairs are going to cover the access to the bridge down to – there are some culverts which are really broken, so we are trying to ensure that that work is done. The money is catered for.

And for the new bridge, the Japanese were here a few months ago and they came for the scoping aspect. Now they are coming back in one month or two for the detailed design. But for the new bridge, we are told the design might take a long time; could be nine month to one year. But I want to assure you that the ministry is trying to be as fast as possible in repairing the old bridge so that there is no double catastrophe. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think there were no other issues for the committee other than to thank the Members. 

8.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mrs Winifred Masiko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have rightly said, all the issues were answered by the respective ministries. But allow me to thank the Members for persisting and debating these important issues up to this time. This shows a lot of commitment and I am really very grateful. 

I would like to thank the Members of the committee. We have been discussing as a full house in that committee and we have met the different autonomous bodies, the ministries, and they have all been very cooperative. We are grateful. And as you can see, the report was well written, as the Members have said, and we are very proud of that. We do appreciate the comments. 

We would like to thank both the ministers of Energy and Mineral Development, Water and Environment; we have called them even at short notice and they usually came. Sometimes we use phone calls without even writing but they have always accepted our invitations. Even the Ministry of Finance appeared before us following our short notice. So, we are really very grateful for their support. We hope and pray that the commitments they have put forward shall be fulfilled and if they are not, we would like to assure this Parliament that we are there to make sure that they put in place what they have pledged. And we shall work towards that because we know that is what our role is. Otherwise, thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving us this opportunity and for debating this report up to this time. 

I pray and request Members to pass the budget estimates as we have already requested. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the report of the Committee on Natural Resources as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report approved)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really want to thank the Government Chip Whip for shepherding her side very well today. We still have full complement on the frontbench. (Laughter and Applause) 

I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his staying power and marshalling his troops, and all of you honourable members for staying here. But, also our clerks at Table who have been with us, the stewards and our sergeant; we want to thank you very much for enabling us to do this work today. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned until 10.00 O’clock in the morning. 

(The House rose at 8.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 August 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)


