Friday, 22 August 2008

Parliament met at 11.19 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I just want to make a slight adjustment to the Order Paper, instead of starting with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; we shall start with Committee on Trade and Industry.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
11.20
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMMITTEEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Godfrey Ekanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In compliance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, rule 155, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts for 44 districts of Uganda for the financial year ending 2001. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMIITEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/2008
ii)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM TRADE AND INDUSTRY

11.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr James Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, I stand to present the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, which considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the ministry for Financial Year 2008/09 in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda and rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. As per rule 193, I wish to lay on Table the minutes and the report of the committee. 

The committee I chair has a very able vice-chairman, hon. Lubyayi, with whom I shared the work as we interacted with the various sectors and ministries. We had all the cooperation we needed from the ministry; we interacted with all the ministers and their officials for a number of times. I thank them for their cooperation.

The budget performance of 2007/08 - the table is clear. The only item I wanted to point out is vote 015 – Ministry Tourism Trade and Industry under performed at a rate of 48.3 percent of the approved budget as at the end of May and the activities of vote function, vote 04 – tourism development performed very poorly at only 7.8 percent of the approved budget being utilised at the end of May. We were told this was so because staff had not yet been recruited. 

Budget outlook of 2008/09, the table is equally clear only that the ministry headquarters takes 25.327 billion representing 61.38 percent. But 1.568 billion caters for wages of all the three votes. 

Key achievements of 2007/08 are very many, they go up to 26. We thank the ministry for all these achievements in spite of the meagre resources they had from the budget. 

Key planned activities 2008/09

The department plans to develop mice as a new tourism product to increasing the visitors in the country. Uganda will host the Ninth Governing Council of Lusaka Agreement thereby contributing to Uganda’s tourism. 

They intend to set up sanitary facilities for tourists between Kampala and Malaba, Kampala and Mbarara, Kampala and Masindi. The tourists include Ugandans; some people were wondering if it is for only tourists from abroad. The planned activities can be read I need not to waste your time on it. I now go to the observation and recommendations 

Ministry Headquarters

We were informed that the ministry lacks office space and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has permitted the ministry to accommodate the extra staff in rented premises in the short run and at the same time acquire land where it will construct its own premises.

We were informed the ministry has identified a piece of land at Uganda Museum and plans to construct its premises there. The committee recommends that Government ensures that construction takes as short a time as possible with a view of reducing the time of paying for office space rented by the ministry. 

There is a problem of arrears of contributions to international organisation. We were informed that the Ministry of Financial Planning and Economic Development paid up all arrears before financial year 2003/04. This financial year, the Ministry of Financial Planning and Economic Development has set aside Shs 5.2 billion to pay part of the international arrears.

The main organisations still in arrears are Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, where we owe US $380,000; World Tourism Organisation, US $260,000; IIPT, US $100,000; UNIDO, US $11,000. This implied that Uganda remains suspended from WTO due to the outstanding arrears to World Tourism Organisation.

The committee notes that arrears of contribution to International Organisations are a constant embarrassment to the country, and recommends that Government should find ways of clearing the total sum.

Secondly, if Uganda is to sufficiently promote her tourism sector, it is important that she clears the arrears so that the country fully benefits from the World Tourism Organisation. The US$260,000 owed to this organisation must therefore be found as a matter of urgency.  

The ministry is fragmented with institutions like Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda National Council for Science and Technology located in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, yet they are of direct relevance to Trade and Industry. This unnecessarily undermines the operations of the ministry and consequently its performance.  

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and Local Government should expedite the process of harmonising the location of institutions that fall under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

There is a separate Vote for statutory organisations under the ministry. The committee notes that statutory organizations under the ministry namely, Management, Training and Advisory Centre, Uganda Export Promotion Board, Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust, Uganda Wildlife Authority and Uganda Tourism Board, have not yet been granted Vote status despite the committee’s previous recommendations to this effect. The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that each of the said organisations get its own Vote.  

Tourism sector

The committee notes that tourism continues to be the highest foreign exchange earner for Uganda. Unfortunately this is not reciprocated in terms of allocation of funds to the sector. Uganda is therefore unable to reap even more from this sector in comparison to other countries with similar potential. You reap what you sow.  

The committee recommends that Government should deliberately promote the industry by categorising it as a priority sector and facilitate it as such.  

Uganda Tourism and Training Institute

The committee was concerned that Uganda Tourism and Training Institute, which is located in Jinja, was transferred from the Ministry of Education and Sports and returned to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, where it actually belongs. Unfortunately its budget was left with the former ministry. The committee was informed that the ministry is working with the Attorney General to find a framework under which the institute will operate.  The institute will work on creating requisite skills for the different arms of Tourism.  

Important to note at this point, however, is the fact that the Ministry of Education and Sports intends to keep the budget for this institute because according to them, they also receive the training institute previously under another ministry without a budget line for it.  

The committee observed that the requirements of the institutes concerned cannot be the same though they cannot be swapped. It recommends that the budget line for Uganda Tourism and Training Institute be moved from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry forthwith.  

Legal status of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust

The committee noted that UWECT continues to be ranked as a trust. This status is very restrictive in terms of attracting Government funding and support. Most of the challenges facing Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust emanate from this its current legal status that is too free to allow the organisation to operate in a concrete manner. The following examples were cited:

Land: the organisation has 70 acres of land for which it would want to get a land title in due course. But the committee noted that this will be very difficult for Government to register 70 acres of land in the names of the Trust.  

Finances of the operations of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust: the operations of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust are strongly hinged to donations. This financial year, even the wages are not catered for by Government.  

Management of Botanical Gardens, Entebbe: the Botanical Gardens, Entebbe, share a border with Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust. There are some species of animals and plants that could benefit from protection offered by the skilled management of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust. These include Columbus monkeys and some medicinal plants. It is however difficult for Government to transfer management of the gardens to a Trust.  

State Lodge, Entebbe: this building is the former city of the colonial governors of Uganda. It is an important tourist site. It is currently occupied by soldiers who sometimes behave in ways not very friendly to wildlife. It is therefore desirable that this building is handed over to the management of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust. This has proved difficult because of the legal status of being a trust. The committee recommends that the ministry should ensure that a Bill defining the legal status of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Trust is brought to Parliament as a matter of urgency.  

Wild animals attacking neighbouring communities: the committee was informed that communities near the national parks often lose their crops which are destroyed by animals. UWA suggests that the communities concerned should create a corridor where animals pass during the periodic migrations. 

The committee was informed that the best way of creating a barrier between the communities and the wild animals, especially elephants, is to dig trenches two meters deep - that is more than my height, and two meters wide, and then have beehives along the trenches. I do not know if the elephants will like the honey. The other alternative would have been electric fencing. This option is too expensive and cannot be afforded by Uganda Wildlife Authority.

The committee was further informed that currently to deal with this problem, the ministry is planning to do two things; employ more rangers with a view of keeping animals within the protected area and encourage game breeding and game hunting. Here skilled personnel in the field of game breeding will come to Uganda and breed the animals so that their population grows at a much faster rate than they do naturally and then hunting will be permitted when the numbers are realized. The proceeds from the hunting will be given to the local communities. In addition, however, people interested in hunting of particular game like leopards will be permitted to hunt those that have become a nuisance to neighbouring communities. It is hoped that this will reduce the instances of stray animals terrorizing neighbouring communities.

The committee recommends that local governments should be facilitated to dig the trenches in the affected areas and to encourage the local communities in these areas to practice beef farming. So, the communities should be given or enabled to get beehives. Government should ensure that more rangers are employed as a matter of urgency.

The impact of oil discoveries on wildlife; the committee was concerned that the discovery of oil might impact negatively on wildlife reserves on whose land the oil fields were discovered. 

The committee was informed that most of the wildlife areas are to be affected by the discovery of oil, but oil fields and wildlife reserves will co-exists and the impact is not likely to be detrimental to wildlife. We were told that the contrary is true. The improved infrastructure to and around the oil fields will improve accessibility to the tourist sites hence a boost to tourism. 

The committee was further informed that there is a committee working on a law aimed at mitigating and minimizing the negative impacts of the discovery of oil and wildlife. 

The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is part of this committee and will contribute effectively.

Dispute in Inkulingo

The committee was concerned about the situation in Inkulingo which is found in Bwindi National Park where a private investor entered into agreement with the local community and constructed a lodge with the understanding that he should control six out of the eight permits for gorilla tracking. Today, a problem has arisen where the other lodge owners in the area are limited to only two permits. This in effect is a near monopoly by the lodge owner who has six of the permits. The other lodge owners have raised the complaint to the ministry disagreeing with the current arrangements which they described as a monopoly. To the committee, this is a contradiction of the current policy of liberalisation of the economy.

We were informed that the ministry has sought advice from the Attorney-General with a view to reviewing these agreements towards removing the monopoly. 

The settlement of the Bennets

The committee congratulated and thanked UWA for finding land to resettle the Bennets who have been homeless for a long time. These are found in Bukwo District.

The committee was informed that UWA is in the process of finding extra land within the park to settle those not yet settled. 

The committee notes that the groups of Bennett who are still landless are in a very desperate situation at the moment. They do not have food, shelter and clothing. 

The committee recommends that while UWA is in the process of finding land to resettle them. The office of the Prime Minister under the division of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should come in and provide relief aid to these people. Otherwise their current situation is very dehumanising.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should liaise with the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development to have the land allocated to the Bennett surveyed and recorded.

In the trade sector regional imbalances, the committee was informed that Uganda’s business community fully support the integration efforts of the East African Community but they think it is moving too fast. The East African Community was supposed to be private sector driven, but the reality on the ground is that the business community is being left behind.

Trade issues that are agreed to by all member states are not practiced by some member states. For example, a category of polythene bags that were burned here in Parliament are still produced in Kenya and exported to Uganda. Yet Ugandan manufacturers were stopped producing them. They consider this very unfair.

Secondly, very many none tax barriers still exists between the member states despite the customs union. For example taxation is not at par among the member states as seen in the case of soft drinks. In Uganda we tax 31 percent, Kenya they tax at 26 percent and Tanzania and Burundi at 28 percent. Ugandans are at a disadvantage.

Another case in point is transport of Ugandan goods on the Kenyan territory. Ugandan trucks are charged much higher than their Kenyan counterparts. Ugandans have to pay high storage costs while they await clearance of their goods in Mombasa. There are very many roadblocks along the way from Mombasa to Uganda. In fact the business community were wondering how we negotiate, they said we are too lenient to the Kenyans when negotiating with them. The committee recommends that Government should boldly negotiate with Kenya to the advantage of the Ugandan business community.

Government should expedite the process of opening up the central sea route into Uganda through Dar-es-Salam.

New water vessel to replace Kabalega

The committee was happy to note that the government plans to acquire a new water vessel this financial year to replace the Kabalega that sunk after an accident. I hope even this new vessel will be named Kabalega. The committee was, however, concerned that Kabalega was lost because it had not been insured. 

The committee recommends that the government must insure all Ugandan public water vessels.

State of export trade in Uganda

The committee was informed that in the process of promoting export trade among Ugandans, Export Promotion Board ran into the problem of sustainability of supply.  Orders from developed countries particularly in the United States of America and European Union emphasised continuity of supply and in large quantities.  Ugandan suppliers with particular reference to suppliers of agricultural products do not have this capacity.  

The committee, however, noted that many times the desired products are available in their raw form but cannot reach the foreign markets because they are highly perishable.  

The committee was assured that sustainable industrial development is an integral part of the government’s developments strategy.  One of the key focuses of the national industrial policy is agro-processing. Proposed specific objectives in relation to industry will be to enhance the pace of industrialisation by providing financial, organisation and technical know-how to target sectors engaged in agro-processing.  

The ministry also plans to address constraints in the Uganda Industrial Research Institute so that it can carry out its mandate as the lead implementing agency in the establishment of rural based industries.  

Legal framework under which the Uganda National Bureau of Standards operates

The committee was concerned about the outdated laws under which UNBS operates. This greatly hinders the operations of the institution resulting in counterfeit and sub standard goods flooding the market.  The committee notes that the counterfeit products flooding the Uganda market continuously suffocate Uganda’s industries.  

The committee was informed that at the moment there are four laws and regulations that the ministry and UNBS are handling.  These laws and regulations are: the UNBS Act, the Pre Shipment Verification of Conformity Bill, the Counterfeit Bill and the Weights and Measures Act.  

The UNBS Act and the Counterfeit Bill are with the First Parliamentary Counsel. The principles of PVoC were approved by Cabinet last month and will be sent to the First Parliamentary Counsel and the ministry together with UNBS is still working on the draft for the Weights and Measures Act. 

The committee recommends that work on the said laws should be expedited and when completed Government must provide sufficient funds for their operationalisation.

Apex National Standards Body

The committee noted that standardisation in Uganda is not done centrally. For example, seed quality is standardised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Polythene bags are standardised by the National Environment Management Authority, among others.  

The committee was informed that a more professional method of standardisation practiced by many developed countries is to have an apex standardisation body that coordinates all matters of standardisation in the country. 

The committee was informed that the ministry is currently spearheading the process of formulating the National Standards Policy and once this is finalised and approved, the National Standards Strategy will be operationalised.  It is hopped this will address the problem.

Industry and technology sector

Availability of energy for industrial use

 The committee liaised with government’s commitment to fast track the Bujagali power project and also happy that Karuma power project is about to commence.  It however noted that, before power supply in the country has improved, efforts should be made to improve the amount of power available for industry use and proposed that:

i)	To save power that is on the grid for industrial use, other consumers such as Parliament should be encouraged to use solar energy.  In view of this government should create a policy on solar energy.
ii)	The waiver on the diesel tax that had been put in place to promote industrial activity during the current power crisis has been scrapped in anticipation of more power in the grid.  

	The committee proposes that until the increase in power production has been realised, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should re-instate the tax waiver on diesel so that industries that are currently operating at approximately a quarter of their capacity begin to operate at full capacity and offer employment to individuals who had been laid off because of the power crisis.  

	In addition, the tax waivers should also put into consideration the power consumption of the industries and make it fair to all industries concerned because at the moment industries running generators about 500KVA pay half the price of those consuming less. This is unfair and the anomaly should be rectified.  

iii) 	Tax waivers on diesel should also be extended to agro-processors like grinding mills as these are currently not considered and the current fuel prices are almost putting them out of business.

Jua Kali Parks

The committee was concerned that the construction of Jua Kali parks and common facilities centre at Luzira and Makindye has not kicked off yet funds are available for this purpose.  

The committee was presented with site plans and architectural drawings that were approved by Kampala City Council for Makindye and Uganda Investment Authority from Luzira. I beg to lay these plans on the Table. However, the ministry noted that the funds available for the actual construction are not sufficient. So, with the current status quo the tenders cannot be awarded.  The ministry went ahead to identify an area for relocation within its budget that could cover the funding gap hence enabling the works to commence.  This was under the funds earmarked for the development of an industrial park for each region of the country.  

The ministry pointed out that this included central region that already has Namanve industrial park and proposed that Shs 3 billion should be relocated from this area to Jua Kali parks.  The addition would increase the budget for the Jua Kali parks from Shs 1 billion to Shs 4 billion which is sufficient for the construction to begin.  

The committee recommended that Shs 3 billion be relocated from the funds earmarked for the development of an industrial park in central region to the construction of jua kali parks and common facilities centre at Luzira and Makindye this financial year.

Qualified personnel in factories

The committee was concerned that many technical colleges have been converted into universities and yet in addition to graduates, factories need technical people to work under the graduates.  The committee notes that the current trend is causing factories to have a shortage of qualified personnel.  This is draw back to Uganda’s drive towards industrialisation.  

The committee recommends that the remaining technical specialised education institutions should be left at their current status because the different levels of qualifications awarded by the institutions needed for the industrialisation and development of this country. 

Financing of the industrial sector

The committee was concerned that the financial sector in Uganda is very exploitative to investors hence hindering industrialisation of this country. The finance industry keeps increasing the interest rates instead of reducing them to encourage borrowing. As a result already existing industries have difficulty expanding and many of them especially infant ones end up collapsing. In fact we were told 50 percent collapse every year. For this reason, some areas particularly difficult and costly ones that need to be developed are not ventured into. 

The committee was informed that government has decided to revive Uganda Development Corporation and once revived, it will be able to identify areas where no investors are interested and take them up. 

The committee recommends that Uganda Development Cooperation be revived and adequately facilitated without delay.

Infrastructure

The committee observed that road infrastructure is an area that affects all three sectors of the ministry namely, tourism, trade and industry. This is elaborated as follows. 

In the tourism sector, the committee noted that the deplorable state of Uganda’s roads is a big challenge to the ability of the Ministry of Trade and Industry to deliver. Many roads are impassable and make access to tourist facilities a nightmare. 

The committee was informed that this financial year, government has prioritised works on the tourist roads.

Trade and industry

The committee observed that the poor road infrastructure in the country makes the cost of transporting raw materials to the factories and the finished products to the market exorbitant. This is made worse by the fact that some of the products involved are highly perishable. 

The committee recommends that government should focus specific attention to rural feeder roads because many of the raw materials for our industries come from rural areas.

Secondly, traders have to deliver commodities to rural areas and it is unfair for them to transfer the increased costs of transportation to the consumer yet the temptation is too high.

Cooperative Development

The ministry’s role in reviving cooperative societies, the committee was concerned that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is not seen to be playing a leading role in the revival of cooperative societies in this country yet this area is directly under its mandate. It is worse where savings and cooperative societies (SACCOs) are concerned. 

The committee noted that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under the sector of micro-finance with particular reference to Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Unions (UCSCUS) seems to have taken up the role of supervising SACCOs. 

The committee further observed that the ministry headquarters do not seem to have a link with the cooperative officers in the districts. 

The committee was informed that the ministry registers the cooperative societies and then the Ministry of Micro-Finance provides the funding for the societies. It was further informed that naturally, when a sector is mandated to provide funds for an activity, it monitors closely to ensure that the funds are used properly hence the perception that UCSCUS is playing a lead role in operations of cooperative societies.

However, government is in the process of drafting a cooperative policy. So far Government has registered 10,422 cooperative societies of which it cancelled 851 of them and is left with a balance of 9,371 cooperative societies distributed as follows:

55 percent – agricultural marketing
23 percent – SACCOS
16 percent – multipurpose
6 percent - miscellaneous

In regard to cooperative officers in the district, the committee was informed that it is the districts that employ these officers and not all districts have the capacity to employ them.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry must visibly take a leading role in the revival of cooperative societies and the actual running of the SACCOs. 

The committee further recommends that it should be a government policy that every district recruits a cooperative officer.

The committee recommends for the approval of a grand total of Shs 41,005,364,000 for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2008/09 broken down under three votes as follows:

Vote 015 - Ministry of Tourism Trade and Industry gets for recurrent expenditure Shs 14,884,575,000 and Shs 10,279,798,000 for development expenditure. 

Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute; recurrent expenditure takes Shs 3,026,000,000 and Shs 4,730,000,000 for development expenditure. 

Lastly Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards gets Shs 4,825,000,000 for recurrent expenditure and Shs 3,300,000,000 for development expenditure. That gives us a total of Shs 22,695,575,000 for recurrent expenditure and a total Shs 18,309,789,000 for development expenditure.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. I do not see the shadow minister. Let us hear from the shadow cabinet.

12.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I once again rise to make a brief response on behalf of the Opposition. My shadow minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. John Kawanga, is hosting the Vice-President in Masaka today and he was not aware that his sector report would be considered and so he did not send a copy of his response. I have, nevertheless, had a quick look at the report and I would like to give a few comments that will represent basically the perspective of the Opposition in regard to this report.

I would like to thank the chair of the committee and the members for their report. I would like to examine a number of things in the report where they have the table on utilisation of approved budgets. The budget turnout for the ministry is extremely low considering that we have had, in previous cases, even 100 plus turnover for other ministries. We would like to know what the problem is in regard to this ministry because in one case I think it is as slow as about 30 percent. Is it the problem of ministers not having sufficient muscle with Ministry of Finance such that their money is not remitted, or have they run out of activities to justify further requisition of funds for their ministry?

On page 5, a long list of achievements for Financial Year 2007-2008 are given. I know that revival of the cooperatives is a very important element and so a record of revival was repeated by the committee in items No. 10 and No. 11, where 250 cooperatives were revived and there is intention to revive 400 more. Our problem is using this word “revival”. Most of those cooperatives were actually dead and as a biological scientist, it is impossible to revive a dead thing. You can start afresh to replace it though. 

I am asking what this concept of revival of cooperatives is that drives the actions of the ministry and that has allowed them to achieve the revival of 250 cooperatives. I know, for example, in my part of the country, we have the East Acholi Cooperative Society, which is a cotton cooperative society. It actually never died but went into some kind of limbo. Occasionally, it would try to engage with commercial cotton ginners then it would go back. I am sure that those kinds of cooperatives certainly could be revived. We want to know the actual input of the ministry that led to their revival.

On page 8, the question of arrears of international organisations is brought up. I am sure that when the Ministry of Agriculture comes up, they are most likely going to talk about arrears for FAO and other organisations. When the Ministry of Finance comes up, they will talk about the same arrears. We are talking about this perennial problem of not contributing. 

In this report, the committee says that tourism brings into the country the highest foreign exchange. Out of this, government cannot pick money to pay subscription to World Tourism Organisation so that the face of Uganda that the tourists know is also reflected in this organisation that brings together all the countries that take tourism seriously? It is a big embarrassment. It gets even worse when we read in the papers, for example, that Uganda is giving Burundi US $2 million to subscribe to the East African Community, but it cannot give its own ministries money to subscribe to international organisations that truly help us. This is not acceptable. 

On page 13, the committee made reference to the wildlife that is destroying crops. I have first hand experience of this in Amuru District, in the areas of Koch sub-county and Purongo sub-county. Periodically, elephants go there and the basic recommendation from the wildlife department is that we should dig trenches. I know that somehow the people who live along the borders of national parks have to learn to live with the animals, but I would have also loved to see reflected in the ministry’s policy statement or the report of the committee, the role that the ministry is playing in passing on some of the revenue from the parks to benefit the communities around those parks. We then would know whether their support to the communities around is sufficient for us to go and encourage people to learn to live with the animals or they are actually not giving money, in which case we would then want to demand compensation to the individuals involved. Would the minister give us clarification on that?

On page 15, they talked about disputes in Nkolinga between the companies that have put up lodges for gorilla tracking. I am a bit puzzled. The Attorney-General is here and he could give us his legal opinion on this. The statement says that this particular entrepreneur entered an agreement with the community and apparently that agreement is now binding on the government, to the extent that they are even seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. Is this true as stated in the committee report? If it is, is it regular that communities have a legal way over rights to these national parks? We also want to seek clarification from the minister on that.

On page 17, they mention regional trade imbalances and page 19 they mention export trade promotion. You know, this complaint about Kenya treating us differentially is something that I think we should not have come to Parliament for again. We are under the treaty of the East African Community and we must stick to those agreements rather than lamenting. It does not look good that we keep lamenting. If they hit us with sanctions, the best way to let people understand that it hurts is to reciprocate. We did that I think with the visa when we changed our visa rates because countries like the UK and US were hitting us with high visa rates. It works. 

Kenya is a highly capitalistic country. I lived in Kenya those days when Julius Nyerere was alive and he described Kenya as a “man eats man” society. So let no government ministry expect magnanimity from Kenya. If they do not respect the fact that we are East African, we must remind them that we are East Africans.

As regards these trade imbalances, sometimes they go in our favour as in the case of Sudan. It is important that we penetrate markets, fight for them and hold them. The Opposition would have loved to see what Government is doing to actually counter-penetrate the Kenyan market, particularly in respect to food commodity trade. What have they pressed to ensure that our commodity suppliers can supply the Kenyan market without hindrance and how can we hold on to the Sudanese market? We are beginning to hear complaints; Kenya is also moving in there and soon we will find that the contest between us and them is being played out in another country. We want to know what the ministry is doing in respect to that.

The problem of export trade promotion - and it was well reflected - is a concern that we talked about when we opposed funding Tri-star Apparel and things like that. We said that the best way of becoming competitive is first to do the basic. If you are going to produce clothing out of cotton to export to America, the best way to go about it is to make sure that our cotton production and the value of our cotton is highly competitive. That will attract industries that know that Ugandan cotton is of first class quality - as they used to know that it is cheap - and therefore the final product is competitive outside. The approach we have taken is just throwing good money for bad. I can guarantee Government that they can give Tri-Star a subsidy of US$ 1 billion but they will not recover 10 percent of that money because it is just a wrong way of going about this.

We have examples from Rwanda. I was listening to the deputy head of the Trade Promotion Agency of Rwanda on BBC yesterday morning on the London exhibition - I am not sure if Uganda is even there – and she was talking about your speciality, coffee, and how they made sure that the middle companies that deal in the coffee trade became partners. We have been trying to go ahead of them but you cannot; you do not have the strength to go ahead. You produce your instant coffee and they will cut you in the international market because they have the muscle to do that. However, if you partner with them and eventually you mature and be on your own, it is far more effective. 

This addresses the primary issue of ensuring that the quality of our primary products is such that it allows the country to be competitive. Therefore, export trade promotion must be taken back to its route - in whatever we do finally, basically produce first the raw material and then we can now promote production of those products in such a way that they have the quality and the price competitiveness to be able to compete. Our people in the embassies and in the ministries must then be facilitated. We facilitate ourselves to go and make big promises like “gifted by nature”. This becomes a feel-good slogan because when you look for the gifts that we have, we have not packaged them in such a way that we can sell them and yet yes, we are gifted. However, we stop at feeling good about the gifts that God gave us instead of using them for our benefit. We end up being like the person who kept the talent that the big man gave him, waiting for the big man to come back and he declares, “I kept it very well.” You know what happened to that person. 

On page 24, on financing the industrial sector, the committee made a good note but I was surprised that their recommendation was not about the financial problem which the title basically had; they instead said, “Revive UDC” and I think that is what you had in mind. The industrial sector is not just about finance. Finance is basically a very small element. It is really what we want to do as a country in terms of developing the industrial sector to take advantage of the opportunities within the country and in the region. 

I know and I agree with the committee that the lending rates in this country are not good at all for industrial, agricultural or any other investments because the interest rates are too high. I got a loan to buy a tractor and I am being charged 24 percent -(Interjection)- you say it is cheap but fertilisers are now at Shs 120,000 per bag. In the end you make no money. If that were the long-term borrowing system that used to be with the development bank, or as the members have urged an agricultural development bank, or an industrial development bank where you have a long-term loan, modest interest rate and some grace period that allows you to undertake the establishment of your industry and to begin to recover costs before you start paying back, that would help. 

Secondly, we need to have policies that allow industries to be attracted far beyond the foreigners. We have so many Ugandans outside there who have money but when they want to invest here, they are not treated like we treat the foreign investors. You create conditions; tell them that anything you want to bring, even if you are investing at home or even your car or anything, it will not be taxed. You know, tourism said they are the biggest foreign exchange earners but Ugandans living abroad are sending money for fees and some for investments. Last financial year, it was about US $1.3 billion. Rather than saving their money in the UK or in the US if we encourage them, through concessions that give them bigger advantages to bring their money home, the impact on our economy would be tremendous.

Finally, on the issue of micro-finance, the SACCOs, and the struggle between the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Cooperatives as to who should really be in charge of this; the biggest problem about the way we have handled SACCOs through the Ministry of Finance is that we are doing it as an end in itself. Financial SACCOs are supposed to be facilitators – a mechanism for financial intermediation that allows us to use the cash resources in our economy for a bigger purpose. Until we really develop these SACCOs in that context, these contests will remain. 

Because you are reviving productive cooperatives separate from the finance cooperatives that are in another ministry, the synchrony that you must bring between these cooperatives will not be there. Even the driving experiences will not be there. So, when we come to this, I hope that this time the minister in charge of microfinance, Gen. Salim Saleh, for the first time will be here to defend this budget so that we sort out these things completely. Otherwise, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you. I had noticed some six Members who were unable to contribute last night. So I will start with them and then I will see the others. I will start with hon. Anokbonggo, to be followed by hon. Franca, then hon. Magulumali, then hon. Olega. When those are finished, I will see everybody else.

12.22
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank you. Yesterday, these members you have mentioned wanted to contribute on other reports but now we have a different report. How would we move if they are not willing to speak today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, do not question my actions. I have been trying to be as democratic as possible, to allow every member of this House to contribute to at least one report. This is the minimum I am trying to do. Hon. Anokbonggo.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start by thanking the committee members for compiling the report and the chairperson for presenting it. I will be very brief in my observations. 

I will start from page 3 where the committee has stated that tourism development poorly performed at 7.8 percent of their approved budget. According to the chairperson of the committee, this was due to lack of recruitment. I am just concerned how the ministry which has been there for some time cannot recruit and there are Ugandans roaming on the streets for jobs. An explanation may be necessary.

On page 14 it is said the wildlife stray out of the park to disturb the communities. Recently, two leopards actually strayed into Chawente sub-county and terrorised the communities there and they were not actually supposed to attack these leopards. It took sometime before the rangers came to the rescue of the communities. I am wondering what steps are being put in place to avoid such situations?

Page 16: the committee was informed that the Attorney-General was being consulted to review the policy on monopoly. I think it is clear to this august House and to the people of Uganda that the current economic policy is liberalisation. I would like to urge all ministries to avoid instituting monopoly when this policy is still in place.  

On page 18 the committee talks about the wreckage of Kabalega, which sunk some time back on Lake Victoria. I do not know whether the ministry is planning to recover the wreckage for museum purposes in future.

On page 24, I am pleased to read that after 23 years, government has realised that the Uganda Development Cooperation and the Uganda Cooperative Movement System in Uganda were pillars of development. It is late but it is better late than never. I would urge the ministry to move fast to revive these two organisations for the economic development of this country.

Last but not least, I would actually like to urge the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to move fast and assist these small societies which are trying to help themselves in reviving the cooperative movements in the country. I know they are passing through very hard times and I think with assistance from the ministry, these attempts will be realised. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.28
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute towards this committee report. Allow me to begin by asking the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry when they intend to take the ministry to Northern Uganda. I remember I was a member of this committee and the first issue I raised when they were before the committee was that the ministry is not felt at all in Northern Uganda. The excuse they gave was that Northern Uganda was experiencing conflicts, the LRA war. However, at least courtesy of the two-year peace process in Juba, we have relative peace. So, what comprehensive plan do you have?

In line with that, -(Interjection)- you will have an opportunity, honourable minister, to explain. You will notice that there are so many foreigners investing in Uganda, compared to Ugandans themselves benefiting from the resources we have in the country. What measures does the ministry have to ensure that Ugandans benefit from the resources that we have in the country, other than having Chinese and so many other foreign investors coming to benefit? You find Indians selling Kabalagala and even charcoal! (Interruption) 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for giving way. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I wanted to give to my colleague is that the investors we are getting right now leave a lot to be desired. In Bugolobi, we have a washing bay owned by Chinese and even those who wash cars are Chinese.

MS AKELLO: The honourable colleague has almost completed what I wanted to say on this very point. Thank you so much for that information.  

Let me proceed to my next concern. On page 4, among the key achievements of the ministry is that they have reduced inflow of counterfeits and substandard goods. I wonder what the percentage of reduction in our Ugandan markets is. If you went to Owino market, 90 percent of the goods we have there are substandard. These are not only in Owino market; they even appear on the streets of Kampala. You buy plastic slippers at either Shs 2500 or Shs 3,500. If there is a Ugandan who has the initiative to produce quality goods, that one will be out-competed in the market because of the low standard products in the market.  

I also want to raise concern on the Apex Fund. Who are the beneficiaries of this fund? I am asking this because of what my Leader of the Opposition said that he borrowed at a very high interest rate. So, who are the beneficiaries of this Apex Fund because the intention of passing this fund was to allow Ugandans borrow at low interest rates. Maybe we can have a brief on who the beneficiaries of this are and how far the fund has benefited the country.

About a year or two ago the President - when they were formulating the PRDP - promised affirmative action for Northern Uganda to benefit from trade in key investment areas. I want to know what has happened to this affirmative action and how far it has gone. 

I also want to go back to the substandard goods and give another example. If you went to a bond where they sell second-hand cars, you will only find scrap. Is Uganda a dumping place? If you buy such cars or trucks and trailers, in a few weeks they will be already gone. I wonder whether Uganda National Bureau of Standards is really playing its role and carrying out the mandate it is supposed to carry out. They have to check on that area.  

With these few remarks, Madam Speaker, allow me to end here by thanking the committee chairman for endeavouring at least to produce this report. Thank you.

12.35
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament. This is just a reminder of what I was supposed to say yesterday; bear with me. In the first place, the first issue was supposed to be directed to the Minister of Works –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot win. 

MR MAGULUMAALI: Okay, on the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry report, I want to say I thank you very much, chairperson, for having made the report, though I have a few observations.  

In the background to the budget, it was mentioned that Shs 50 billion was earmarked to be availed to the commercial banks for agro-based loans, and Shs 20 billion earmarked for the Uganda Development Bank to be availed to people dealing in small scale industries. However, it is still unfortunate that in the report, it is not clear how these funds are going to be availed particularly to people who were involved in enterprises in the rural areas.  

Most of us hail from rural constituencies. How are we going to access this money? This is what is not clear yet. We keep talking about industrialization; how are we going to industrialise when we are not clear about how to access the financial bit of it. This is to re-enforce what other people are complaining about, because when I approached the Uganda Development Bank, they asked for collateral. How do you expect somebody who is involved in a small scale industry in Kooki County to raise collateral to expand his or her enterprise? This is where I would like the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to come out clearly and tell us how we can access these funds?  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.38
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also wish to thank the committee and the ministry for a job well done. I have gone through this report and I wish to make the following observations: 

On page 19, Uganda Industrial Research Institute is mentioned. This institute has a plan to establish rural-based industries. This will not be possible without power. In most rural areas, you find that farmers may produce enough food, but when it comes to processing, power is a major constraint. I therefore wish to urge the ministry concerned to liaise with the Ministry of Energy so that power is made available to make agro-processing a reality in this country.

The second point I would like to make is in reference to something, which appears on page 24, that is, the interest rates in this country. We have often complained about the rate of interest in this country; I do not know who is in charge and I do not know what can be done about these interest rates. It appears people are left to do whatever they want when they are trying to lend money. This trend, if allowed to continue, I am sorry this country will not prosper in terms of development. That means those who are working are working for the banks.  At the end of the day, a person who is trying to invest gets nothing out of what he has done. I would like the ministry concerned to note this issue. It appears to have become a habit in the country. 

The other point is on page 26 about formation of SACCOs. In Yumbe, formation of SACCOs has become a problem because we learnt that the financial officers ask for a lot of money. At one time they wanted the people to raise Shs 10 million. How can poverty stricken people collect Shs 10 million? As we talk now, formation of SACCOs is a problem in Yumbe. I call upon the minister to find a way to form SACCOs more cheaply. Thank you.

12.41
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and members who have contributed to this report. Apart from the human resource we have in this country, the other assets we can count on are the natural endowments which form part of the tourism assets that we have as a country. When you talk of regions that are endowed, then Kigezi is one of them; we have Lake Bunyonyi, the second deepest lake in Africa, and we have the mountain gorillas. 

At the same time, however, the Bible says that you reap what you sow. When you look at the performance of the ministry’s budget for the last financial year and you look at the department expenditure of 7.8 percent of the money which was supposed to be spent that year, we are taken aback. Also, bearing in mind that our highest foreign exchange earner is tourism and government is budgeting for only Shs 10 billion for this sector, then we are not serious. You cannot develop these assets to earn money and you invest only Shs 10 billion – that is roughly US $9 million.

I know that government has made roads a priority this financial year, but in subsequent years, government should consider tourism more seriously. If we are to tarmac Kabale-Lake Bunyonyi road, that would be an asset in that region.

Let me mention something about the cost of capital, which is the financing of the industrial sector that the report talks about. When the Leader of the Opposition says that he went to a bank and borrowed at 24 percent, I quietly said that was cheap. If you go to a bank now, if you include the insurance costs, the handling charges, the cost of capital, the interest rate goes up to almost 30 percent. 

We have said here again and again that we need an explanation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is only in Uganda where the gap between the lending rate and the savings rate - which does not actually come to four percent because they deduct a withholding tax of 3.5 percent - is the highest in the world. When we were liberalising the economy, one thing that I remember the Governor Bank of Uganda saying was that we are liberalising to bring the interest rate low but instead he is making it higher. 

At an appropriate time, we need the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here and tell the country what is happening to the interest rate. There is no way you can borrow at 29 percent and leave something in your pockets. That is maybe why the defaulting rate is increasing; people go to the banks to borrow but they cannot make a gross profit that can cover the interest rate.

Having said that, I once again want to thank the committee and also say that as a country, we need to get serious about the tourism sector because is it the only sector we can count on. The natural resource that we have can really make a difference. I said here before that last time when I visited China, one of the tourist attractions that they took us to was a building of 67 stories and there is nothing on the top; they just give you a telescope to look across to Hong Kong. How much do they earn from that building alone – US $5 million every year. So we need to get serious about this sector.

12.47
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

On page 16, I have an issue of concern, and this is resettlement of the Bennets. This is a problem that is long overt due. However, before I go further I want to thank the ministers, hon. Janet Mukwaya and hon. Rugunda, who have personally endeavoured to visit Bennet area and interfaced with the community. They have seen the problems there. 

I want the Members of this House to understand the Bennets, who we call the Ndoboros. These are people who have been staying in the forest since time immemorial. They were born there and since it is a very cold place, they do not put on clothes like we do; they use blankets because of the temperature there. Now when Mt. Elgon National Park was gazetted, the line placed them inside the park and they were forced to come out of the park as per the national park policy. This has been a very big problem and these people have not been settled to date. 

I have seen in some report that UWA is organising to find some permanent resettlement for them. I am very happy for that, and that is what hon. Janet Mukwaya has endeavoured to say in meetings that we have held in Mbale and even in Kapchorwa. I am only requesting that this process be expedited so that a permanent solution is found to the resettlement of the Bennets and we will no longer have the issues that are being raised here and there. There was even a time when they came to Parliament to demonstrate. Petitions have also been presented every now and then. My urge is to have this process of resettlement expedited. 

In Tegeres sub-county, and that is still in my constituency in Tingey, UWA has made so far three demarcations, and these demarcations are not in the same line. As they make the three demarcations, it affects the community land, and you know land in Kapchorwa is very precious. This of course could be the case elsewhere, but ours is very precious because we have very small land sizes. So, UWA makes these demarcations but they even make them not in consent with the leadership of the district or leadership of the community. I want this readdressed so that we have one permanent line in Tegeres Sub-county between the community and the national park instead of these three lines that they have made. One was made in the 1957, then in 1992 and in 2005. The communities are wondering why make these demarcations continuously, and as they make the demarcations, they extend into people’s land. So, this is the concern that I also sought to raise. 

Madam Speaker, we also have people in Kapkwata. Kapkwata Forest was originally a forest reserve and some people settled there with the Singa Singas. Singa Singas were Indians who used to cut timber. We even have Kapkwata Saw Millers I think on Sixth Street, Industrial Area. That is a name that is imported from Kapchorwa. Of course, these people had settled with the Singa Singas and they had produced children and their children also produced. Because they were workers, they did not have where to go, so when the national park was created these people did not have a place to settle. The best they did was to settle on a rock. Even if we went there right now, you would find these people camped on rocks. Just imagine the sanitation situation on rocks; you cannot dig up a latrine in that place. They are there even as I talk now. 

Yesterday I was very surprised when the Minister of Lands said that they were not helping us to have a land fund for resettling these people. I want to urge the minister, hon. Janat Mukwaya, that we will support you, honourable minister, to ensure that Kapchorwa District gets some land fund to resettle these people of Kapkwata that have settled on rocks because they cannot dig or do anything. I appreciate that the Bennets who were displaced were sent some food by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, but the problem that we have is that these people have their cattle and their cattle cannot graze because they cannot go into the forest. So when this process is expedited, it will also help us.

Page 6 of the report indicates facilities that can be put on the tourism lines from Kampala to Malaba, Kampala to Mbarara and Kampala to Masindi. I am from Kapchorwa District and we have very good tourism potential. Whoever is here and has visited Kapchorwa will agree with me that the scenic beauty is good for tourism, so why don’t we also have Kampala to Mbale to Kapchorwa so that we also benefit. Even if we go into the records, we have so many tourists visiting Kapchorwa today and I would encourage the ministry to ensure that we are included in that line of support.

The infrastructure development in the tourism sub-sector is something that is wanting. I have a particular case in point; we have an exploration centre in Mt. Elgon called Kapkway Exploration Centre and it is in Chema sub-county. The road to Chema, to Kapkway Exploration Centre, is about only six kilometres but this road is impassable. It therefore curtails the tourism industry. When tourists come, they are not able to access Kapkway. They access it with difficulty. I want to urge the ministry to include this road for rehabilitation and improvement so that we have tourists reaching the exploration centre in Kapkway. 

Finally, the revival of cooperatives is a very good arrangement. I have seen in the report that they have revived 250 and another 400 are yet to be revived. I also want to put in a case that we have Sebei Elgon Cooperative Union, and this is a very big cooperative union. It is the only union that handles wheat and barley in this country, apart from other crops like coffee and maize. So, I want to urge that in the list that is being put for revival, Sebei Elgon Cooperative Union is included. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.55
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to confine my remarks to the issues associated with the tourism sector, and specifically on issues of UWA.

Some years ago government decided to put up a demarcation on the mountain ranges of Muhavura, Mgahinga and Sabinio. People who were above that demarcation moved down leaving their land and houses above the line. An attempt was made to compensate those people whose land was left above the mark. Some were compensated while others were not compensated. The issue now is, why not compensate those people who were not compensated? It is both an economic issue as well as a political issue. 

Similarly, some structures like church buildings were also left there. I know something is happening and the Ministry of Tourism has written about this, and I am grateful, but it is an issue that is yet to be resolved because no decision has been made as of now. 

The third element associated with that area is that some people have been killed by animals straying from the forest. There has been no compensation whatsoever towards those people. 

The issues of trenches as well as compensation for crops eaten by animals have been tackled in the report. I do not want to add any more comments on that issue. However, the issue of land compensation and the issue of compensation for property, especially houses lost as well as other issues that are associated with that element, are of concern to the people there.

The second issue is associated with the Bwindi Nkuringo area. I have seen in the report that the Attorney-General is yet to make a recommendation. The important issue is not the recommendation; the important thing is that people in Kisoro area, those who have lodges, those who have hotels, those who have handicraft shops, have lost business because of this monopoly. Now, the way the committee has treated the issue seems as if it is an issue of cooling the local people around the forest reserve alone whereas in fact the issue is much bigger than that. It is affecting the people in Kisoro town as a whole, including transporters. So, that element should also be refined so that the true issue is reflected. 

The third element is the question of royalty being paid. The royalty being paid to the communities is extremely small. It is 10 percent of the permit that is used per day; in other words 10 percent of Shs 10,000, which is Shs 1,000. Now if you calculate and multiply 1,000 with eight visitors, that gives a yield of eight percent and that is nothing to the communities there. The communities want something that is like 10 percent of the money levied on each tourist on a given tour. A tourist is paying something close to US $500. If it were 10 percent of US $500, that would yield something more reasonable.

The last observation I want to make is that tourism is affecting agriculture in that area especially in Nkuringo. Sometime ago, people in that area were encouraged to plant tea and they did. They had hoped that they would sell their tea to Kayonza Tea Factory. And indeed a road was built through the park up to a point near River Ivii. When the road was not there, our people could not allow a bridge be built across the river. Consequently, the farmers who had planted   tea in that area lost out because they could no longer transport their tea to Kayonza Tea Factory and there was no alternative given. So, that becomes a big issue.

In the event that they cannot change there is a way in which they can reconstruct the road and bypass the park from Kanungu to Nyabwishenya and that will provide an alternative route for the tea, the people as well as for security because in Kisoro we have only one road. When there is a problem, we are completely stuck. 

So those are the four issues, Madam Speaker, on which I would want some clarification: the question of compensation for land property; the question of Bwindi; the construction of the road and other related matters. I thank you.

1.01
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade and Industry for the report. However, I would like to note with dismay the approved budget for tourism development which was Shs 24.975 billion and the total spent by end of May. Is it the problem of the Ministry of Tourism or it is Finance, which has not released this money to Tourism because what is the point of approving a budget which is not going to be released? 

Secondly, about wild animals on page 13, wild animals have been reported in many cases killing people even in Busitema Forest, the baboons there especially during the dry season and when there is scarcity of food - if you have food in your house, it will even enter your house and if you touch it, it will kill you. Does the Ministry of Tourism have any way of compensating these people who have been killed by these wild animals? It is not only in Busitema but even in other places where trenches are dug. 

Regarding regional imbalance, it is noted here that there are many roadblocks from Mombasa up to Uganda. These roadblocks have been created for Ugandan vehicles and it has made Ugandan business people not to ply the roads in Kenya because when they do so especially the buses, at each roadblock people are told to get out and they are checked thoroughly whereas an Akamba bus will come and pass with its passengers. Is the ministry going to have this checked with the counterpart in Kenya because among the recommendations you said that you will renegotiate with Kenya for the advantage of Ugandan business people? You need to include this in your negotiations so that our buses can also benefit on the Kenyan soil like they are benefiting in Uganda. Here we do not even check them; Kenyan vehicles just come freely and there is nobody who chases them here but you go to Kenya, the moment you reach the border you will start getting checked from there.

Regarding jua kalis on page 22, they are saying, “This has not kicked off because funds are not available.” And yet here on page 18 they are talking about money, which is there for jua kali; but the “Funds were not utilised.” How can you again have this money reallocated to them and in billions to have the same thing done and yet they were failing to utilise the money allocated to them during the last financial year? This is what I want us to be given as a report because if a section or sector cannot utilise the money that you allocate it, why do you continue allocating the money? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.05
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by thanking the chairperson and the committee Members for the good report. I want to appreciate the dilemma the ministry is in. The have said that it is a good foreign exchange earner but there is no money going to the ministry. The Leader of the Opposition has made it.

We have been sitting here and at times we go up to 8.00 p.m. because of your determination that we finish the work. Who brought this budget? It is the Ministry of Finance. Let me make it absolutely clear today, as long as we continue to have ministers who do not respect others in this Parliament, we are doing a futile job. (Applause) 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Nathan Byanyima, for giving way. The information I want to give is not to you. I am basically drawing the attention of the House. I had wanted to rise on a procedural matter. Yesterday, we even suspended sitting in order to get Ministry of Finance to be here. And as we sit now, unless I no longer know the ministers –(Ms Chekamondo rose_)- Oh! I apologise. I could not see you -(Laughter)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, for that. But still we are doing a futile job. I remember when hon. Ssendaula was the Minister of Finance he had assigned a minister here for the budget. But today we have hon. Omach, tomorrow we have hon. Semakula who comes late, today we have another one. We want consistency! 

The committee took a bit of time, sat and looked at the policies, we are now reporting and there would be a serious group to take note so that at the end of the day, they give us comfort that what we are saying is to be taken note of. The minister is arrogant -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Byanyima to insinuate that the issues that are being raised by Members are not being noted and are not being sufficiently responded to? Currently I am stepping in for the Leader of Government Business who is out of the country, as you are aware. I am aware that hon. Suruma is indisposed; he did inform us and consistently he had delegated as you always request the ministers in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I am also aware that hon. Omach is committed.

In as much as he can, the Minister of Finance always comes to this House. He was even in this House on Monday and I think even on Tuesday. Is the honourable member in order to use even unparliamentarily language that hon. Suruma is arrogant and is not taking this Parliament seriously when actually he is serious and takes this Parliament seriously, and he is an honourable member who is not arrogant at all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Government Business, first of all, hon. Byanyima is one of the Members who are consistent in this House. (Applause) He is here from beginning to end. So when he raises issues about the absence of Ministry of Finance, he knows what he is talking about. Government Chief Whip, you were not here yesterday, we had some drama where the Ministry of Finance disappeared and someone who had no authority attempted to step in. The Speaker was not even informed; so there was a lot of drama here yesterday, Government Chief Whip. 

In addition to that -(Mr Omach entered the Chamber)- -(Applause)- now we have two ministers of Finance. I am even hearing with shock that Dr Suruma is sick. No one has informed me. I have an office in this building. I think I should be the first to be informed that your minister of this sector will not be coming. But if you keep within yourselves and no one informs me, really hon. Byanyima is right. (Applause)

Please, be like the Prime Minister, he always writes to say where he is going and who will take charge of his duties. Please emulate the Prime Minister, you Members of Cabinet.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We want Members’ views to be taken seriously. Those technical people from finance look at this Parliament and wonder what we are saying because what we pass is not implemented. Look at this ministry, for example. You are talking of industrial parks -(Interjections)- even if you stop me from talking, my request is one. Let us not have the Committee of Finance reporting. Let them report last so that we can take care of what other people have said. For example, they are talking of jua kali parks. Why should the money for industrial parks be in Finance? I want every Member to come with the medium term paper. On page 29, see how they allocated extra funds; Shs 20 billion for the industrial parks, the other financial year there was I think about US $8 billion. Did you see any industrial park being put up? No where. This money should come in the right home of this ministry. How can you make this distinguished lady, Janat Mukwaya to head a ministry, you do not give her money. Finance is fond of having a big empire which they cannot control. We are having a greedy son, there. We want to have a Ministry of Finance that can deliver.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Byanyima being a very senior legislator. Therefore, he should know when to raise which concerns. Really, hon. Byanyima is discussing the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development because he  knows the jua kalis are under investment authority and he is talking of Ministry of Finance should be doing a good job.

So, we should be able to know that the committee report is coming and if we want those adjustments to be made, they can only be shifted from Finance to Trade, but when we are debating that report. Is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for the Member to be discussing issues that are directly under the Ministry of Finance, when actually we are dealing with the committee report on Trade Tourism and Industry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, I would like to ask the Leader of Government Business to just listen. The issue of jua kali is in this report. He is complaining why the Ministry of Finance does not give this minister money to finance the jua kali. Just cool down, let him speak. (Applause)

MR AHABWE: Thank you, hon. Byanyima, for giving way. I want to inform the Leader of Government Business that a long time a go, when I was still chairperson of this committee, the Jua Kalis had never been under the Ministry of Finance but under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The only difference is, the Ministry of Finance has for a number of times diverted the money from Ministry of Tourism to Ministry of Local Government and that has created some kind of rift between the two ministries.

The other information I would like to give and support hon. Byanyima is about this tendency of the Ministry of Finance behaving like a super ministry. (Applause) Go to the investment plan and look at all these projects, lucrative projects are under Ministry of Finance. Look at the SACCOs. As if the Ministry of Tourism cannot produce a law; the SACCO law is coming from Finance; the Regulatory Authority is coming from Finance. I understand that even the recommended Uganda Development Cooperation that we are intending to revive under the Ministry of Industry, they are scheming it to be under the Ministry of Finance. I said, “I understand” and if I am wrong the minister will correct me. But I know in the budget there is money hidden as something to support the industrialisation process. It is under the Ministry of Finance and not under Trade and therefore the idea that the Ministry of Finance behaves like a super ministry is real and it is hampering progress of this country.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am saying this in good faith. I have been here long and this is my third term and I want us to leave a legacy behind. I do not want us to do rituals here. 

On page 19, they are talking of Uganda Industrial Research Institute. I would appeal to Members to walk there and see. They are trying but the problem is that they lack money. It is a very good institute; it is dynamic. They invited us to go there but very few Members went there. But I was impressed by the effort they are putting in – (Member timed out)

1.18
MRS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee Members for the comprehensive report. However, I have a few things to note in this report. The first one is on page 14 about the boundaries between UWA and the residents who live near these borders. In my district, I have about six sub counties that border with forest reserves, game parks and game corridors: Rwimi sub-county in Bunyangabu county, Kasenda, Rutete, Busoro, Hakibaale, and Kicwamba sub-counties in Burahya County. 

There has been an ongoing wrangle over where exactly the border lies. I am grateful that the Minister for Tourism has been very cooperative in trying to solve this problem. But recently, I visited Hakibaale sub-county and people were up in arms complaining that the game rangers kill their animals when they go to the game park and at the same time the animals from the park destroy their crops and these people have nothing to say. The Minister of State for Tourism has accepted to come to Kabarole and look at these problems and try to solve them amicably so that there is harmony between the residents and the game rangers.

No. 2 is on page 21. It is about industrial development. You will agree with me that these jua kalis and their artisans are very important in societies but in my district, we have been having a problem of power cuts. I have gone everywhere to inquire why there are perpetual and persistent power cuts in Fort Portal Municipality. I was told that since last year, there have been repairs on the Kasese-Fort Portal power line. But whenever I call the Minister of State for Energy, this power is switched on. But before we raise mayhem over it, we are always in darkness. When it comes it is in the night and for about two or three hours and it is off again the whole day yet people cannot work in the small scale industries in the night; they can only produce during the day. 

I ask the minister to at least give people five hours of the day so that they can also work. I am happy to note that there have been efforts towards this endeavour of providing power but if we can be given more hours during the day and fewer at night, and then we can live in harmony. 

I would like to draw the attention of Members of Parliament to the most beautiful scenery in this country, if not the whole world. This scenery is in Kabarole, Kamwenge, Bundibugyo and Kasese because of the Rwenzoris. We have few hotels and the Minister for Tourism keeps telling us to put up more hotels. I am happy that now the ministry is constructing the road to Bundibugyo. The meandering road that lies like a sleeping snake from Fort Portal to Bundibugyo, if worked on as quickly as possible to access the hot springs in Bundibugyo, would really boost the tourism industry. A lot of people want to get there but because of the bad road, a few people come to this place. 

I promised to bring some photos here yesterday. I want to ask you, if it is procedurally right, that I lay on the Table photos of President Levy Mwanawasa with me and hon. Latif Sebaggala so that Members know that we did not promise hot air. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay, you can lay them on the Table.

1.23
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and the ministry for managing to work under hard conditions. I want to comment on tourism using the words which our President normally says. He talks about people living around the lakes and those who own some cows and they do not feed the cows but they depend on the cows for milk, food and sell them to build houses and wonders who the master of the other is. Is it the cow or the human being? I also want to ask the Minister of Finance who is supposed to feed the tourism sites; who is the master of the other: the people of Uganda or the sites of this country, which are not developed?

We know very well that tourism brings in a lot of foreign exchange but the ministry is grossly under-funded. I want to give, an example, of a country nearby; Rwanda. Rwanda has advertised its tourism; the gorillas and there is even a day they call the Naming Ceremony for new gorillas. Tourists come from all over the world to see maybe two of them being named. This attracts a lot of tourists and they get a lot of money.

When travelling abroad by air, the only thing I have found on Uganda in the brochures is a picture of a gorilla without any words, as if we have only the gorilla in this country. When you look at other countries, they put a lot of attractive words to lure you to those areas.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, honourable auntie. The information that I want to pass to you is that, the gorillas in Mgahinga on our side are now spending more time in Rwanda than in Uganda. If you want to track them while they are in Rwanda, we are not allowed to enter. This is because Rwanda is treating them well and with a lot more planning than these gentlemen you see in front here. That is the information I wanted to give to you. Very soon, Uganda will not have gorillas on this side of the mountain. I thank you.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, for that information. Madam Speaker, you remember when we visited Denmark we found a statue of a so-called mermaid called the princess. It is a very beautiful statue and they gave it all sorts of names. Every time they renovate it, they tell you that it had lost an arm because it disappears and then comes back. That information brings in thousands of people. Now I am asking: how is the Ministry of Finance trying to feed the cow, which feeds these Ugandans and also Ministry of Finance itself? I cannot ask Ministry of Trade and Industry. These MTEF ceilings; you say use only Shs 16 billion but what can this amount do? It cannot even train staff to ensure that they have the skills to attract people. They cannot even make brochures on Uganda, they are helpless. Ministry of Finance, which is feeding this country, must look into this ministry to ensure that it produces what it has been given.

On trade, in Bundibugyo we grow cocoa. It is organic and one of the best in the whole world. However recently, you know that people came to spray all the houses in Bundibugyo to ensure that we stop exporting one kilo of cocoa and to ensure that our people die of poverty. I would like to request you, Madam Minister, to ensure that when these ministers are negotiating for DDT, you refuse because you have seen how cocoa is grown in our area. You must ensure that we don’t get -(Interruption)

MR MATTE: Regarding cocoa and DDT in Bundibugyo, I took the matter up with the exporters, that is, OLAM and ESCO. They had assured me that if we sprayed cocoa in Bundibugyo or the houses there, they would not buy our cocoa. I asked them, “What do you want us to do? Malaria is the number one killer in Africa. Do you want us to keep Malaria?” They assured me that if we use ICON, they will still buy our cocoa. I went and discussed this with the minister concerned, hon. Mallinga, and he has agreed that in Bundibugyo, we shall not use DDT but ICON, which is acceptable internationally. I thank you.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, colleague, for giving that information. I believe that if you have checked with Stanbic Uganda you will know that during the peak season in Bundibugyo, Shs 8.0 million is generated every week in the district. This is for the Ministry of Trade so that we can work together. 

Lastly, I want to talk about the parks. We have one sub-county, Kasitu, which borders the park. Pigs, elephants and buffaloes are always invading the people and the pigs are eating the root crops like cassava and potatoes. The people are wondering how they can safeguard their crops because they are starving. I would like to request the ministry because they have told us to dig holes and put fences but for small animals like pigs, which are digging up the root crops, what can we do yet the ministry is saying that if they find an animal killed, the perpetrators will be taken to prison. (Member timed out)

1.33
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am just seeking clarification from the Ministry of Trade and Tourism. 

One: what plans do you have in place for the beautification of the Uganda entry border posts like Malaba because if you go to other countries, the entry is the image; first sight? What plan do you have in place so that we can help you to disseminate it?

Secondly, what plan do you have to promote internal trade? I remember, during Obote’s government, that there was a lot of internal trade activity in this country; trade between the north and south and so forth. What plan is in place to boost this trade because some farmers in western Uganda are pouring milk while others are being cheated and selling their matooke at Shs 500 yet in Kampala it is sold at Shs 10,000? The same applies to Mbale. What plans do you have to boost internal trade?

Furthermore, what plans do you have to out-compete the Kenyans in Sudan? After the Ugandan military supported the SPLA, the Kenyan Government decided to open a road from Kenya direct to Southern Sudan. They have built warehouses and helped the Kenya Commercial Bank to open a bank branch there. Now they are even opening another one in Gulu. As Ugandans, we have a big problem as regards trade. We have no warehouses and we are the ones who end up being sent to an area that looks like Owino. What plans do you have in place because we have spent a lot of money?

Also, what plans do you have in place to boost beef export internally? Why should we carry carcasses from Mbarara or Karamoja to the city? In other countries, abattoirs are built where the animals are. Why don’t we have abattoirs in Mbarara, Karamoja or Soroti so that beef is brought to the city in refrigerated trucks like fish exports? This would lower the cost of meat as well as improve its value. Why do we have sick animals spending two days being transported yet at the end of the day beef prices continue to rise? What plans do you have in place?

Furthermore, what policy do you have for regional or district industrial parks? In Tororo, there is land I can give you; 50 acres of land in Osukuru sub-county for an industrial park. What is the policy?

For the last four or five years, I have been seeing in our budget money for jua kali but I do not see anything on the ground. If you go to other countries in Europe - I was in France and our matooke is not allowed there. Ugandans who want matooke are told, “If you want to bring matooke here you must call it a vegetable”. Doesn’t this contradict international trade rules?

The Crested Training School in Jinja is a property of the Eastern University, Busitema. It is among the properties that were laid here on this Table when the Eastern University was being created. Under what law did you decide to own this training centre? I really want to tell the Minister for Trade that this issue of the training centre in Jinja is very serious.

Also, if you travel and look at the International Tourist Guide, it states that there is nothing good in Tororo. Furthermore, it has only a quarter page on Uganda and mentions nothing about Tororo or Masaka yet in Tororo District we have home tourism and the hospitality industry. Why don’t we spend money and buy more pages in this International Tourist Guide? Thank you very much.

1.38
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Trade is the soul of the world so if you see a country like Uganda, which neglects trade, you know they will never develop even within 100 years. Tourism is the only activity that Africans can engage in and manage but if you see a country like Uganda, which does not even think about its tourism, a sector that would give us comparative advantage over other countries, you know that this country is next to the grave.

As a country what do you give chimpanzees? Do you feed them? You do not, yet you can have tourists coming from America to see them in exchange for money but we do not want to develop where the chimpanzees live. What is wrong with us?

Furthermore, this report has a problem; maybe the policy had a problem. It lacks the element of planning. For instance, they tell us in the report that 25 Members of Parliament sat down and said electrical fencing to separate human activity from the wildlife is very expensive. Expensive in what sense? How much do we need, as a country, to embark on electrical fencing? You do not know the amount but you are telling us that it is expensive. 

Even if it is expensive to the tune of billions, if we embarked on it for 10 years, don’t you think that we would have this electric fence? It is a question of planning. There is nothing expensive in this world. Many are going to the moon but you cannot separate people from animals using wires and electricity. What is your problem? (Laughter) It is lack of planning. People who border these parks are supposed to get 25 percent. Suppose you say that this 25 percent will be used to dig trenches for the next 10 years? 

For instance, can’t you fence 50 kilometres? Can’t you make trenches of 50 kilometres separating the people of Kasese from the national park if you can embark on this programme for 20 years? Your problem is that you plan as if the country is there for one day. What is your problem? Does it make sense to plan for one day for a country, which you will leave to your children? What is wrong with these fellows? (Laughter) 

They talk about the Bennets but they forgot that recently we the Basongora went to the national park but there is nothing mentioned here. In our wisdom, we found some land but government has stopped there. They have failed to plan this land for these people. The people do not know what belongs to them and they are just there in general happiness. A country that cannot think and invest in planning is dead. The world is not waiting for you; you must think and you must plan. Why are you developing as if you are in the jungle, as if you are in the wildness? Are you trees? (Laughter) We speak with emotion because the Trade and Tourism Industry is the sector that we can handle as black people. We do not have the capacity to engage in science and technology to go to the moon. 

In other countries, when you hear presidents talking about a sector, you know that sector has been given priority. Your President is always talking about trade and industrialisation. What is the budget? Where is the budget for industrialisation? Can you develop industries with Shs 10 billion? Even where Finance will not release the money, they are hiding the money for them to ‘eat’. How can you put money of a sector in another sector which is not related? Who is fooling who? -(Interruption) 

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. I have really admired your zeal and anxiety because you wanted these things yesterday, but I do not know whether if I sit down and cook figures now and present them as a request that you will give me the money when I do not have a policy because you are zealous about planning. 

Last year, we produced polices here; we have worked out activities that will help us to implement and I do not want to really promise what I cannot do. So, what I have promised here is what I can manage between October when you give me the money and next financial year when we close. And gradually, I have given you a programme for five years because trade and industrialisation is not an activity like cooking millet or posho -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, are you really saying that you are satisfied with what you have? The whole House is saying that you should be given more money. I do not understand what you are saying.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, much as I want the money - I have appreciated for example the contribution of the Leader of the Opposition! But when a Member of Parliament calls you, “These, that” - we are honourable Members of Parliament too! The next person who is “These” or “That” - the language! I would not want such support.  

MR KIBANZANGA: I kindly beg that you do not waste time on form; go to substance. On the language, I apologise. But we need serious planning. As I told you, Uganda is not ending tomorrow. Let us look at your policy. Let us look at the money you want and let us divide these monies in years. It is planning! If you want Shs 7.0 billion to phase off separating animals from human activities, we can phase out that money and within a period of 20 years you will have finished. That is how people develop; that is how people plan. I know we cannot raise these monies within a single financial year. I know your economy. [Members: “It is ours.”] No, given an opportunity, I can develop this economy; so this one is yours. (Laughter) So we can phase out our activities and say that within 100 years, we shall have electrical fencing around our protected areas. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for having given me the opportunity to make a contribution. But let us be serious on planning. Uganda is going nowhere. We shall pass this country to our children. I thank you very much.

1.47
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I want to start on the issue of harmonisation. As we speak today, if you look at the presidential policy statement, you will find that half of the budget for Trade, Tourism and Industry is budgeted under the President’s Office for trade-related matters. When you go to Foreign Affairs - the committee where I belong - you will find trade-related matters budgeted under it. When you go to the East African Community, you will find trade-related matters budgeted. When you go to Finance, there are trade-related matters. 

Then, when you go to negotiations, you will find different ministries moving as negotiators on behalf of government for trade-related matters. You will find a trade negotiator from Foreign Affairs; someone from Finance; someone from Trade, someone from President’s Office. I am saying this because I have been involved in many trade-related matters under ACPEU, as a Member of Parliament under the ACPEU.  

If we were to harmonise the budget related to trade now from all these ministries and we put this money in one pool, we would pull this country ahead. You will find that Trade would perhaps be the first or second highest budgeted ministry. But because it is scattered, you cannot, one, get the outputs you desire. Two, you cannot plan the activities in a more coherent manner. I think it is time that the committee and the ministry and the ministers harmonised trade-related matters. 

It is sad that in many countries trade is the number one priority. Actually in many countries, you will find the ministry of foreign relations and trade as one ministry because trade is no longer a matter of domestic arena; trade is now an international matter and if we cannot harmonise trade and put it as a priority, we shall remain behind. We need to harmonise the issue of the budget of trade and harmonise where to go. 

You find investors coming and then the Executive Director of the Uganda Investment Authority will not carry the foreign investors to the Ministry of Trade; she will carry them to the President’s Office. So, who the real Minister of Trade is, is the question for which I need an answer. I am saying this because the actual operational framework suggests that the President is also the Minister of Trade. So, I want to know whether the President has delegated and the Minister is substantially the Minister of Trade. Otherwise, why should foreign investors come to Uganda for trade matters and instead of them going to the ministry of trade they are taken to State House?

Much as I respect the minister, but if we are going to put in place institutions, we should also respect, strengthen and make them functional. Otherwise, at the moment the ministry of trade is not functional on matters of trade. There is a time we were in Brussels at the peak of the negotiations for the Economic Partnership Agreement, but with no representatives from the Ministry of Trade. So when we returned we inquired why it had happened that way. And you know what they told us? They told us that they did not have money. But there was a very low team from the Ministry of Finance masquerading as a negotiator on behalf of Uganda; some very low –(Laughter)– after failing to carry the technical people from the Ministry of Trade to go and negotiate under EPA; they chose to fly junior officers from the Ministry of Finance to go and negotiate –(Interruption)

MR NYEKO: Thank you, hon. Betty Amongi, for giving me way. I just want to give brief information about what you are talking about. Last year, I and others attended the Smart Partnership Dialogue in Malaysia and the honourable minister was there and there was no official from the Ministry of Trade apart from the minister herself, but those who travelled under the President’s entourage to attend that very conference were not less than 50. That is why I rose to support you on this point and I want to emphasize that this is a very serious matter; we have to empower our technocrats to be the ones to attend such dialogues. Thank you so much.

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much. I think –(Member timed out)

1.54
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the work well done.

My first problem concerns the kaveera. This is a matter of life and death because the kaveera affects our soils. The issue of Kenya not banning the production of kaveera is very significant. If we are moving in the East African spirit, they should abide. In case they do not abide, then it is upon the Uganda Government to ban it here and follow the banning strictly, the way the Rwanda Government has done. It is very unfortunate that people keep praising Rwanda for being strict on kaveera yet we cannot do it here. It is very unfortunate, Madam Speaker, and we should follow suite. 

The other issue is about taxation. When our people are taxed higher than the rest of the East African businessmen and women, it means we are doing a disservice to our people; they will not compete. Therefore, I want to suggest that the Uganda Government moves faster to harmonise the taxation system and if the Kenyan Government does not agree to the arrangement, then we should consider reducing the taxes on our side.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is about standardisation to be done centrally. This is a very important thing. When we had the problem of fake seeds being supplied to the east and north, I saw drama. The ministries did not understand who was supposed to do what; the fake seeds were there, we agreed, but we could not tell who was responsible. Ministries were blaming each other. Therefore, I suggest that this be done centrally, given our financial constraints and the limited manpower resources.

The other issue I would like to comment about is the waiver for diesel tax. We cannot have a budget based on speculation - we put this waiver in place and later on removed it because we had anticipated having more electricity. But now that this has not been done, we must consider keeping it there. And we also need to include the agro-processing people into this. I am saying this because agro-processing is the cornerstone in Prosperity-for-All, which is the foundation of our manifesto as the National Resistance Movement.

On tourism, I want to say that this sector should be supported highly because of what my brother hon. Kibanzanga said about countries having to invest where they have more comparative advantage. The principle in development is that countries should invest in sectors where they have comparative advantage. So, when we do not put much money in tourism, then we may not compete favourably in industrialisation and that is why I am saying that hon. Kibanzanga had a point in what he said.

Let me say something about wildlife: wild animals attack people and destroy crops. The ministry and the staff of UWA surely seem not to be concerned. I have a case in point from Burahya, where locals complained about UWA evicting them from their land. And whenever they talk, they use the words: “We are going to shoot you.” Surely we should limit this arrogance by the UWA people because I believe this country operates under the law. So, I think honourable minister – it is good hon. Muhanga has said you are coming there - you must restrain your people.

My next point is about SACCOs. These SACCOs are good but the way we are moving on with them is not the best. Actually the minister needs to look into it. And it is unfortunate that our brothers on the Opposition side are saying that it is the NRM Government that killed the cooperative movement in Uganda –(Interjections)– yes, you will have that time, but I would like to say that already the cooperatives, with or without the NRM Government were bound to collapse because they were highly indebted. So, actually we should forget whatever happened and just revive them.

It is absurd that a Member of Parliament, hon. Kibanzanga, can say that this government does not have the time to think and that it does not think. It is very unfortunate, my brother! This country has a leadership that is capable and is doing every best thing for this country. (Applause) If you moved to your district, Kasese, which I am familiar with and you are aware and looked at the people there, compare the life they led in the 1980s and early 1990s with what they are leading today, you will realise that it is not the same. My brother, first appreciate then put in your input because you are also a citizen of this country. But to say that our leadership does not think is really very unbecoming of a Member of Parliament of your calibre and I think it would be better you withdrew for us to move – (Member timed out)

2.00
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Bulisa County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this detailed report. I would first of all want to seek clarification from the minister. Last year you made an undertaking in this Parliament and in our committee that this year you are going to give us a textile policy. I have tried to check, I thought you would accompany your ministerial statement with the textile policy given the problems that Phoenix Logistic and the defunct Tri-star, Bugisu ATM and Lira Spinning Mill have faced. And even recently we had a crisis with cotton seed because of lack of regulation of ginners. 

Secondly, as a neighbour of Murchison Falls National Park, I have had a situation where nomads have lived in the national park for three years until April this year when the President intervened. When he did, your team, in their joint operation decided to punish my district speaker and my sub-county chairman whose animals only strayed into the game reserve because you had unloaded all the animals that you have kept into our community grazing area. And they say that you are the ones who reported to the President, they imprisoned the two men and they have lost Shs 4 million. They were punished for having reported them to the President that UWA had kept animals - for three years. And now the same animals have returned with Foot and Mouth Disease and caused us more problems. Can you do something to punish these people?

Secondly, I have been wondering how the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which is in charge of tourism and the investment authority can make use of our blessed endowment in Bunyoro. You are aware that the Albert region – that part is in the mother kingdom. You are aware that this Lake Albert, where you are now talking of mining oil has a sand beach from Ntoroko up to Wanseko; we have this Nile – the Lake Albert Victoria Delta. Why don’t you come and make this place a tourism destination with a tourism park so that we do not see people going there to graze animals and instead people come and invest in real terms for tourism. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleague, you mentioned something that remedied me of something that I should have inquired about. In yesterday’s debate on the Ministry of Land’s report, they talked of comprehensive planning for greater Kampala and then the Albert – are they planning on a city with that name in your constituency or what? I forgot to ask that. Maybe you could help us so that we can know more about that.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I am only asking for more planning in the Lake Albert grabben and more so in that area. I am aware that some semblance of planning is being worked on in that area of the early production scheme of Kayisotonya. But I am requesting that we do more than just the early production scheme. For us the people of Bunyoro, unlike those who are very excited about this oil, we know oil is a finite resource. Our long lasting resource is actually tourism, because that potential is long lasting. And we would like to see the connectivity of these old hot springs, the Murchison Falls in Bulisa – all these things are lacking a semblance of human development. In our neighbouring Kenya and Tanzania, you cannot find a single site where you cannot wash your hands or find a canteen.

So my proposal is that we should work on the tourism section, and work on all these nice canaries on the escarpments, the sand beaches, the wildlife – and that is why I have always been talking bout the lakeside road from Ntoroko to Butiaba. And people should know that our tourists do not have to come to every tourist site through our capital’s jam and slam towns. They would want direct connections from one site to another so that they can enjoy that beauty from one site to another. That is why I appeal that we should do serious investment to see that all sites have at least a development.

I appreciate that we have achieved a lot in terms of public-private partnerships where investors are putting money into the tourism sector. But that is not enough; the Sudhirs will not go to some of these places like Murchison Falls National Park. Find money like it was for the UDC arrangement and make sure that these areas are developed. If we cannot manage them, we can get private managers and if they cannot perform, we can privatise them much later. But government must move and give a big push in tourism in the biggest way possible.

2.08
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report given to us. I have some concerns regarding trade and tourism. 

First I would like to talk about trade across the borders. With relative peace in Sudan and the Congo, there is booming trade going on. Goods are coming from Kampala and others from Kenya and they pass through Koboko to Kaya then into Sudan, and many men and women are involved in this business. But I would like to inform the minister that these businessmen and women are suffering. One of their problems is the high taxes that they impose on them as they take their goods to Sudan. I wonder if there is any formula for calculating those taxes. Many women who are trying to engage in business are falling out because all their money is going to taxes.

Secondly, the businessmen and businesswomen who go to Sudan are suffering. Women are being raped, men are being harassed, and their money is being stolen. I can report one case in point where two women took fresh fish from Kampala to Sudan. After selling their fresh fish, they had money on them but on their way back they were robbed. They returned empty handed. And it is the same situation with the men. Men are being killed. Every month you see people coming – some come to die here in Uganda, others are carried back from Sudan. So, what can we do to reduce the suffering of our people? I understand that there was an inter-ministerial meeting between Sudan and Uganda but still these problems are going on. I am suggesting that instead of us suffering in taking our commodities to them, why do we not develop a very big international market in Koboko where we can bring all our goods, even from Kenya and Uganda and those people who want them come to buy from us, rather than us going to look for trouble and suffer from there? We have the land, we can provide it. That is one suggestion.

Secondly, our young men and women who are doing business in Congo – when you just bring some few kilogrammes of sugar, they arrest you. You get arrested even for bringing very small commodities. A certain young man at one time bought some sugar, salt and posho; he was taking them across the border to a funeral in Uganda, but this, what do you call it, this crack unit, they followed this young man up to the funeral and shot him. Even in Uganda? Surely, what amount of commodities do you consider to be taxed? Because some of our people stay in Congo, in Sudan and they even have their farms across in Congo. And when they come, they are taxed. Our businessmen are really suffering.

Another incident regards these motorcycles. There are very cheap motorcycles in Congo. They buy them at around Shs 1 million but if you want to register it, it costs more than Shs 700,000. They cannot even give you a grace period to look for the money and pay in instalments. So, our young men and women are really suffering because of this. I would like something to be done. I have seen in other borders people moving freely with their goods but when it comes to Kiboko, we are really rendered helpless. I want an explanation on this. And at one point, young men decided to fight one of those people who were chasing them. So it is a chaotic thing. We thought it was a blessing to be near the border but it is becoming a curse and we are not progressing. 

Madam Speaker, on the side of tourism; I would like to advice the minister to expand and identify new areas of tourism. For example in Koboko, we have very exciting scenes, which you may not know about. We have a watershed on the boundary, which divides Congo and Sudan. And you see very beautiful rivers parting the waters on the opposite direction. You can see Koci River flowing in the east and Keri River flowing in the west. When you go to the border, you find Kaya River flowing in the east. It is a beautiful scene, and you can walk along that watershed. That is a tourist attraction!

We also have a spot called, in our language, Salia Musala. Salia Musala means three cooking stones. One stone is in Congo, the other is in Sudan and one stone is in Uganda. You can even go and stand on them and put your feet across the three countries. That is a beautiful spot! And that one can be developed for tourism attraction. 

If you come to the southeast of Koboko, there are some rocks there, and they have got various shapes. One is called Ombokodo. The rock looks like a human head. (Laughter) It is beautiful to look at. So I would like you to come to Koboko and revive these areas and develop them. Thank you very much.

2.15
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My issue is on page 20, the legal framework under which the Uganda National Bureau of Standards operates. 

Given the fact that there are some laws, which are yet to be passed in order to have an effective Uganda National Bureau of Standards, but as we talk now, many of our voters, including ourselves, have been victims. Many of us have been cheated. And in terms of trade, if you look at the weighing machines of most of those traders who are operating wholesale and retail shops all over the country, you will notice that they have cheated many people; because someone who has bought a kilogramme of sugar ends up getting something like 700 grams. 

When you go to petrol stations here in Kampala and other places, you can clearly see a sticker of UNBS. To me this is an assurance that these fuel stations have been inspected by UNBS. But more often than not, we have had complaints from constituents that most petrol stations are cheating them; that the pumps are faulty and yet they bear stickers of UNBS.

When you look at the quality of some of the products that are being produced here in Uganda, you wonder. And indeed Uganda National Bureau of Standards inspects those factories. Look at our toilet paper, some of them definitely do not measure up to standard. There are some companies that manufacture such toilet paper but actually this is not toilet paper. 

When you look at our soap, the standard of our soap these days leaves a lot to be desired. Madam Speaker, I am wondering what we can do before these Bills are enacted to enhance the effectiveness of Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Can we really have something in place so that we can really curb this kind of cheating?

Madam Speaker, in some parts of this country, traders are mixing diesel with paraffin. And indeed these are petrol stations that have been inspected by Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Because of the high prices on diesel, they have now started mixing paraffin with diesel so that they make ends meet. 

I believe that unless we do what we can do in order to prevent this kind of cheating – because I know that currently there is a framework under which UNBS is operating and it is within that framework that the UNBS is expected to protect the standards of our products. When you look at the standards of the products coming from abroad; you buy slippers which my colleague talked about.  Go down there; you buy shoes for ladies, there are now disposable shoes that today you have bought them and you cannot use them tomorrow. I had a colleague who went and bought a pair of shoes from down there and he had a wedding. But before the wedding came to an end, he was requesting his driver to go back and pick another pair of shoes because this one could not complete the function.

These are the commodities we are getting. Go and buy a shirt here; in two days take it for dry cleaning, it will come out when it cannot be used anymore. I believe that this country should not be a dumping ground. Everything that comes here; like the shoes being sold very cheaply, at the end of the day turns out to be very expensive to our ordinary Ugandans who are mostly the victims.   I believe that the ministry has a lot to do in order to ensure that our standards not only of goods produced locally but also those from abroad meet our standards. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.20
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by commending the chairperson of the committee for the clarity with which he presented the report. To my knowledge, this was his first time and I was really impressed. (Applause)

I would, however, have loved to see the mandate of the ministry reproduce so that as we debate the policy, we refer to the mandate of this ministry. Because we may not all be able to remember what the ministry is supposed to do. 

I have seen tourists coming to this country in foreign registered vehicles. Some of these vehicles are double-deckers. They carry their own tents; they carry their own food; they carry their own water so that they just go to the park and pitch their tents in the nearest town, spend the night there and move on without spending money in our hotels and without eating our food. What is government policy on this? Should these people come here, enjoy the facilities and leave no money in this country? How much are we gaining as a country from this type of tourism?

In the Sixth Parliament I was a Member of the Sessional Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs as it was then known. The President informed the committee that the main role of our foreign missions from that time on would be to promote Uganda by promoting tourism and trade and investment. I would have liked to see the linkages between Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Which bit is done by Foreign Affairs and which bit is done by the ministry? The linkages should be there so that we see the roles of the two ministries in this sector together.

On page 12 the committee expresses some doubts that government will not allow Uganda Wildlife Education Center Trust to register its own land. I do not know where the committee got this? The law is very clear; where a body has got the board of trustees, it owns land just like anybody else. Why should this center not be allowed to register its own land? My advice to the ministry is that they should move and register this land tomorrow. The next day this land could go to some investors. Looking at the way things are being done here; so I think that it is very important to secure this land. The ministry should move very fast and register this land in the name of the trust so that it is not given away to some investors. 

I also want to know really - I know the Presidential delegates; all these ministers have delegated authority of the President. But I think that it is fair that once authority is delegated, it should be allowed to stay there or the holder should be allowed to use that authority. It is not only in the case of the Ministry of Industry that the Chief Executive of our country seems to be the minister. It cuts across the board. I think our ministers should just advise the President because the first work of a minister is to advise the head of government and advise that head of government honestly. The President should be advised that those holding other offices are also human beings who can perform. They should be allowed time to fail first before we grab their roles so that we know who is doing what. Because when everybody is doing everything and nobody is doing anything -(Laughter)- then things do not move. Then we shall not move because really, I would encourage our ministers to go out and sell themselves first of all to the people of Uganda.  

Where I come from I was shocked when I asked senior one students and they did not know who is the Minister of Education -(Laughter)- something that should be known by somebody in P1! So, really I would encourage the ministers also to make themselves available to the whole country. I think in this respect –(Interruption) 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think it is true that an S1 student may not know the Minister of Education simply because of various reshuffles every other day. So I think that it is true that really if a student in S1 today tells you that the minister is hon. Bitamazire, then after two years it is going to be another minister. So they are right; there are so many reshuffles going on. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: I think the people in hon. Okello-Okello’s constituency could be having problems with pronouncing the name of the minister. (Laughter) 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. I thank my colleague for giving way. Actually I do not think the Member should blame the children but he should blame their teachers because in social studies they are supposed to be told by their teachers under what we call current affairs and civic education. But then in addition we have got these charts, which are everywhere and we encourage all schools to buy those charts. At least they can very easily learn and get the names from there. 

Thirdly and finally, I think I am one of the ministers who have been around the country so much that whoever has been keen has seen me here or there. I thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank all the honourable members who have given me information. The point I am trying to make is that it is true some ministers may be going down, but really not all of them. I think what the Vice-President has started to do should be emulated so that we do not hear -  if the teachers teach that the Minister of Education is so and so, without even those pupils seeing the face, it will just end there -(Member timed out)

2.29
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I rise to appreciate and support the report of the committee. I want to talk about trade between Uganda and Sudan, which my colleague from Koboko has just talked about. There is very extensive trade between Uganda and Sudan and this trade is reaching a level where each and every item in Uganda is now being bought by Sudanese. Ugandans are not benefiting from the trade but the Sudanese are benefiting. Why do I say this? The Sudanese go up to the farms to buy fresh food from the gardens, which to us Ugandans will now be dangerous because we shall soon suffer famine. Right now food prices in Arua are very high and many people cannot afford food.

I am thinking that the government should actually have a common market at the border where the people of Sudan come and buy, instead of going up to the villages to buy food from individuals.

I would like to talk a bit about tourism. In Arua District we have a very beautiful area where the white rhinos have been living. It is the only suitable place for white rhinos in Uganda and these white rhinos were interfered with during the wars. Most of them died. I will request the Ministry of Tourism to look at our game reserve and develop it. It is a very beautiful area from which we could get a lot of money. 

I also would like to talk about industry. In Arua we do not have many industries but we have the best honey in Uganda. The honey industry that was in Arua has collapsed and yet government injected a lot of money in that industry. So, what is the ministry doing about that? Do we have to reactivate it?

We also have the petroleum in Rhino Camp. When it was identified an organisation called Neptune went and they are working but what perplexed the common man was that even the unskilled labourers came from Kampala to go and work in that industry. Madam Speaker, what will the people of that area benefit if they cannot even be allowed to do unskilled work?

We do appreciate the work that the ministry is doing but they need to be a little bit – I really want to say that the budget for this ministry is very little. Is it because their activities are not very intensive? And even then the little budget that is given to them, the Minister of Finance does not even release it all. Even when it is released they again return it to Ministry of Finance. I think it is unfair! There are very many activities, and this is the ministry who should do more work, because they are the ministry which even brings for us revenue in Uganda. Thank you very much.

2.34
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start from page 11. The committee is concerned that Uganda Tourism Training Institute located in Jinja was transferred from the Ministry of Educational and Sports and returned to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry where it belongs but this budget was left with the former ministry. This is not enough. I wish the committee could get time to go and visit this institute. The institute is really suffering because they are not running under any budget; they are facing problems in harmonising this situation. They belong to another ministry, the budget is another ministry, it is really crippling.

I would also like to encourage the committee to look at the merits and demerits of it being where it was transferred, because as hon. Ekanya said when they introduced the government university in the East, this institute is part of the university. The university is under the Ministry of Education. So, I really wonder how we are going to harmonise the situation. I think it will be better if the Ministry of Trade, if they find it very important to have –(Mrs Mukwaya rose_)- it is very little time and I have a number of points. She will respond in her response.

Madam Speaker, I would just say that maybe the Minister of Trade could get a technical person to be a member of the board of governors of that institution but it is a subject, which I would like really the committee to take as a serious matter such that they see how best they can help this institute. 

My point No. 2 is on page 27: “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry must visibly take a leading role in the revival of the cooperative society and actual running of the SACCOs.” This recommendation should be reinforced in such a way that as we  have the Energy Fund, we should also have a Trade Fund because I was very much shocked when I heard during the day of budget presentation that the money that is going to be available this year for the SACCOs is Shs 100 million per district. What really can Shs 100 million help a district, like a district, which has got 27 sub-counties? I think if we came up with a trade fund we should achieve the goals of this policy. We want to help the people. You find that the people are really in need of the SACCOs. Very many young people do not have access, they cannot manage to go and get loans from micro-finance institutions because they will ask for collateral security, they will ask for log books, and land titles. It is only these SACCOs that can help them to access that facility without those details. So, I think if we can come up with a trade fund, t will not only help the SACCOs but also the jua kalis. 

I must thank the minister for this idea and the fund should be put in place, but the fund is only committed to Kampala. And when I was a member of the committee that was sensitising the population about the fast tracking of the East African Federation, I got an opportunity to move around the whole country. You find that these jua kalis are placed everywhere. You go to Busia border, Mbale, Lira, or Mbarara, they are all there. 

I would like to urge the ministry to come up with a comprehensive programme of how these jua kalis are going to be helped in the country. This is a sector that is developing very fast. If we come out to support them, then it will help very many young people who are unemployed to access these facilities as the Kampala jua kalis are going to do. 

The third point is an issue raised by hon. Franco. She was against –(Interjections)- I am sorry, hon. Frank. Thank you for the correction. She was against the importation of old cars. There is a policy, which discourages importation of old cars because the taxes are high but I think this process should be gradual until we achieve the Prosperity-for-All -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So far 21 Members have contributed to this report; I think I should now invite the minister to respond. I have noted all the names of the Members who want to speak and I will give them another opportunity in the next report.

2.40
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. We have benefited immensely from the contributions and the concerns from Members of Parliament. I want to beg your indulgence that I respond to issues not to individual Members because they were talking about the same issues. 

Let me start with the serious concern of our border trade. I want to remind the House that sometime this year the government constituted an inter-ministerial committee, which visited Southern Sudan. They came and made a report which and Cabinet discussed. A technical committee was established to actually cost the activities that were identified as facilities required and the technical committee was given one month and they are about to finish. After that, the Ministry of Finance will sit with this technical committee to see how best we can invest. And next month, the ministries of Finance, Tourism, Trade and Industry, Works, Local Government, Agriculture, Internal Affairs and Justice are going to Sudan to meet the government using the costed activities in order to negotiate. But government has already established a facility at the border on the Ugandan side, which is helping our people who are trading in Southern Sudan -(Ms Namagwa rose_)- I am sorry colleague. 

On the issue of the industrial parks, it is true the Members are concerned about the decision to merge Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Export Promotion board and other two institutions. It was decided that we merge and then later wisdom appeared that we should not because these are different functions and we need each of them. Government decided that these institutions should be transferred to Trade. There has been some resistance but I am still pursuing it. I would not mind because Uganda Investment Authority is the investment arm of government. Developing the industrial parks as an infrastructure to facilitate trade would not be an issue in my own view. Whether it is Finance or Trade, what I need are facilities for trade. 

This year, Uganda Investment Authority has been given money to develop the first ten industrial parks. The last time I called Uganda Investment Authority, I was excited by the response from the districts. Some districts are giving land up to 1,000 to 9,000 acres for the development of the industrial parks. While we sort out the issue of the housing of Uganda Investments Authority, at least work is in progress and money is there for this activity.

But let us also draw the distinction between the industrial parks vis-à-vis a dry port vis-à-vis a jua kali common facility. The intention of the jua kali common facility is that you find carpenters, for example, in Kampala who are wasting our wood because of low technology of machinery, get the machinery that they do not have, put them in one centre so that every carpenter in Kampala can access that facility to upgrade their woodwork rather than owning it as a person because it is very expensive. I would invite colleagues to visit an industrial centre near Lugogo just before Shoprite Supermarket, which belongs to the Ministry of Labour. In that small facility there is major metal fabrication machinery and any fabricator within Kampala can access that facility to perfect any item that they want to use. So that was the intention of the jua kali because in order for the Katwe fabrications to compete as spare parts, they need to be upgraded. 

Last year we were given Shs 1 billion. The first time the money we were given was to pay off the land, get the titles and get the land surveyed. After we had done that, we went into the tendering process and it was concluded but we could not award the tender because we did not have enough money to do the building. Last year we could not tender and we took back the money and this year we have been given the same Shs 1 billion. In the budget you find that the central region is one of those that have been identified for an industrial park. I was pleading with my colleague in the Ministry of Finance that now that the central region has Namanve, which is being developed, let us get part of that money from that park to top up on the Shs 1 billion so that we start the first phase of this jua kali place. 

Alternatively, they could give us all that money for the industrial park in the…

Alternatively, they could give us all that money for the industrial park in the central region to work on both in first phase.  

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education had wanted to give information. If Jinja Training School was made part of the Eastern University - that was then -(Interjections) yes, we are trying to discuss to amend because there is already a recommendation by Parliament already that this school should be improved to be the UTALI of Uganda. And that is why the tourism sector agreed to pay a levy in their Tourism Bill for the purposes of investing if government is not investing. That money for the tourism levy is basically to improve this facility. When it was under Ministry of Education - I do not want to say that Ministry of Education did not do anything. Actually they built four classroom blocks there, although classroom facility is not enough, but they were able to build four classroom blocks.  

While we cannot get the money for the budget that is in Ministry of Education, we were in discussion with Ministry of Finance, first of all to give us the money for the salaries and up-keep of the on-going programme and also we are developing plans to create more space for the hotel, the classroom and other facilities. So, as a policy, any policy can be amended, hon. Ekanya.   

We are the same Government who recommended that this institute –(Interjections)- but I have not even finished. You raised your issues hon. Ekanya and I am responding to them. So wait until when I finish. Your concern was that you are planning to take over as MTTI - granted. But this is part of the Eastern University. I have not denied, but I am saying for any policy, we can come here as Government and recommend final amendment of the same law. It is only people who do not realise that things have changed, that do not change. I am telling you that the tourism industry requires this facility to develop all the cadres in the sector that we require. So some other facility can be compensated for the Eastern University. That is what I am saying. And when we come to discuss, that is the time I will invite hon. Ekanya to do the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister - I do not know how to put this, but let me just say that the people of Busoga did not take it kindly that this institute has just been taken away. It was part of our plan for the growth of Jinja, the growth of the East to activate that institute as part of the university because of central location, the population and the facilities. So really we are not happy. That one you must understand. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I just want to ask the minister; what is wrong if the tourism sector or whatsoever wants to make the UTALI but under Eastern University? What is the crime?  You think the people of Eastern Uganda cannot manage the UTALI concept?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I was not aware that I am going to discuss regional sentiments but I have taken note of them. I was responding as a national minister. I participated and I wish the people of the East to have many universities. I wish them well and I am not standing in the way of any creation of a university. What I am just submitting - I am a manager. Government decides, take this institute, make it part of a university. The same Government tells me, manage this institute as a facility under your ministry. So what do I do? I have taken your sentiments. When we go to further debate, I will mention this to Cabinet that the people of the East have the capacity to manage UTALI under the university. So give further instructions –(Interjections)- yes, Cabinet will give me further instructions.

But for purposes of the budget, what I had to report was that this institute did not have a budget and Ministry of Finance has promised to give me a budget. For today, that is what I am concentrating on. That I am going to get a budget for this institute. So when I am given matching orders, at least the institute will be functional.  That is what I am appealing for.  

Madam Speaker, there was a concern about UNBS, six capacity; the weighing scales and so forth. It is unfortunate the Member who raised it in Kampala is not around. I would want to submit that UNBS’s role is to check whether the weighing scales are functional. The people who license should demand that a certificate from UNBS to indicate that your scale has been checked. Nobody in Uganda should be issued a license to operate like a shop, or like these weighing scales without actually satisfying that UNBS is checked. I want to appeal to local governments in Uganda to help UNBS because we cannot be everywhere, that they should not license people who have not indicated that the scales were checked. 

Madam Speaker, I also appreciate that UNBS - in Uganda we are supposed to man 57 entry points.  Those are the big entry points that can be seen by the eyes, but there are many others that cannot be seen by the naked eye and we are only manning four.  I want to submit to this House that UNBS with its laboratories that have to check samples is centrally located in Nakawa. So we do not have any laboratory outside Kampala.

What we have done this year is to ask - because laboratory equipments are very expensive and we have been renting. So our priority was that let UNBS get a home so that we fix the laboratories permanently. This year, we have been given money for UNBS to have a home of its own and we are recruiting more officers so that we can open up more border points. When we have finished with establishing the central laboratory to be efficient, then we intend to have regional laboratories in order to ease the samples that are picked from, for example, Koboko and other border points in the North. It takes three days and you find a queue of other samples that came a week ago.  So we are aware that there is a problem, but we are trying to address it.

There was concern about the linkage between Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Trade. I agree because diplomacy is trade. Last year, we were allowed to recruit trade officers and we have so far recruited six. They are going to undergo orientation and we have identified the major trading partners: China, India, Dubai and others.  We are going to post these people there to do diplomacy in trade and also aid our traders.

There was an issue of dissemination of information.  I am inviting Members to our website which is very functional and some information about prices, markets, what is required, the tonnage, the cost, the quality, the people now exporting, is available. But the problem we are having as a country, and that is for Ministry of Agriculture, in the market, markets are overwhelming but many people export once or twice and can no longer supply. Let me hope that with this Prosperity for All and the money that has been given for our people and to boost research and extension, our people will respond and give us the required material for export.

There was the issue of non-tariff barriers being imposed by Kenya on Uganda products. Madam Speaker and honourable members, you are aware that East African Community met here between the 5th and 6th of August and the main issue was poultry. You remember they had rejected our poultry and meat but we took advantage of that meeting to discuss other issues. A framework has been agreed to handle issues of non-tariff barriers and trade facilitation and a monitoring mechanism has been put in place. If this does not work, we are going to complain through the East African Secretariat but we hope that our neighbours will respond.

There was this juicy comment about Rwanda but I want to assure Ugandans that these are the domesticated gorillas that we have between Uganda, Rwanda and DRC. Rwanda does not have more gorillas than we do but they have exhibited that they have more gorillas than us. For the House, at least let me assure you that Uganda has more gorillas than any country besides DRC (Interjection)- You are going to give me money to do the needful. 

Colleagues, there was the issue that it appears the gorillas have been enticed to go to the other side. I agree and probably hon. Rukundo will come here with a paper because he actually visited that place whereas I have not visited the other side of Rwanda where the gorillas go. On our side, gorillas are competing with the population. You have heard in this debate calls to change the boundary. I am managing gold but I also have people who want to grow food. Probably on the other side of Rwanda, the forest may be far away from the people so that they are not harassed. Hon. Rukundo will come here with a paper to assure you that we are actually doing very well. 

However, let me give you the figures. The gorillas that we share with Rwanda and the DRC are 37 in number. These are migrant and it is their nature unless you tell me to put them in a cage, which I cannot. They visit here and there and they are 37 in number. Those that are found in Bwindi National Park, inside Uganda completely are 340. However, some of them are not accessible because you have to domesticate them and the domestication process takes time because these are our neighbours. You must domesticate them in order to allow people to visit them. The total global population of gorillas is 700. So, those that we share between Rwanda and the DRC are 320 out of this total. I am very grateful that this is a concern. When you give us money, we shall do the needful in order to publicise this information but I thought that it was important for the House to know these figures.

Madam Speaker, there was the concern of under performance of my budget. Let me start with the concern about how much money is shared within the community because I think this is important for members of Parliament whose constituencies border the national parks. Some national parks are just building up because of the war but for those that have been operational, the communities get 20 percent of the gate collection and this is known by the communities through their local councils. 

In the 2007/2008 budget, we collected Shs 0.0676 billion from gate collections and we disbursed Shs 1.063 billion. One would ask, why did you pay more than you collected? The answer is that we had had excess that had not been paid the previous year so when we totalled that, we were able to give this figure. However when I visited Kasese district, I realised that this money has been going to the districts and that is why members of Parliament cannot find it. Because of basket funding, the districts choose how to use this money. We have now discussed with the districts and we are saying that let the sub-counties who neighbour the park receive this money in order to address the concerns of the communities within these areas. This is going to start this financial year.

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much, honourable minister for giving way. Our concern is about the percentage we are getting vis-à-vis what those hosting minerals are getting. For example, we are only getting 20 percent of the gate collections while those hosting minerals are getting 17 percent of all collections. Honourable minister, this is a resource we have and we should not be treated differently because others have minerals. What we are requesting for is that you give us 17 percent like it is for districts that are hosting minerals. I thank you. 

MS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, those are negotiations and I have heard. Hon. Rukundo will manage that issue with Uganda Wildlife. There was concern over our failure to attend negotiations. I want to submit to this House that if we were to attend say negotiations only for European Union, we would not do anything else. So, we choose which meetings are critical for Uganda to attend and on those critical issues, my ministry has been represented effectively. I can lay on this table the programme for the year for the European Union, East African Community, COMESA and WTO. If we were to invest in only attending those negotiation meetings, we would not be able to invest in the roads and other things. We have to take a delicate balance but I appreciate that this has been noted. Also, each time we go for negotiations we have a multi-sectoral committee because some issues for negotiations are legal, some are financial, others are agricultural. For example, if you are negotiating sanitary and photo-sanitary, these are managed by the Ministry Of Agriculture. So, it depends on which issue is being negotiated and under which committee and then we decide as Government who should represent us there effectively.  

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of leopards. I want to inform this House that in 1995, the function of vermin control was decentralised to the districts. However, the central government was left with the responsibility of building capacity for the districts to manage vermin control. But within the Uganda Wild Life Authority, we have created a quick response unit to coordinate with various districts and local governments that still have problems with animals. Specifically for the leopard, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, in the pastoral areas where you keep livestock which we feast on and the leopards also feast on, we could not go and kill the leopards as a country because we are under the SAITE’s agreement. This is the endangered species law framework. But Uganda negotiated because of these problems and we got a quarter. We have been allowed to harvest 28 leopards a year and for every leopard shot officially through a permit of hunting, we are going to get $ 500. But we are also working towards enhancing the population of these animals so that we can encourage people to hunt and harvest. So, I want to appeal to my colleagues that if you have a problem, get in touch with hon. Rukundo. He is a very versatile minister; he will respond to your issues. But sometimes we do not have this information. 

A colleague was concerned about immature fishing; that is in the Ministry Of Agriculture. Yes, they should protect the fish so that I can export; that is true.  My Jajja from Ssese, you know. We have been working together – and the way forward to stopping my relatives there is aqua-culture because they are not going to obey the rules anyway. 

Hon. Rukundo should come here and tell this House how Members’ constituencies can develop tourism. He will come here and tell you what we have done so far. Hon. Ekanya, we shall discuss about this issue privately. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to conclude. Somebody was concerned about what we have been doing in the North since the war ended. I want to submit that at least hon. Nobert Mao is on record for having acknowledged that my ministry has been in the North - that is the chairman of LCV.  But I want to say that Para Lodge has been renovated; Chobe Lodge is under reconstruction and Pakuba Lodge has been concessioned by Acacia Safaris and it is going to be renovated.  

Lastly, there was concern why my budget under performed. I am informed that the expected donor funds for support to tourism infrastructure development were never realised and this accounts for the under performance observed above.  While we had counter-part funding, the donor funds did not come; and I am promising that when hon. Rukundo comes to make a statement, he will show the national parks and the monies that we have given. I have just given you the bulk but I think it will be important for you to know. I want to thank everybody that has made a contribution. [HON. MEMBERS: “The Apex Fund”]The apex fund is a financial matter; so it will be for the Minister of Finance when he comes here. For those of you that I have not responded to, my office is always open and those people who have come to my office, we have sorted out so many issues. Thank you very much for the support.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon. Minister. I have two small announcements: One is that in the public gallery, we have several youth from Bugabula North Constituency in Kamuli district represented by hon. Menhya and I. You are welcome (Applause)

The other piece of news is that our colleague, hon. Florence Hashaka has given birth to a baby boy but through a caesarean operation but she is okay. She is in Paragon Hospital in Bugolobi. We congratulate her. 

Hon. Minister, I am glad you talked about hon. Rukundo coming to talk to us about the tourism sector. As people of Busoga, we developed a tourist circuit running from the Nile through three or four of the districts of Busoga right round when hon. Akaki was still the minister and we submitted to your ministry but no one has ever responded to us.  I hope hon. Rukundo really; you will locate these documents and come back to us. It was a complete circuit for tourism for several districts of Busoga developed by the Members of Parliament. Thank you. Chair of the Committee, I think everybody congratulated you; you have no problem. Do you have anything else you want to say other than to thank the Members?

3.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr James Kiiza Rwebembera): I really just want to thank the Members for the contribution they have given. I have enjoyed sitting on the front bench -(Laughter) I wish to assure Members that the points raised have been noted. Members of the committee agreed that after this budget process, we will go around and interact with all the sectors and see how to develop.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the committee on trade tourism and industry.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for your staying power; you have been here the whole week. I would like to release you this afternoon so that you can go home. So, I will adjourn the House to Tuesday morning at 10.00 O’clock. Thank you very much, all of you. Have a good weekend. (Applause)    

(The House rose at 3.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 August 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)








