Thursday, 26 August 2004

(Parliament met at 10.24 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I informed you that we would like to wind up receiving and debating reports of the committees, and that we are going to take a vote today. So, I do not know where everybody is. We agreed to meet at 10.00 O’clock.  So, let me ask the Chairperson of the Agricultural Committee to read the report and we proceed with the debate. The Leader of Government Business, please find your colleagues because we are going to vote today.

10.26
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am raising a matter, which really concerns Parliamentary Commission; this is a matter of this building. As much as I appreciate the information being given to us by people in communications by way of displaying their ware here in front of our foyer, I take the front foyer of the august House to be a ceremonial area of the building. So, I am requesting the Clerk, Parliamentary Commission that anybody who wants to display his or her wares for our purchase should be in some other place other than the front foyer of the building. Because it gives a wrong impression to guests that probably Parliament is now in the business of selling certain things, including communications. So, again I request that maybe politely they are requested to take the things upstairs in our area of refreshments and entertainment, or in the exhibition hall, the main hall on the other side. (Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, my colleague for giving way.  Madam Speaker, in line with what hon. Aggrey Awori is saying, today I was reading in the paper that those people there selling phones are conning Members of Parliament. And they have named the first victim that they have fallen in love with one of the Members of Parliament, whom they convinced to buy a phone at Shs 240,000. They do not take it as if it is a promotion, but they think is one way of the beautiful girls wooing male Members of Parliament. Thank you. The paper is here, I can lay it on the Table; it is on page 4.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of what paper?

MR WAKIKONA: The Red Pepper.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the concern of the building and precincts of Parliament is very serious at the moment. I have seen you coming to the Chamber, and I have realised that actually your coming to the Chamber could also be determined by weather conditions. If it is raining it would be very difficult for you to move from the North Wing to the Main Chamber here because our aisles are not covered. This is not a very expensive construction venture. I would urge the Commission to make sure that the North Wing, the aisles connecting the Chamber and North Wing are covered. 

Madam Speaker, you know all our offices are in the other part of the building, and yesterday but one it started raining when we had gone to our offices and business could not resume because of quorum. This was due to the fact that it was raining heavily, and for you to move from the other side to the main Chamber you only need protection from rain. It is against this background that we urge the commission to make sure that this simple facility is made available for Members to facilitate our smooth running of our business. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will update you in the afternoon on the matters you have raised.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/05

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, while I was on the Floor, my honourable colleague –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had not finished?

MR AWORI: I had not finished; I only sat down in order for him to give information. As a result, I lost the opportunity of expressing concern on a matter you had raised regarding the voting. While I agree with your proposal that we take a vote at a certain period, is it possible to amend the proposal to the effect that we debate all the reports and then one afternoon we take a vote on all of them at once when we get the quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, that is what I proposed since the beginning of the week. That is why we have not voted, although there was another reason why we have not voted.  

10.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, the Committee examined the policy statement that contained policy issues, budget performance for the previous fiscal year and budget estimates for this financial year for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) - Vote 010, National Agriculture Research Organisation (NARO) - as mandated by Article 155 of the Constitution of Uganda. In addition, the Committee also looked at National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and District Agricultural Extension Services and their activities. 

I now beg to present the report to this august House for consideration and adoption. 

Methodology:

Besides, Madam Speaker, inviting the Minister for Agriculture, the ministers of state, the technical team led by the Permanent Secretary and National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) scientists led by the Director General, and the Director Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) and NAADS, the Committee also had opportunity to attend a three-day workshop at Hotel Equatorial on Banana Bacterial Wilt Disease and a half-day workshop on biotechnology.  

The Committee took time to look at the vision, the mission, mandate and objectives of the ministry.  In particular, the mandate is summarised as follows: It is to support, promote and guide the production of crops, livestock and fish in order to ensure improved quality and increased quantity of agricultural produce and products for local consumption, food security and export. We must emphasize the element of food security here because it is very important.  

The ministry adopted a number of objectives, which are enlisted below. But, honourable members would be interested in the policy framework, which was adopted by the ministry to actualise the objectives. The major policy framework, and principle initiatives and actions that will impact on the objectives, levels of activities include: 

• Continuation of operationalisation of PMA priority areas.  

• The roll out of the NAADS into new sub-counties in the districts where NAADS is already operating and rolling out the programme to identified new districts. 

• Continued implementation of MAAIF components of the strategic export programme, and the export programmes are already known to the House.

• The adoption and implementation of the new National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS).

• Implementation of animal disease control strategy, including enforcement of standards and regulations.

• Adoption and implementation of the transformation of the ministry following approval of recommendations of the functional analysis.

• To finalise and commence implementation of the MAAIF development strategy and investment plan.

The Committee, therefore, proceeded to the following observations:

• The Committee noted that based on the on-going functional analysis, the vision of MAAIF will be revisited to adapt to the need for the ministry to take on the strong leadership in the national effort to transform subsistence agriculture to commercial production of crops, livestock and fisheries. This will ensure that agricultural sector institutions are strengthened to provide efficient and effective demand-driven services to the farming communities. The Committee is happy because this is in agreement with the recommendation adopted by this august House during the fiscal year 2003/04, budget report.

• MAAIF’s functions are derived from the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), which is the broader poverty alleviation framework adopted by Government. PEAP is designed to provide an over arching strategic framework, to guide the public action to reduce poverty. Within this broader framework, MAAIF adopted a more focused framework - this is a framework within a framework - the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) to enable the sector contribute more meaningfully towards national poverty reduction down to 10 percent by the year 2017. 

• The mandate still ignores the challenging responsibility expected of MAAIF, to spearhead the production of crops, livestock and fisheries. MAAIF has continued to pursue the rather passive mandate, which is just to support instead of taking the lead and leadership. Its work is to support, promote and guide the production of crops, livestock and fisheries. The Committee encouraged the ministry for the past two years to revisit its decentralisation policy, which divested the ministry from the primary function of monitoring of the agricultural extension services, which has led to the poor coordination by the existing district local Government arrangement.  

• As noted in the last financial year, the sector objectives were mixed up with activities and outcomes, which distorted the clear and effective implementation programming and execution of duties. This makes it difficult to evaluate the sector performance. The situation is aggravated by the fact that MAAIF has not carried out the sector household survey since 1988. This means that there is no basis to undertake the analysis of the objectives.

• The fiscal decentralisation, which is being adopted by MAAIF, is a positive step in ensuring a complete decentralisation of MAAIF’s function to the district local Government.  This action will harmonise the way the agricultural extension workers will relate to the district local governments, as it removes the current confusion created by the fiscal retention against the decentralised function of the agricultural extension workers by MAAIF to district local Government. I must emphasize that this policy, however, is a subject of contention, especially that MAAIF is being urged to revisit its decentralisation programme.

• The ministry has not shifted much of its approach on PMA from the multi-sectoral nature that has totally deprived the sector from sufficient funding. The Committee regrets the lack of empirical evidence that PMA is working towards transforming agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming.  

• The Committee noted that Government has registered great progress in its effort in disseminating information to the public on the activities of PMA. However, the need to transform the information into agricultural production and productivity is now more important, as the public is anxious to tap the benefits from PMA to improve their living conditions than keeping it in the electronic and mass media.

• The Committee noted that NAADS is the only pillar of PMA which has so far been operationalised and that it is being appreciated in villages where it exists. The Committee, however, observed that this pillar alone will not create sustainable impact on agriculture.  There are six other pillars to be brought on board. 

• The continued policy of fiscal decentralisation of some of MAAIF’s activities such as advisory services to local governments makes it difficult for the ministry to ensure close supervision and accountability of NAADS progress and impact.

• The Committee notes that MAAIF did not explain how it went about to achieve the PEAP stated objective of improving household food security and expanded employment opportunities.  Similarly, it was not clear that sustainable natural resource use and land management in the agricultural sector was being achieved.  

• A close look at the actions taken to achieve PEAP and MAAIF sector objectives revealed that MAAIF concentrated much more on institutional reform, most of which are either in preliminary stages or are just at inception.

• The Committee is concerned that the continued functional analysis and institutional reforms are simply creating fear, uncertainty and apathy, with loss of morale among the staff, as none of them is sure of their job security.  These developments manifest negatively on the farmers and steps should be taken to conclude the reforms to offer stability in the sector.

• Government is commended for promoting the Vegetable Oil Development Project (VODP) as an important import substitution and a means of poverty reduction. In the oil palm sub-sector, Government has already secured land in Masaka and Kalangala for the nucleus estate for the oil palm project. Sensitisation of out-growers is going on and a core investor has been identified.  

Based on the above observations, the committee recommends that: 

• Cabinet approves MAAIF’s functional analysis as soon as possible to enable the ministry rationalise its vision, mission and objectives in order to spearhead their agricultural development and realization of the PMA goals and objectives. In particular, the ministry will be urged to take the lead in the production of crops, livestock and fisheries and the total transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming while enhancing the natural resource base. 

• As a strategic framework for reducing rural poverty through transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial production, PMA should strive to operationalise all its seven pillars as soon as possible for it to make more meaningful impact in the country.

• The Committee strongly recommends that a farmer-friendly rural credit as a vital pillar should come into force within the next 12 months to support the farmers in their endeavour to commercialise agriculture. And we are not talking about any other credit, not commercial, nothing else but focus arrangement for agriculture, which should target our rural community. 

• The information technology and rural electrification should equally be extended to the countryside as soon as possible for the farmers to access market, and add value to their products. 

• The agricultural education, and rural road network should be strengthened and improved in support of the agricultural productivity and marketing.

Madam Speaker, the Committee had an opportunity to get a presentation from one professor who spent time in explaining poverty in Uganda. This is professor David Cribyll, from Ohio State University and Dr Bernard Bashasha, a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Agricultural Economics, Makerere University. The study reveals that a number of policies may affect agricultural-dependent nationals differently. For example, the presence of roads, and that is why we are emphasising that rural roads should be improved as soon as possible. This would improve household consumption in villages by 6.5 per cent. That is, if you introduce the roads alone without other components of PMA.  Electricity in the villages would be able to increase consumption by 7.3 per cent and reduce poverty by 9.3 per cent. If you only extend electricity leaving the other pillars alone, this is the impact; micro enterprise in every household currently would increase consumption by six per cent.

The introduction of credit not requiring collateral.  Unlike most of our farmers who are not mortgageable, they are not bankable, if you give non-collateral credit to the villages, it can increase consumption by 4.5 per cent and reduce poverty by a rate of 4.4 per cent. There are details, which are presented in this paper, Madam Speaker, which I beg to lay on the Table for a closer look. 

• The on-going functional analysis in the ministry should be completed this fiscal year, to allow the employees in the sector concentrate on the national goal of modernising agriculture. 

• PMA activities should aim at economic commodity or enterprise based zoning of the country in order to enhance commercialisation of agriculture. The enterprises formed under NAADS should develop capacity on a sustainable basis in order to become self-reliant in the long run. Agricultural components under PMA should be geared towards increasing productivity, and production of agricultural products to provide adequately for the local and international markets.  

• The Committee recommends that Government should expeditiously resolve outstanding issues of contention in the agreement that was signed between BIDCO and the Government of Uganda.

• The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries, be created as a separate entity from the present MAAIF, in order to enable special attention to be paid on the two sub-sectors of livestock and crops. This will also facilitate the speedy realisation of the Maputo Protocol of allocating 10 per cent of the national budget to the agricultural sector.

On the issues raised by Parliament on the ministry’s policy statement for the year 2003/04, the Committee recorded positive response of MAAIF on the hitherto unclear status of PMA, which prompted Parliament to demand for a full report on the same. A full day workshop was planned, and all PMA sector ministries were also able to provide progress reports to Members of Parliament at Nile Hotel International Conference Centre; and we are very grateful for this action taken.

However, the Committee is still particularly unsatisfied that MAAIF’s response on the multi-sectoral approach of PMA, which has deprived the sector from getting sufficient resource allocation to key agricultural components, is a factor of great concern. 

On the sector performance, Madam Speaker, the Committee examined the policy statement and noted that the sector was still under-funded in general terms, and the details are well laid out.

We also noted that NAADS programme is still stifled by under funding, a factor being constrained by MAAIF’s ceiling. 

The Committee noted with satisfaction the new policies and bills already presented to Parliament; notably, Meat Policy, Food and Nutrition Security Policy, Fisheries Policy, NARO’s policy under a new arrangement, Seed and Plant Bill, Agricultural Chemicals (control) Bill, Plant Protection and Health Bill, the National Agricultural Research Systems Bill. These add up to the previously saved UTGC and Uganda Tea Authority Decree Repeal Bills, and if enacted, should enable the sector register progress on its reform.

Madam Speaker, on the livestock sub-sector, the Committee observed that very little sustainable measures and mechanisms for epidemic pest and disease control were being put in place especially in terms of priority and resource allocation. The Committee wishes to emphasize that livestock contributes nine per cent to the national GDP. The Committee learnt that Notifiable and Contagious disease and Vector outbreaks especially, Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP), Rinderpest and Rabies were reported nationwide. These epidemics have affected livestock health, production and productivity in the whole country. 

MAAIF’s level of preparedness to address these cases has only reached the stage of appointing committees at various levels of local Government.  For example:

• The Committee learnt that only 339,773 herds of cattle out of more than six million in the whole country, were vaccinated against CBPP and 350 herds of cattle were vaccinated against FMD and only 2,884 herds of cattle were immunised against East Coast Fever in the whole country.  

• In the control of tsetse flies and trypanosomiasis, the Committee was informed that only 4,000 traps were manufactured. You can imagine manufacturing only 4,000 traps and deployed in Arua, Adjumani, Moyo and Yumbe districts.  60,000 herds of cattle were treated using Samorin in 13 districts in eastern region. This is certainly inadequate action in the control of this menace. 

• The Committee observed that a comprehensive national strategy for the prevention, control and eradication of animal disease and vectors has been drafted. This will address the epidemic and zoonotic diseases that affect production and marketing of livestock and livestock products. The strategy lays out methods for control of animal disease vectors such as ticks and tsetse flies. 

• On the need for a strategy to operationalise the Animal Breeding Act to improve the quality and quantity of the existing stock, the CSACommittee observed that the Animal Genetic Resource Centre (AGRC) and Data Bank (DB) has been mandated to expand and spearhead commercial breeding and livestock development. Its strategies include the use of Government farms in Njeru, Kasolwe, Rubona, Maruzi, Ruhengere, Sanga and Nshara ranches for breeding and providing a nucleus source of improved germplasm/stocking materials to farmers. This has been elaborated in the animal breeding policy and MAAIF development strategy and investment plan.  

• Other factors causing widespread livestock diseases include, inadequate and inconsistent supply of vaccines to carry out strategic and ring vaccinations following outbreaks of major diseases.  

• The Committee observed that in the financial year 2004/05, a budget line for livestock disease control is included in the MAAIF’s development budget amounting to Shs 2.27 billion categorised as a PAF item. This budget item will be protected from any other disruptions in event of finding resources for supplementary expenditures.

• The Committee observed that the cattle corridor is faced with challenges like inadequate water for livestock. This is affecting the livestock quality and quantity.  

• The Committee also observed that there is a laxity in enforcement of regulations in the sub-sector especially at the local Government levels. For example, issuing movement permits for livestock without technical advice from the veterinarians. 

Now based on the observations above, therefore, the Committee recommends that: 

• Centralising and strengthening of disease control strategies should be undertaken seriously by Government in order to facilitate easy coordination, monitoring and evaluation of diseases in the sector. The local governments should work hand in hand with the veterinary department in enforcing veterinary regulations and disease control. 

• Government should avail funds for emergency preparedness plan, under the livestock disease control strategy. 

• The agriculture and livestock census should be carried out to guide the planning process in the production and marketing at all levels, including local governments.

• NAADS should guide the farmers on the quality of livestock that should be purchased to avoid exploitation from other private actors in the industry. Currently undersized, overpriced and poor quality animals are being bought and given out by the middlemen who pose as service providers.

• Guidelines should be provided by the ministry on the movement of livestock to combat disease control at local Government levels. LCs should avoid temptation of giving out movement permits for livestock in their localities, as this is a mandate of the veterinary extension workers.

• Decentralisation of slaughtering livestock should be undertaken countrywide to avoid animal torture during transportation and control of disease spread. This will require more investments in abattoirs and slaughterhouses and markets at local Government levels.

• The Committee recalls that Parliament approved US$31.34 million for the Livestock Productivity and Improvement Project for the cattle corridors.  NAGRC as the overseer of activities within this project, should access funds from the project and for the project as soon as possible.

On strategic interventions in the agricultural sector for export, Madam Speaker, the support to the production of strategic agricultural commodities for export includes coffee, tea, cotton, cocoa, livestock and horticulture.

Coffee:

On coffee, Madam Speaker, the House should know that this lead export crop has registered some achievements and challenges. For instance, only 66 million coffee seedlings out of the planned 80 million plantlets were procured and distributed to 340,000 households countrywide. The Committee learnt that 500 large nursery operators were contracted to supply the 80 million seedlings.  

Of the 16 wet-coffee processing units procured, only eight have been installed. Three new joint ventures were established, an achievement which is worthy commending, in Denmark, China and Egypt while promotion is reportedly being undertaken in USA, Europe and China as well. A new coffee brand was launched in South Africa.

The Committee noted that coffee nursery operators are still claiming Shs 6.5 billion as non-payment of seedlings already distributed to farmers by MAAIF. Similarly, Uganda’s coffee is facing a lot of competition in the new markets especially in China particularly from Colombia, Brazil and Thailand although Uganda’s brand is the best.  Government should not take this challenge lightly because China provides the greatest potential market for our coffee. However, China is more interested, I must emphasize, in green beans rather than instant coffee, as they prefer to roast the coffee from their own restaurants to suit their taste. So, while we add value here to produce instant coffee, it will not target the Chinese market, but they want the green ones.

Recommendations: 

Government should provide more resources to the coffee industry, as it is the leading export commodity for the country currently. The support should be on promotions, packaging, pricing and provision of skilled manpower to the processors.

The payment of the coffee nursery operators should be done, as a matter of urgency and a harmonised position should be agreed upon to avoid arrears with the operators in future. The public should be informed on the steps Government is taking to clear the arrears.

Tea:

On tea, the Committee learnt that only 2.3 million out of the planned 7.7 million plantlets were distributed to farmers, thus, benefiting only 493 farmers due to lack of funds. There is still great need for Government to support the small-scale farmers to come up, as we still have the potential 100,000 hectares available for tea expansion in our country.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that a tea policy be presented to streamline the tea industry in the country. Preferably, the tea policy should come into force this financial year. The commercial tea nursery owners should also be paid their arrears of about Shs 2.3 billion.

Cotton: 

On cotton, Madam Speaker, this sector still has a long way to attain its set target of generating 1,000,000 bales per year of lint cotton by the year 2006. The Committee was informed that only 160,000 bales were produced in the fiscal year 2003/04 and this target was set in the year 2001. We have already covered three quarters of the timeframe, and that only 7,767metric tones of seeds were treated and distributed for planting. Meanwhile, Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) has zoned out the cotton growing districts, more-or-less gazetted them and allocated them to investors to promote the production, processing and marketing of cotton. 

While this is a good policy in liberalising the cotton industry, it might be putting the farmers at the mercy of those lucky investors who will be in charge of the districts under their control and jurisdiction. This is bound to drift the farmers in the hands of some unscrupulous cotton dealers. The competition in the field should be left open so that the farmers are guided by market forces.

Recommendation:

• Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) should set realistic targets so as to revive the industry on a sustainable basis. CDO should scale down its original target of one million to the one that might be achieved by the year 2006.  

• The idea of giving an investor full control of cotton growing area or district as a policy should be revisited so as to allow more players and competition in the market.

Cocoa:

The Committee noted that this is a promising high value crop for export. However, it was reported that only 925 metric tons of cocoa beans exported were inspected out of the planned 4,700 metric tons.

The Committee further observed with interest that MAAIF had targeted the procurement of 3,333,333 – a very interesting figure - cocoa seedlings for distribution, and that only 850,000 seedlings were procured and distributed. It was noted that this figure was not different from the last financial year’s figure.

Recommendations:

• The Committee recommends that Government should increase its investment in the cocoa industry and advance to processing the cocoa beans, either directly or through the private sector.

• In order to ascertain the nature of trade, data should be provided to Parliament indicating the total export of un-inspected cocoa compared to the actual quantity of cocoa inspected by Government.

Goats:

During the financial year 2003/04, 300 Boar goats (150 males and 150 females), were procured under strategic intervention programme to promote exports. The goats were distributed to 141 farmers in 30 districts. However, due to limited funding, only 52 out of these 141 farmers were trained.

There were reported cases of mortality and non-performance of some of these goats in many parts of the country.

Recommendation:

Government should utilise Natural Animal Genetic Resource Centre as an alternative source of raising improved breeds through the importation of semen, than importing the actual animals. This approach will benefit more farmers with more impact in a short time compared to importing the live animals.

Cattle: 

The Committee observed that the procurement and distribution of 77 Borans and Sahiwal bulls was not convincing enough to justify that Government is promoting the livestock sub-sector. This is more so that the method of distribution was not sensitive enough to cater for the interests of a wider population of cattle farmers in the country.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that artificial insemination be considered as a more viable opinion to be managed by NAGRC. This approach will cover more farmers in the short time with less cost to the Government.

Water for production:

To promote utilisation of water for production and increase sustainable commercial production, the committee agrees with the thinking that water is life for all living organisms. Crops and livestock in the country are facing the increasing challenges of unpredictable weather conditions in the country.  The need for water for production is very vital now, than ever before.  

The Committee learnt that this is one of the key objectives of MAAIF. Nothing has been done to provide water for production to farmers in this country. The mandate was given away to another sector altogether, which has no infrastructure and capacity to appreciate the production of livestock and crops, and this is specific for livestock and crops. For example, it was reported that effective planning and design of irrigation system was acquired and maintained in only one village in Masaka, one village in Mbarara, one village in Luweero, one in Iganga, and another one in Lira.

The Committee was not impressed with the reported achievements in attaining water for agricultural production by MAAIF as cited above.

The Committee regrets the erratic policy decision to transfer water for agricultural production and livestock from MAAIF to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. The consequence of this decision is being exhibited in the lack of water for production in most parts of the country as a priority.

Recommendation:

• A component of water for production in crops and livestock should be established in MAAIF, so as to manage the provision of water for agriculture.

• Government should clearly define its role in the provision of irrigation services to the farmers, particularly as small-scale farmers cannot afford the high cost of irrigation equipment and installation by themselves. This component calls for an intervention from Government. 

Fisheries sub-sector:

Madam Speaker, the Committee observed that Cabinet has approved the National Fisheries Policy, and that it will soon be tabled to Parliament together with a bill to revise the Fish Act of 1964.

As a means of involving fishing community in the management of the fisheries resources, a legal instrument providing for the creation of Beach Management Units (BMU) has been made, and efforts are underway to establish BMUs on landing sites that meet established criteria under the fisheries 10-year strategic plan.  

The areas to be supported include fish infrastructure and quality, rural and urban market deployment development, agricultural development including culture-based fisheries or restocking of the fish bodies.

The Committee observed that the waterweeds are still a menace to the fishing communities, particularly on Lake Bisina. 

The Committee learnt that the enforcement of regulation resulted in the destruction of 5000 metric tons of immature fish impounded. This is a big loss to this country as the exercise also resulted in the destruction of the fishing boats commonly known “mbawo tatu.” These “mbawo tatu” are the small canoes, which are normally used by the poor fisher folk instead of the fishing vessels.  

The Committee is particularly concerned that Uganda lags behind the two sister states of Kenya and Tanzania in fish export from the fisheries resources from Lake Victoria. This is uncalled for, comparing Kenya with only six per cent share of Lake Victoria, but earning over US$50 million of export; and Tanzania with 51 per cent share, earning about US$200 million, while Uganda with its 43 per cent share of the Lake, earning a mere US$90 million.

The recommendations:

• Harmonising of fish quality assurance, inspection and certification systems in East Africa sub-region should be finalised to boost the fish industry through increased export earnings, hence incomes. 

• The fisheries strategy for restocking water bodies, should aim at acquisition of internal capacity to raise fish fry, hence influencing market prices for fish.

• MAAIF should investigate into the causes of rampant harvesting of immature fish by the fisher folk.  

• Pending legislations concerning the industry should be presented to Parliament to streamline the industry’s operations.  

• Government should invest more in the fisheries industry to bring the country to competitive level with Kenya and Tanzania.  

Madam Speaker, I now turn to National Agricultural Research Organization (NARO), which has a separate Vote. The Committee appreciated the contribution of NARO in the sector in one main respect, that is, technology generation for the farming community in crop, livestock and fisheries through scientific research in the sector for the benefit of the farmers in Uganda.

On food security, the committee learnt that NARO has been able to address threats of food security by fighting the dreaded cassava mosaic disease in one of the food crops, cassava, through generation of cassava mosaic free and possibly resistant variety for the country. Similarly, NARO has been able to control the spread of water hyacinth from the fishing water bodies thus promoting the breeding of more fish for the country. 

NARO also generated a list of maize varieties for high yield and disease resistance in form of longe series.  

The various varieties of beans and sweet potatoes have been released and are in use by the farmers.  

NARO has embarked on fighting banana bacterial wilt in banana by the use of new biotechnology laboratory at Kawanda though with very limited funding. 

Similarly on strategic export, the Committee noted that NARO has been able to generate technology on; coffee and Irish potato, and to a limited extent on cotton.

The Committee notes with concern the attempts by MAAIF to drag NARO into taking over the function of extension services over and above their function of technology generation. This is an inappropriate decision, which should be discouraged. The Committee is aware that the mandate of technology transfer and farmer education is a function of extension services and NAADS. It should not be the function of the research institutions.

Madam Speaker, the Committee wishes to bring to the attention of this House the state of banana bacterial wilt, which has become a serious threat to bananas and food security in this country.  The disease has spread to over 21 districts in central, eastern and Northern Uganda over the last three years with up to 90 per cent mortality in many parts of the plantations. 

The mode of spread is wide-ranging but easy to control if the will is there. This includes the popular “Kisanja” or dry and green banana leaves from the area of infection to the new points. There is nothing political here but these are scientific findings. (Interruptions and Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, honourable members.

MR ODIT: Other modes include the movement of planting materials, cutting knives, which the farmers use for pruning and also cutting the plantations. Other tools from the infected plantations being shared with clean plantations.  

While this budget has provided for about Shs 1.594 billion to combat the disease, the modest financial requirement would amount to Shs 10 billion. At an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, the Committee intends to come back to this august House with a comprehensive report on this subject.

Recommendations:

• MAAIF needs to set up agricultural research agenda for this country clearly and package it well for the people to understand and appreciate. MAAIF should not concentrate on protracted institutional reform, which has resulted in creating uncertainty and brain drain from NARO.
  
• MAAIF should be in a much better position to know the different roles/functions and mandate of public institutions in agricultural research and steer it clear from those that relate to extension and agricultural research.  Agricultural research will not be with activities that are a function of other institutions.

• MAAIF should take analysis of the capacity of the private sector, it’s objectives and strategy in agricultural research, and draw the best strategy for harmonising it with those of the public research.

• MAAIF should take it upon itself to persuade Government to understand that public agricultural research is very vital in addressing food security, poverty reduction and a rapid economic transformation in this country.  

• It is necessary to remind MAAIF that over 80 per cent of the people of Uganda are employed in this sector. All of them are living on less than a dollar per day from farming, yet they must feed the nation and support the economy by producing for export. Rapid transformation of agriculture to modernity is a function of research and technology transfer, which requires sufficient investment.  

Madam Speaker, on the proposed budget for the year 2004/05, the agricultural sector will contribute 40 percent of the GDP in terms of income in the country. This is the most important single sector that supports the country in providing food for home consumption, food security, household income and export. 

The Committee expressed concern that Government has given it more or less a lip service with only 2.1 per cent of the public resources in the budget. The Committee observes that while the ceiling for the year 2004/05 has risen to 3.4 of the national budget, amounting to Shs 119.85 billion from the original 2.1 per cent or Shs 99.4 billion is an important improvement. This still falls far short of the 10 per cent contribution as recommended in the Maputo Protocol to which Uganda is a signatory.  

The total budget estimate for MAAIF and NARO for the financial year 2004/05 will be Shs 119.854 billion of which Shs 11,694,416,000 will be for recurrent and Shs 108,160,359,000 for development expenditure including VAT. This figure includes Shs 5.98 billion for agricultural extension, and Shs 16.02 billion for NAADS respectively. 

NARO’s share from the total budget amounts to Shs 27,857,861,000 including recurrent and development expenditures. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this august House approves the expenditure and revenue estimates for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) - Vote 10 and national agricultural research organization (NARO) - Vote 142 as follows:

Vote 10 – MAAIF, total budget will be UShs 91,996,914,000 of which total recurrent budget expenditure will be UShs 9,535,702,000 and development expenditure will be UShs 82,461,212,000 including VAT.

On Vote 142, which is NARO, the total budget will be UShs27,857,861,000 of which total recurrent expenditure will be UShs2,158,714,000 and development expenditure will be Ushs25,699,147,000 including VAT.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and your committee.  I would like to confirm that the report was duly signed by more than one-third of the members of the committee.  It, therefore, meets the provisions of Rule 170(1) of our Rules of Procedure.  So, we are going to debate it.  Hon. members, three minutes.

11.21
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will make brief comments on the Ministry of Agriculture.  One, I used to hear that agriculture is a backbone of this country.  I wanted to know from the Minister of Finance whether it is still the backbone given the funds they are giving the sector.  Two, I would like to know from the Minister of Agriculture, what is the agricultural policy of Uganda, and does the ministry have a policy analyst who is actually checking the performance of this policy so that we get changes in the policy.  Is the policy having an impact on the ground?  

These questions, Madam Speaker, can help the ministry.  I want to know what is the report of the policy analyst?  What does he or she show about the policy of agriculture in Uganda and its impact because I have seen sectors where there are strategic interventions?  In strategic planning, the strategy you use should be a strategy that moves you forward.  Can these strategies where you are having a strategic intervention move forward?  For example, when you have a strategy of improving coffee production, improving tea production and you start at the level of borrowing UShs6.5 billion in arrears from nursery operators - I want even to know from the Minister of Finance because last year we were informed that one individual was given one billion, which was supposed to pay these nursery operators to go and trade; was this money recovered?  How do you keep Shs6.5 billion in arrears for the nursery operators who are going to expand coffee?  You keep Shs2.3 billion in arrears for tea operators and you tell me you are doing strategic intervention? What strategic intervention is that?  What strategic planning is that?  These are genuine questions which need genuine answers because you cannot say you have a policy –(Interruption)

Mr MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam speaker, and thank you hon. Capt. Byaruhanga for giving way.  The intervention in that particular area was to increase production.  The seedlings you are talking about were produced, purchased albeit on credit and planted.  So, the strategic goal of increasing production was achieved because the seedlings were planted.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  You see, Madam Speaker, when we come here and raise these issues; I do not know how other people look at it.  Of course, hon. Rukutana, the gentleman holding the portfolio of the Ministry of Finance, is used to consuming goods and services of the country on behalf of Government free in broad daylight.  

Government today owes the many various economic business units over 65 billion in arrears crippling the economy in various - many people have sold their houses.  So, hon. Capt. Byaruhanga is saying people go and attend to coffee nursery beds then through UCDA (Uganda Coffee Development Authority) – Henry Ngabirano, coffee is distributed to farmers and they are boasting.  You can see he is here boasting on behalf Government that they have increased production when people who have been looking for livelihood to return their children to school by way of having coffee nursery beds are not paid!  Are you boasting of production of your own seedlings for which you have not paid?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, Government should follow a game plan that allows more production.  But what is your game plan if you have crippled the few nursery operators who supplied you and they cannot produce more?  What game plan is that?  That is a wrong game plan, that is a wrong strategy and that is not strategic intervention at all.  

Madam Speaker, on cotton production you have seen the few bales.  First of all, how much money has been injected in the cotton production because, Madam Speaker, the money the farmers get – I am told there are some documents I have seen.  The Uganda ginners association levies some money from farmers and the levy they get from farmers which is included within the prices is used to support cotton development organization, which is a parastatal.  May I know what statutory instrument is there between the ginners association and CDO for the farmers to sustain the CDO instead of Government?  The document I see of Shs26.3 billion, which was collected by the ginners association, Ushs 4.5 billion was given to cotton development organization and Government is also pushing funds in this.  What legal instrument is there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Capt. Byaruhanga, what documents are you reading?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, they are documents, which shows the levies the ginners association is getting from the farmers, and how much money has been passed to cotton development organization? Madam Speaker, with your authority, I will lay them on the Table because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they authored by the Uganda ginners association?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES:  They are authored and received by cotton development organization and their stamp is there.  They are authored by the ginneries association and given to cotton development organization. Cotton development organization has received for the past six years Shs5 billion from the farmers to sustain them.  

MR KIWALABYE:  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for giving way.  I also know that Government has imported tractors, which it has passed over to the ginners, and these ginners are extorting money from the cotton farmers for ploughing.  This money is deducted when the farmer takes his cotton to the ginneries. The prices are so exorbitant that farmers walk back with only the invoice and not money.

CAPT.BYARUHANGA:  Madam Speaker, I want to know whether there is any legal instrument which authorizes the ginners association to collect this tax from farmers to sustain CDO. Is there that legal instrument? Madam Speaker, we have been boasting of AGOA.  I want to know from the minister how much cotton have you produced for Kananathan and Tri-Star that you have used to expand your cotton sector for the last two years? The money you have invested in Tri-Star, how much cotton have the farmers supplied to this sector?  These are genuine questions, which need answers if we are actually talking of strategic planning.  

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you table the documents? You should mention the documents, date, author and the recipient.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  These are documents, which show the levy paid to Uganda ginneries association annually by farmers via the ginners at farm gate since 1999. They show the amount they have collected so far for the last six years, which is Ush6.3 billion. They also show the total money that has been passed over to CDO via Uganda ginners association. The amount is UShs4.8 billion and these documents were duly received in the cotton development organization on 15 October 2003, and the cotton development organization stamps received.  

MR RUKUTANA:  Madam Speaker, can I seek clarification as to the purpose for which the money was passed over by the farmers to the CDO so that I prepare my response.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I am asking him.  The cotton farmers buy their own tools, drugs, hire their own labour, produce their own cotton and you levy them to support a statutory organization.  What legal instrument do you use?

11.33
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee for a very good report. I would also like to thank the ministry for a good work.  I am afraid of losing my Friend Dr Sebunya Kibirige.  Victoria Sekitoleko did a good work here in Uganda as Minister for Agriculture and the international community took her away.  Recently, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was also taken away. So is there anything we can do so that our friend does not over perform and we do not lose him. 

Madam Speaker, we are getting fruits from South Africa eggs horticultural crops, the scientists we have, and all these very important people who are being promoted to international bodies.  Is there no way Uganda can produce these crops to the extent that South Africa is doing?  We have the resources, we have the land, we have the minds and we have NARO. What is the problem?  

The second thing is on the issue of tobacco in Arua.  We are talking about integration but tobacco is destroying the environment, it is destroying the people and what they get out of the production is low.  Madam Speaker, is there no way that crop can be introduced which is more money magnet to attract these people away from growing tobacco so that they stop destroying the environment and human bodies. Is there no way?  We are not talking about zoning, is there nothing that can be zoned so that gradually we eliminate the issue of tobacco growing in Arua and in any other parts of Uganda.

Number three, Madam speaker, is the issue of tsetse control.  A number of areas in Uganda where we have tsetse flies are being assisted.  I would like the minister to explain why Nebbi is not involved in this. Of course, we have a lot of tsetse fly infection in the park.  Is there something that can be done to ensure that this is controlled?

Number four, Madam Speaker, is the issue of building on the landing sites.  We said that 30 landing sites should be built in Uganda to ensure that the export of quality fish in Uganda can be enhanced. We read from this report that Uganda is doing very miserably compared to the other two member states.  Can we know when this is going to be started, and in particular the one of Panyimur in my constituency where we have already given the land. The land is available and we are waiting for the commencement of the work. As you know, we have got the best fish in this country.

Number five, Madam Speaker, is the issue of operation fishnets.  Some time last year, in July, the Ministry of Agriculture introduced the issue of the beach management committee.  Now the operation fishnet operation is in total disregard of this fish management committee.  The way that fishermen are being handled is extremely brutal. I would like the minister to explain why this cannot be made in a more friendly way so that there is collaboration.  

The aspect of putting in the beach management committee was that the ministry and beach management committee would collectively handle the control over wrong fishing gears and registration of canoes. We do not see why so much violence is being used in as far as implementation of this is concerned.  

My last point is on the integration of agriculture into industries.  We already produce a lot of this.  I am saddened to note that China would like to get green beans of coffee from Uganda and yet our policy here, point number (5), that we would have an integrated, independent and self-sustaining economy. This definitely needs backward and forward linkages; agriculture linking into industries so that we are able to add value and enhance the income of our people.  Now, I wish to know from the minister how much of this has been prioritised.  I will not say anything, Madam Speaker, on the amount of moringa that has been grown by this country, and may be that is one other reason, which may allow the minister to remain here in Uganda for some time.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.39
MR WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Chairman and the committee for its report. I have a few observations to make.  I have been wondering whether the ministry ever carries out any policy reviews because when you look at plan for modernization of agriculture (PMA) as a policy, it is faulty.  Why?  If you start tracking the money from the ministry and you reach the district, a district like Mbale would be getting about UShs 150 million under plan for modernization of agriculture (PMA).  By the time you reach the parish, you have UShs 400,000 because you remove the 65 per cent for the sub-counties and retain 35 per cent at the district.  Is it possible to modernize agriculture with UShs 400,000 in a Parish?  

Now, when you go down and look at plan for modernization of agriculture (PMA) as a policy, it tries to do everything like this Napoleon in the french revolution. They tried to please everybody by constructing the road, constructing the bridge and modernizing agriculture and at the end of it the policy ends up doing nothing.  It needs the ministry to sit down properly and look at this policy.  

Then we have national agriculture advisory services (NAADS).  NAADS has a policy; we are likely to go in a situation of the early childhood nutritional project in the Ministry of Health.  Districts have ended up with buildings, which were supposed to be community centres for nurseries, and we have nothing to do with them -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The Chairman of the Committee informed this House that there is a study by professionals, including some from Makerere, who pointed out that having roads improves production.  There are several indices that he mentioned in the study which appear to be innocently far away from agricultural production, but that they are relevant scientifically according to this study.  Therefore, is the hon. Member really aware, or when these points were being raised he did not follow up.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I am very well informed regarding those issues.  First of all, many of the roads that are being constructed under plan for modernization of agriculture (PMA), have no provision for maintenance; they just grade them and at the end of it, after three months, you find them back to bush.  Why do we not have this project for roads specifically under feeder roads?  

Madam Speaker, I was talking about the issue of NAADS, and I was trying to point out that NAADS is likely to fail like the early childhood nutritional project.  Our people, including my grandmother, knew the value of good seeds.  They also know that it is good if you have exotic cows, you get more milk, but the problem is affordability.  When an exotic cow falls sick, you need about UShs 52,000 for one dose of east coast fever.  Now, it is like when I fall sick from malaria and I am treated with septrin.  NAADS is addressing a wrong problem.  The people know the problems.  

Unless we marry with the committee’s recommendation of credit facility, a micro-finance project, at the end of it NAADS is going to leave nothing behind. I want to appeal to the ministry to sit down and review it.  I am from the village and I do not want to pretend and say that it is working.  It is true my constituency does not even have one Sub-county, but they are only losing allowances when people go for seminars.  But in terms of activities on the ground, NAADS is a failure and I want it to be put on record.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.48
MR JOSEPH KULE (Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee, the chairman and members, for this report.  I have a few things to present.  One, we have this plan for modernization of agriculture (PMA), which has become a song of everybody, but in some areas it is not felt because may be they have selected very few districts.  But even those districts where it is found we do not see much on the ground.  For example, in my place we do not have extension workers to teach people what type of farms they should have.  I have been moving all over my constituency trying to mobilize farmers, but I have never moved with anybody who is supposed to teach our farmers what they are supposed to do.  You find that because of lack of this education to the farmers, even the amount of money we are pouring in NAADS, in PMA, may not have any impact on the ground.  

Second point is that we are losing our crops despite the fact that we have so many rivers flowing on Mt Rwenzori.  In fact it is a shame to say that actually we have lot of water flowing, and yet we do not have the access to this water to be used on the farms; we need irrigation.  Why should we have a problem of food production when water is flowing freely?  Even in Mobuku Irrigation Scheme, actually, the number of farmers who are there is not enough to produce enough food for people in Kasese.  So, it would be fair actually if we utilized the water, which we have to produce, even when the climate is not favourable for us.  But if farmers remain at the mercy of the climate then agriculture cannot be modernized to the extent that we want.

Thirdly, some time back when we were still young, I used to see extension workers teaching people.  We had district farm institutes (DFIs) and the work of these farms was to train farmers on how to go about their daily activities in farming. I do see these days’ people being taken to DFI farms to be educated.  So, I do not know whether it cannot be a policy now that we have at least a farm institute in every district.  

For example, we have been having the new animals which have come, the Boran, but because people are not educated on how to treat them, most of them have ended up dying of simple diseases.  So, Madam Speaker, I believe if people got education it could be better.  

Secondly, this education should start from primary up to secondary; and it should be compulsory because we cannot have agriculture as our main sector and then we just leave it to the mercy of people who are not educated. Why do we not make the policy that we educate agricultural from primary to university so that people get involved in this main activity?  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in Kasese we have no land because more than half the land belongs to Government; so whoever tries to grow cotton is renting land from a friend. Recently, we had problems of solving land wrangles between the cultivators and the pastoralists. Most land was taken to Government under prisons, game parks etcetera; so, this is a big problem. There is no way you can modernize agriculture when Government is taking the little land available.  So, Madam Speaker, it would be better if land was availed to people so that they can produce.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.53
MR OLUM ZACHARY (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Committee for the very good report. I would also like to thank the Ministry of Agriculture for moving the process forward in modernizing agriculture.  14 years ago the debate on this floor, on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries, was very acrimonious. I remember Lt Gen Elly Tumwine once come up with a motion on this floor that the ministry should be banned.  

If you check in the Hansard you will find those sentiments being expressed. But today we are debating on the framework of modernizing agriculture and I would like to really to congratulate the ministry for moving the process forward instead of being condemned. Now we are talking about how we can improve on the existing process, which is going on.  We have done a lot in the area of plant breeding and producing better materials for production.  We have also done a lot in the area of agronomy, but the person who is supposed to put this improved material into the soil is a farmer.  

Today, we use cell biology to produce very advanced seeds like what they have got in developed countries.  But we have a small farmer who is supposed to go and plant these material and produce, but we have not focused our attention on how to help this small farmer to produce more.  We are still talking about the hand hoe, which has been with us here for many, many, years.  

In 1967, these same farmers produced over half a million bales of cotton, but what are we talking about today?  I would like to recommend the ministry to look at agriculture not only in terms of one group of farmers.  We have the small-scale farmers who make the majority of farmers in this country, how do we help them?  Their problem is that they need the hand tools and additional energy of production.  I know there is a move towards improving on animal traction but that is not sufficient.  

We need a policy on mechanizing agriculture. The small unit at Namalele is not receiving sufficient fund to do research on how best to mechanize agriculture in this country.  I know even the donors are not very keen to find this particular aspect of agriculture. We used to have what they call the special development section at Namalele, these group of experts assisted farmers in planning their farms, controlling soil erosion, providing water for agriculture but we have destroyed Namalele.  If we are talking about special strategic intervention, I think an institution like Namalele should be able to help farmers plan their farms, to lay out contours, to go back to Kigezi and make sure that those contours are in proper places so that we do not lose the soil. I think to me that is a proper strategic intervention.  

If we are talking about helping farmers acquire oxen and a set of ploughs. I do not see why we cannot help farmers with subsidies; provide them with proper hand tools so that they can produce better.  Farmers in this country had ever bought tractors on a subsidised - well, Madam Speaker, what I am saying here is we need a policy on how we can provide these tools to our farmers, be the small farmer, the medium scale farmer and the large scale farmer.  Until we can do this we can have all the good seeds; we can have all the fertilizers but if we do not have proper environment to plant these seeds we are not going to increase our production.  

So, I would really like to ask the Minister of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture to sit down and see how best we can revamp the mechanization of agriculture in this country.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.55
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative Of Persons With Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity.  First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture for the report they have presented.  I would like to raise a very important issues regarding agriculture.  We are all aware agriculture is the backbone of the economy, and the main participate of agriculture are women and of course, people with disability.  If you look at the management of agriculture, you will find that women are least represented there.  Even if we take the extension workers of NAADS you will find that they are men.  You go to the village the women are the ones in the banana plantations. But when it comes to training, the men are the one’s training and they get this to play cards and yet the women who are doing the donkey work do not get the information.  Thank you for giving me the information.

MS WONEKA OLIVER: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Baba Diri for giving way.  As far as NAADs programme is concerned, it would be unfair to say that women are not there.  In fact, majority of the farmer fora, the membership basically, women and men are waiting to see that NAADS works and that money is flowing and then they would join.  Thank you, Madam speaker.

MRS BABA DIRI:  Thank you very much for the information. But what I know is that women are present at the lowest level, you come to the ladder, how many women are there on the boards, we have only one minister on the side of agriculture.  But if you look through the hierarchy of agriculture, women are not well represented. 

For your information NAADS has just come and men are the ones training rather than women training the women farmers.  So, that is a very important issue, even if you looked carefully at the policy and agriculture issues, you find men are the ones taking them up.  I can give you a very simple example, grinding is a domain of women but when these mills come around men are the ones operating.  As long as something comes mechanized, they take over and they do not give the opportunity to women.  

So, I would like the Ministry of Agriculture to take it seriously and have budget specifically allocated for women.  Women have problems when they come for training; they have their children to take care of.  So, they should ensure that when women come for training, their children are taken care of, and they are provided with funds for babysitters so that they can participate fully in their training.

Then regarding people with disability.  Blind persons are very good farmers, and if they are well trained they can produce a lot, the same applies to deaf people.  Since they do not have really proper employment, the only way is self- employment through agriculture.  In the past we used to have very good training in Salama, these people would train blind persons how to grow crops and so forth, but today this training is not there.  PMA has come, NAADS has come, and I would like to know how many blind persons have been trained to train the others.  How many interpreters have been hired by the extension workers to ensure that deaf people also benefit from this training?  

For the physically handicapped, what kind of appropriate technology do you have in place to ensure that the physically handicapped, even those ones in wheelchairs, are able to pull the ploughs and do some work?  So, I feel that the disabled people are totally left out from this modernization of agriculture, and as their representative I am very concerned. I would like the minister to give me the plan they have to ensure that people with disability are involved in production.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

11.58
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would also like to thank the chairman of the committee for his report.  I would like to raise a concern that every year whenever we are budgeting these policy statements, we are always ending up lamenting, which makes this chamber a place for lamentations.  Yet we are in charge of appropriating and we are supposed to be budgeting. I do not know why this is the trend of the affairs.  I would have expected the chairman and the committee really to guide Parliament so that as we come out with final allocations of the budget we really guide the Minister of Finance in allocating resources to the various sectors.  

Madam Speaker, I read the report of the committee, they are blaming the Ministry policy of decentralization, which I would not like to buy.  For example, they are saying, the ministry is not carrying out agriculture extension services, it is because of decentralization; the ministry has failed to control diseases because of decentralization, and many other problems enumerated by the committee in this report.  Madam Speaker, this is not true. 

I would like the committee and the Ministry to read the Local Governments Act, the second schedule.  The second schedule shows the functions and services of Government and local governments. In part one we have the functions and services for which Government is responsible; there are a number of them, they are around 29, and one of them is setting national standards.  Another one is national research policy, control and management of epidemics and disasters, and agricultural policy.  This is what the Government is supposed to be doing. The committee should have gone further to find out from the ministry why they are not fulfilling their mandate as per this Schedule in the Local Government Act.  It is supposed actually to come out.

Madam Speaker, when you go to Section 97 of the Local Government Act, it elaborates further.  It says: “For purposes of ensuring implementation of national policies and adherence to performance standards on the part of the Local Governments, ministries shall inspect, monitor and, where necessary, offer technical advice, support supervision and training within their respective sectors.”  Now, if the ministry has failed to carry out its mandate as per Local Government Act, section 97, they cannot support, they cannot mentor, then they should blame themselves.  I think what they should have done is to say that the ministry has proved incapable and then we advise His Excellency, the President to restructure the ministry and may be appoint more vibrant and energetic people to lead the ministry.

Madam Speaker, another problem, which we have in the districts now, is the Government itself, which has disorganised its programmes.  For example, now there is a policy of restructuring, which for the last four years is restructuring districts, and up to now local governments do not have the required number of staff.  Even now to bring in more confusion, we have this component of NAADS, where they are saying that they are going to privatise agriculture extension services.  You are privatising and then you blame local governments; the policies come from the centre.  

Secondly, many staff have been retrenched, our colleagues are saying there are no extension service staff in the districts; you are blaming decentralisation.  We should blame the Ministry of Agriculture for coming up with poor policies rather than blaming the districts.

Madam Speaker, the issue of coffee, I am also unhappy with the Ministry of Agriculture because in May I attended the labour day celebrations in Masaka and my people requested His Excellency, the President to intervene because many nursery operators had very many coffee seedlings which had not been bought.  Then His Excellency, the President directed that this coffee should be distributed.  But really is this how we are going to work, where everything must be referred to His Excellency, the President? Could the Ministry of Agriculture not see that coffee seedlings were lying idle in those nurseries and then come out with an intervention?  Really, I need a proactive –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE:  I would like to inform you that money was actually appropriated to UCDA to buy seedlings and give to coffee nursery operators for onward transmission to farmers.  But this money was later diverted and –(Interjection)- yes, $ one million was diverted and given to the development of value addition.  Now, much as value addition is very important, on the other hand also production is also important, so that additional money should have been found for value addition and then the nursery operators should have been given their money.  But as a result now, a lot of the nurseries are bushes. I think the sector is going to collapse; so, soon there will be no coffee on which to add value.

MR YIGA:  Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker, this is an issue, which is very important, and can the minister tell the country what the fate of these coffee nurseries is, because farmers are still planting coffee seedlings to be sold to the Government.  Tell them that they should stop planting these coffee seedlings.  

Finally, I would like to give my observation on the proposals by the committee that the Government should transfer the responsibility of water production from the Ministry of Lands and Water to the Ministry of Agriculture.  You can see they have too much, then we are also adding on another responsibility.  I would not like to buy this suggestion. I also remember we had - before I came to this Parliament, I used to read in the press about the valley dam saga, where valley dams were constructed by the Ministry of Agriculture and no valley dam actually up to now is operational.   So, I do not recommend that we transfer this responsibility.  Let the responsibility remain where it is, but what we should do, let us follow up and see why we do not have water production; may be it could be lack of money.  

Even if we take this responsibility to the Ministry of Agriculture, which has no money, it will not be able to fulfil the responsibility.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.06
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I think we have thanked the Committee on Agriculture for many years for producing very good reports; and again this year they have produced a very good report. The only problem is the allocation of money to the Ministry of Agriculture, and that still persists.

Secondly, Ministry of Agriculture to be combined with veterinary services and fisheries is extremely unreasonable.  The two ministries should be spilt as it was before.  That is when the Ministry of Agriculture was separate and they were able to plan and productivity was improved.  As one of the members of Parliament contributed that in 1967, through modernization of agriculture by tractor hire in the rural areas, production of cotton jumped.  But we have tried under this Government to improve production through tractor hire, but every time tractors have been introduced in the countryside, they have failed because of failure to administer the project.  

Agricultural extension cannot succeed under the primitive hoe, which has been there for over 100 years.  Animal traction has been there for more than 100 years, doing well sometimes.  But presently, I do not know whether it will succeed because the animals have been neglected.  Madam Speaker, personally, I have lost more than 40 friesian cows just this year because disease cannot be controlled.  So, I do not know how animal traction can succeed when we cannot treat the bulls, which are going to participate in animal traction.  Agricultural extension - I understand most of it has been privatised - poor peasant farmers cannot afford to pay for the services of agricultural officers or veterinary officers, and poor peasant farmers just cannot afford to pay for the drugs to treat their animals.  The average cost –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: I really like to thank my Colleague for giving way, and to sympathize with his condition about the loss of over 40 heads of friesian cattle.  But I was just reading through the policy statement on page 42, just to complement your point, your argument of having the ministry spilt, that among the achievements of the ministry they had planned to import up to 600,000 dozes of foot and mouth Disease (FMD) vaccines.  But remember that our livestock population now stands at about 6.8 million herds of cattle, but what did the ministry get, only 200,0000 dozes of FMD vaccine and yet over 25 districts in Uganda have been affected by FMD.  I would like to inform you further that among the districts to which these 200,000 dozes of FMD vaccine were distributed, I do not see Pallisa; so, condolences, dear colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Epetait, did you say that was an achievement?  Is 200 dozes an achievement?

DR EPETAIT: I mean as an achievement for the ministry in their policy statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it recorded that it is an achievement?

DR EPETAIT:  It is recorded here as an achievement, and yet to me that is like a drop of water in the ocean.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much for the information and the condolence.  My family has been keeping cows since 1400; I am the first one to drop out completely and I will never, ever, keep cows again.  I would like to tell the honourable minister who is concerned that they have driven me out of the cattle industry and yet my family was responsible for bringing most of the cows into the Teso area.  Pallisa sometimes is considered to be in the cattle corridor, but when it comes to distribution of drugs and services, Pallisa is completely excluded from the cattle corridor.  I do not know why.  

Madam Speaker, there is something which is coming up in the fish industry.  There is a rumour in the countryside, a justified rumour so to say that the lakes have been sold.  Fish is no longer available to the population in the countryside; instead the trucks, which go there are carrying what they call “mugongowazi” meaning the flesh has been taken off, only the bones and the tails and the heads are left to be sold.  Madam Speaker, I challenge anybody from the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to drive along the road from Kampala right up the border, the only place you will find fish being sold is around Jinja and those people have to struggle to get those fish and they are sold at a very high price.  But what you will see are pickups carrying “mugongowazi,” that is what our citizens are reduced to.  

We cannot compare ourselves with Kenya or Tanzania; these two countries have access to the sea where they get most of their fish.  The inland fresh water in Kenya is more than what we have; inland fresh water in Tanzania is more than what we have.  So, if they are exporting more fish, it is because they have carefully planned.  But what our policy makers have done in this country is to encourage the fishermen to invade the lakes and even produce or catch immature fish for the factories, which we are praising for increasing the export of fish in this country.  We really have to review this; we have reached a situation of crisis.  If the citizens cannot have fish to eat and are reduced to “mugongowazi” then what is the purpose of we being involved in fisheries –(Interjection) - I am winding up, so you cannot inform me anything.  

The control of disease; I think we have really failed to do anything. We cannot immunize cattle, we cannot supply drugs for the treatment of cattle, the veterinary services - the hon. Minister saw me going to that point and she has walked out, maybe in protest, I do not know -(Laughter)- or to express her failure. Oh, the Minister is there, he is a researcher. His knowledge in cassava production - he has done his work.  

Research has succeeded, but we cannot deliver to the ordinary farmer. But as I pointed out, split the Ministry of Veterinary Services from the Ministry of Agriculture as it used to be in the previous governments, that was when Babiha was able to free this country from importing milk from Kenya. But now we are over-producing milk in some areas, we do not know how to market it.

Give me six months; I will market all the milk, which is over produced from those areas.  Children are malnourished, that is a market for your milk from the western region and you cannot see because of the wrong Government policy –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually very anxious to know if hon. Mallinga is able to market the milk, whether he needs any permission from anybody to go ahead and do the job.  

DR MALLINGA: No, I do not want to be included. If anyone says that, it will be an insult to me. We formed a Government in this country, which was able to free this country from importing milk, and when we started producing milk, now they say they cannot market milk when children in schools are malnourished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, I think you have said enough about marketing. Let us go to hon. Ochieng, three minutes please.

12.20
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will try my best to be within the three minutes. But, Madam Speaker, so many things have been talked and before I talk anything, I thank the Committee of Agriculture for the job well done.  

Madam Speaker, page 2 of this report talks about the vision, the mission, the mandate and objectives of this ministry. What I wonder is whether this is basically the normal background that is supposed to be there, or else these people who are doing a lot in this ministry do not seem to see, or simply ignore, some of these scriptures.  

Madam Speaker, I am standing here on a point of sorrow and I will talk with a lot of difficulties and I will request that you do me a favor and give me a little bit of more time to tell you what is happening in my constituency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we had time for talking during the Budget and the State of the Nation Address. Just talk about the general policies; let us not do bilateral issues.

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I am going to say and I will start by saying this; we have a problem in the coffee industry in this country. Somebody mentioned about strategic intervention, and the Shs 1 million that was picked from UCDA to help do a lot more in that sector and not the planting.  

Madam Speaker, I know and I have worked with so many people in the coffee sector in this country.  All the indigenous coffee processors who have done so well over a period of time in this country are now running around, some of them are hiding, some of them are in various places; they have lost all that they did during the other time. The reason is, Government gave basically a deaf ear to their problems.  

You can mention everybody; all the indigenous Uganda coffee exporters are now languishing. Some are trying to hide; they have run away from their factories, they have gone to different places and nothing is happening. Madam Speaker, if this Government is helping production of agricultural items in this country, I would request that it looks into the plight of these coffee processors who had done so well, who had reached very far, and are now languishing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is their exact problem?  What is it that needs to be addressed for the processors?

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, there was a time when we had a coffee boom in this country, or throughout the world. Our coffee processors like Nsamba coffee, Zigoti coffee works, talk about Businge and all these people here, made a lot of money and they did a lot in form of infrastructure building. I imported a number of machines for these people. But when business came down, over a period of time, these people failed completely and they lost a lot of money, basing on the account that they were using money from banks with high interest rate –(Interjection)- I thank the hon. Member for helping me.  

I know of one man called Nsamba, whose factory got burnt after using a lot of money. He is now running around and he has acquired a small space at one of the external coffee processors to enable him earn a small living; a person who had so much! I will not talk much about that, Madam Speaker.  

But, Madam Speaker, there is a problem with fisheries in this country. One of the Members said, we keep lamenting, and lamenting. I feel it is high time something is done. The Ministry of Agriculture and especially the line of fisheries where I come from, has completely failed. One gentleman, who is known as a thief was appointed to head the operation of “Operation Clean”, who came to my constituency and destroyed all the boats. Today we are counting and we have not finished; we have counted close to Shs 1.2 billion that was destroyed by a person who is not a security operative. 

There is one person called Semakula, and I want the Minister of Agriculture to tell us where he is to enable us know where we can get redress from. Because, I went to ISO, ESO and Police and they all did not know him. I went to the Minister for Security; he was not known; and in Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, he was not known; yet he was moving with about ten guns, AMGs. As if this person did not know that we had bigger problems than the mere peasants they were quarrelling with.  

Madam Speaker, it is a big concern, my people can no longer access water for drinking, basing on the report that there is aquatic and water hyacinth in most of these areas. The so-called boats they are talking about as the “mbawo tatu” have been basically the small boats that we use to access either water for drinking or to look for small vegetables for us who live near water and who will never leave water regardless of whatever will happen in this country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is something that people are talking about, and which the report has mentioned, that Kenya gets much more than Uganda.  Madam Speaker, it is a long story. Kenyans have the smallest share of Lake Victoria, in fact four or six percent, but these guys have done so much that competing with them is going to be a problem. When we tried to block fish from going to Kenyan factories, some of the factories in Kenya, of course basing on the fact that they could not sustain their factories, transferred some of the small money that they had and brought it to Uganda. 

Today, Madam Speaker, they are trying as much as possible to cripple the Ugandan system to enable them work at all costs to have some fish in their areas. Those who come to my constituency have reached an extent of trying to fail the fishermen and those who peddle fish from the fishermen to their factories by not paying them. Sometimes they take close to a month or two months without paying these people. They keep referring them and suggesting to them to try to take the fish to the Kenyan side. 

What are they doing, Madam Speaker? They are saying that since they had acquired so much and put a number of facilities in Kenya, those factories cannot be closed, and if they are not going to be closed, they must be sustained. All this is known to everybody in this country, more especially the Fisheries ministry, but the ministry has done so little to help the people in this country.  

Madam Speaker, I request that from today let us start working and stop the lamentation. Let us cut this money that is taken to Fisheries only to do nothing, but to harm our people in the constituency. If they are misusing money and information - Somebody came to us and said, people in my constituency were using fish poisoning. That is the scarecrow that they took to the President to enable them get whatever they wanted, only to come and do a lot of harm, which has put us in a disaster, which is created by Government and has to be solved by the Government if we are to move forward. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we are in danger and this danger must be known to everybody, including the ministry and the Office of President that they have done more harm to the presidency because most of these people -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ochieng, I have been listening. Now, have you actually made a formal report about the destruction of property in your constituency worth Shs 1.2 billion or you are just raising it on the Floor of this House? It is a very serious matter.

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I have done everything it takes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When did you report?

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, it is now about a month since I wrote that report. I also followed these people up to the committee level and did the same, but the response is that nobody seems to have the guts to help the wanainchi in this country, more especially in the Fisheries Department. Everybody keeps referring you. When I went to the Fisheries they referred me to the Inspector General of Government, when I came to the Inspector General of Government they referred me to ISO, when I went to ISO - Madam Speaker, I am sorry, but the suffering that we are talking about is too much. 

Recently they told me they arrested that man called Semakula, who was given a lot of ammunition, and we are not sure whether he was really arrested. If he is arrested, we need to know where he is and we have more reports, which are still coming up now.  Madam Speaker, I would like to give you a copy of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ochieng, you have in this building the people who lead this institution.  I have an office in this building, the Speaker works in this building, and you have never told us about these things. You are talking about a month of tribulations and lamentations and moving about when you have the No.3 person of this country here! Anyway, we have heard.

12.26
CAPT DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report, and the ministry for limping on despite the constraints, and for having ministers of the people. 

Madam Speaker, I am talking about drought in the country. The rains you see in Kampala should not give an impression that all is well down there.  There is urgent need for Government to get interested in rescuing our people, especially from Rakai. We have already registered some deaths; there is no water and of course we are handicapped because Government is overstretched in the North. We cannot ask for food, I do not know whether we could even get it. So, there is urgent need for Government to have an assessment and response in some of these areas in the countryside, otherwise the situation is very bad.  

Page 16 of the report, there is something about the strategic intervention in agricultural export; actually I am interested in horticulture. The committee does not come out properly on what has been done, what projects are on-going. For example we have a project, which was meant to fund a factory to help in the drying of fruits in Rakai. The building is at the wall plate, it has been abandoned and nothing is going on. So, we would want to see this in the report under strategic intervention.

Coffee has been handled and this area, I would even give my signature because that sector involves local governments to give out this coffee.  So, how much is known? The seedlings are known because Members of Parliament, local governments and Sub-counties participate. So we would like the Ministry and Government to come out and sort out this issue because it has overstayed and it affects mostly the women, the elderly, the youth, who are manning these nursery beds.

I also wish to appeal to Government. I happen to border with Tanzania and Rwanda down in the South, and we have that beautiful Lake Victoria. There is some bad blood, which brewing about safety of animals. Of course it requires diplomacy at Government level, but the other side, especially Tanzania, seems to be uncooperative. When a cow crosses, by the time you clear yourself through the border points, and of course you report at the Police, you report a cow, but in the process it has been slaughtered, then they ask you in Swahili “Onatafuta ngombe ula nyama?” So, you really lose the case when you find it slaughtered. So, at diplomatic level, we need urgent intervention, otherwise it is undermining livestock and fishing.

I wanted also a simple clarification from the Minister. Don’t you think NAADS has laid off extension workers because under NAADS the farmers are allowed to hire their own private extension services? It looks as if now Government has deliberately, through NAADS, laid off agricultural extension workers. It is a point we could get interested in and look at.

My last point is about the farmers’ friendly rural credit scheme, which the committee is recommending in order to boost commercial agriculture. Two issues must be noted; interest rate and the period one gets a loan facility. Bank of Uganda has got money under Apex loan; it has been lying there to boost tourism, health education, hotel industry, name it. The problem is that to get this money, you have to use commercial banks as intermediaries, which of course hike the interest. 

Can I also appeal to Government that through the Micro Finance Outreach Programme if you could target the Micro Finance, give them capacity so that they can access this money directly from the Bank of Uganda, maybe to bring the interest rate down; but as long as farmers get money, work for these banks, there is nothing. You borrow money and the following day you run away from your family, you abandon it. First of all, they do not allow you to produce, say, for the first season, second season.

So, Mr Minister together with Government, look at interest rate and grace period, this the only pain we have.  Otherwise, money is all over; there are several banks in the country.

My last point is on PMA advert. There is an advert on the radio, which is very poisonous. It is telling everybody that there is money at the sub-county, yet you know PMA is in a few districts and sub-counties. A small correction please, that you specify those districts otherwise we are being asked about PMA and about this money and we do not see it. I thank you.

12.30
REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County, North): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of the Members in thanking the Committee and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the work they are doing to transform this country from subsistence farming to commercialized farming. But they still need a lot of our support. How?

One point of concern that has been raised by people from Mukono District and from my constituency is that as leaders in this country and Members of Parliament, even if we pass policies, they also require us to go down there to support the people, to mobilize and sensitize them and to support many of these policies we are passing. At times they hear people talking about politics, about PAFO, Reform Agenda and the rest. So, many of our people at times get disturbed and confused whether we are doing real service to this country or we are just doing our own business.  

So, my humble request to all Members is to go down there to mobilize the people, sensitize them, and help them to see how they can be transformed to participate fully in the development of this nation. But this business of saying that this one should go and leave this country, we are tired of that. The year 2006 is coming, give us time to complete our task and then you give us another kisanja.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am glad that the hon. Minister of Agriculture is here.  For two or three years, it has been raised in this House about NAADS. It is a good arrangement, millions of shillings have been sent to our sub-counties, but in the end it has not yielded to real value as our people expect. We think that much of this money has been spent in workshops, feeding people who come to these workshops, transporting them, and a lot of these millions go back to the ministry through facilitation of these trainers, who come to our sub-counties. These trainers have also become professionals.  

After leaving Mukono, they are sent to Mbarara, Kabale and elsewhere, getting all this money in form of allowances and facilitation. How are our peasants going to benefit in this kind of arrangement? We are suggesting, and that is what our people in Mukono are suggesting, that it would have been better - hon. Kibirige you are a very practical man, why don’t you buy us tractors?  

Mechanize agriculture so that we can transform agriculture from subsistence farming to commercialized farming. But this business of facilitation, taking sodas - At one time I attended a meeting where the participants said, “If you are not cooking us good rice, meat and soda, we are not going to attend.” The organizers had to confirm that there would be soda and meat and whatever so that they get a very good attendance. But if you are sending Shs 50 million quarterly, why don’t you try to at least buy us one tractor in a sub-county and even in another sub-county as an example –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE: Actually that is a very important point that the ministry should take up because a tractor, when you go to the Internet, is about 60,000 pounds. You can imagine 56 districts, you multiply that and the money is spent to pay quarterly as Shs 50 million; it is cheaper if you gave it to the districts to enhance the commercial farming.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: I thank you for your contribution. I have already set an example in my constituency -(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: The information I would like to give you is that much as tractors would be needed, there is a lot of planning that you need to do. I can tell you the few tractors out there are being used to transport sand and building materials, and not used to farm. So, put that into perspective; and the average holding in your Mukono is about one to two acres. So, a tractor can do about 10 to 20 acres a day. All that logistics, you have to put it into perspective, otherwise it is easier said than done.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: We have set some examples – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Rev. Bakaluba for giving way. The hon. Member began with a very important point. He says we should sensitize people to participate in the transformation of agriculture, and I agree with him.  But now how do you sensitize people if you do not move to meet them, to hold workshops? Can he suggest to us the modalities of sensitization that do not involve getting people together and addressing them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And giving them soda.  (Laughter)

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: In my first point I was requesting my colleagues, Members of Parliament and politicians, to go and also participate in sensitizing and mobilizing the people.  In my second point, after our people are sensitized definitely they will not just sit down there, they will need facilitation in terms of mechanized agriculture - tractors so that they can put in practice what they have been trained. That is my point. Just release money and these tractors are bought. There is no need of defence, hon. Minister.  

So, I have set an example, I have bought two Massey Ferguson tractors in my constituency and we have laid up a very good plan, and we can see people using them perfectly. We are setting an example, and if it can be borrowed through NAADS and the Ministry of Agriculture, it can be very effective.  Instead of people just digging small plots they can expand and increase on production.  

In this report, point 8, you have mentioned, ‘To support the production of strategic agricultural commodities for export. The committee was informed that the programme includes coffee, tea, cotton, cocoa, livestock and horticulture.’ But the committee has not mentioned vanilla. In Mukono District we are growing vanilla and this is being spread countrywide. I think the committee should also make an effort to see how vanilla can be accommodated because it is fetching a lot of money.  Though it had some problems somehow, somewhere, but I think the ministry is trying to see how it can correct that problem. But if you do not mention it, the people who have been involved in vanilla growing will get worried and even scared that maybe what they are doing is not proper and appropriate.  I would like to request hon. Sebunya to know whether we have a policy for vanilla growing in this country. If you are spreading it to Rukungiri, Kabale, Rwenzori and everywhere, I think we need to be safeguarded. 

My last point, Madam Speaker, is about coffee growing.  In 2001 when we had just come to Parliament as Members of Parliament, we tried our best to work with the Coffee Development Authority to give out seedlings to enable our people to grow coffee. But eventually people lost steam because at times we could take these seedlings and some people even failed to plant them. I think there was a problem. At times they realized that coffee was not at all helpful because some people were saying that it would not fetch money any more. So, I think we need to do something about that. I have heard that these people are still demanding a lot of billions, but how have you verified to know that all those seedlings were sent to our farmers? We do not want to pay air in that regard.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

12.40
CAPT. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman and the committee for a job well done. Madam Speaker, I wish to begin by reiterating the committee’s recommendation on the importance of transport in transforming the lives of our rural people. It is high time Government and Ministry of Finance in particular noted that without transport there cannot be any meaningful development.  

I have, for example, a sub-county of Katerera in my constituency. It is the most populated and most productive sub-county, but it is not served with a good road. The people have continued to be poor because they cannot sell their crops. When they do, they sell them cheaply because the traders will always say the cost of transport is high because of the bad roads. I even have no communication between my County and the nearest county of Buhweju in Bushenyi district yet the people of Buhweju, if there was transport, would be coming to Bunyaruguru to get whatever they want for their homes.

Madam Speaker, the committee has observed that Lake Bisnia is infested with the weed. I wish to inform the Ministry of Agriculture that it is not Lake Bisnia that is infested with the weed, there are - I do not know, I am not a Scientist and I have not even observed that weed. However, I wish to inform the Ministry that in my Constituency, there are three lakes, which are already infested by the waterweed, and these are Mugogo, Bugwagi and Kamweru. This matter has not only been raised today but it has always been raised, but I do not know whether the Ministry of Agriculture has ever got concerned about this issue because as we leave these weeds to grow on the lakes we will be reducing the chances of making the Fishing Industry grow. So, I would urge the Minister of Agriculture to look into that matter immediately.  

Madam Speaker, we are very blessed in Bunyaruguru; we have fifty-two lakes, but over time these lakes have been depleted. There has always been a programme of restocking, but it appears Government is slow in investing in it. I even hear on some occasions Government is pleading with people to make ponds.  I was wondering why you have to waste money even making ponds when there are empty bodies of water, which are lacking fish. So, I thought the Minister would take it also as an urgent matter, to restock some of these bodies, which are empty, instead of starting to dig up more empty spaces.

Madam Speaker, I am glad to report that the Beach Management Units, which were established on Lake George, appear to have succeeded in one way or another. At least now there is no more catching of immature fish and the fishing methods have improved. 

However, when you go to Lake Edward, we have a problem, and Government is failing to assist in this. Fishermen come from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) to our side of the lake and use any fishing methods. Our people do not have patrol boats and therefore cannot patrol the lake to see to it that the Congolese remain on the other side of the lake. Our Government has always endeavored to have talks with sister Governments neighboring us, more so with the DRC Government.  

I hear we are training bodyguards of His Excellency, Kabila, but I don’t see why we do not go into talks of corporating and manning these lakes for the better of our country. If we do not, then I think we are doing injustice to the Fishing Industry.  

Madam Speaker, on this note, I would urge Government - it appears it is an error of creating authorities. When taxes could not be collected, URA was formed, there was an improvement; there was NEMA, I think there is an improvement in the environment; recently, there was a Forestry Authority. I thought it would be prudent of us also to look into the possibility of forming a Fish Authority. And on that note, Madam Speaker, I would also recommend that even the veterinary services could be given an authority and they are managed better than how they are. 

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, is the issue of cooperatives.  The other day there was something to do with co-operatives and I do not know where it ended; I think the former Vice President was concerned, but I do not know what happened. I urge Government to tell us whether it still has the intentions of reviving co-operatives or whether we can call it a dead affair and we call it a day.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you will bring your information when your ministry comes.  

12.46
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, there is no time to delve into a meaningful discussion of vital sectors of our economy because of limited time. Recently, I was discussing some few issues with Prof. Sam Turyamuhika, and he told me that if there is nobody thinking, then nothing is doing. 

I think we have a problem in this country. The Department of Agriculture, which we call MAAIF, is really a sum total and the pivot of our survival, all of us. But go and ask the amount of money the Government puts aside for its research activity.  When hon. Sebunya Kibirige stands up to tell us the amount of money - and can I remind Members that resource allocation is an indication of intentions of a given group of people in power of the areas they cherish. This two per cent year in, year out, of this sector of Agriculture should tell everybody that agriculture is not a priority area. Two per cent of the National Budget is what is put aside for the Ministry of Agriculture, year in year out!  

Hon. Rukutana is here, he is the one who allocates resources; let him tell us. So, Madam Speaker, there is a problem. While Botswana with its two million heads of cattle can get over hundred million Euros per annum, Uganda, according to Francis Epetait, is about 6.8 million, close to seven million heads of cattle diseased.  We do not get - I do not know how much we get. If we get about twenty million dollars, then we are lucky.  All ministers are here; let them tell us.  When they want to hide, they say, ‘But you see in Botswana their farms developed by the Bazungu.’  Why can you not tell these Bazungu to come and invest in this wonderful republic?  

Madam Speaker, Cotton Sub-sector: Hon. Zachary Olum was talking of about half a million bales by 1967.  Today it is about 160,000, as indicated in the document. So, what has happened to the sub-sector?  Tri-Star is instead importing the materials and we sing about it day and night. Is there any linkage between Tri-Star and cotton production in this country? You Economists, who talk of forward-backward linkage, is there any linkage or it is a white elephant suspended in Bugolobi.  How is it helping our people?  

Madam Speaker, I request you to look on page 5 and see what the Committee is telling us. That there is empirical evidence from PMA - on page 5, and mind you this is a committee report after exhaustive interaction PhD holders, with the Professors and everybody. Hon. Sebunya, do not point at me; you have a PHD, I do not have it. It is after an exhaustive interaction with the all the brain in this sector that there is no empirical evidence from PMA to show that PMA - maybe I could read verbatim, I do not want to mix up.  

“The committee regrets the lack of empirical evidence that PMA is working towards agricultural transformation from subsistence to commercial,” and yet they turn around and sing it on radio and on rallies. They say, “Look, PMA is one of the pillars of PEAP.”  Are you sure?  Where is hon. Kabwegyere? He was writing very funny notes to me here - PMA, according to the Poverty Eradication Action Plan is one of the pillars. The committee is telling us that there is no evidence. Madam Speaker, I have read that document last -(Interruption)

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, I just want to inform the Member holding Floor that we have been informed that we are going to reduce poverty by 10 percent in the year 2017 through PMA. I think you would request the Minister to inform us at what rate, what percentage, and how he has 10 percent from the initiation of PMA up to 2017. I thank you.

CAPT. GUMA: But, colleagues, there is a problem at our level; I know we have a lot of work, but it is very incumbent upon us, it is necessary that we read some of these documents. Go and read PMA, you will come out with nothing. Well, if you are a Ugandan right from the mountains of the sun to the mountains of the moon, PMA assumes that there is uniform cultivation in this country, absolutely not.  

Read PMA and you will see; the best you will get out of that document is good English, good economics a good thesis for a PhD. It does not reflect - hon. Matovu Captain is talking of drought, go and read your PMA and you see where drought is given a highlight; read it. Hon. Rukutana, go and cite where irrigation - right from Kinoni in Masaka to the entire Western region, I have not been in the East and North of late, when it is supposed to be raining, and this is a planting season, mark you - in fact the same hon. Rukutana, Madam Speaker, will come here next fiscal year; he will be lamenting, “The GDP has gone down because of the unfavourable weather.” I can challenge you he with their documents of background to the budget and budget speech and so on. He will; I can challenge you today.

Madam Speaker, look at page 5 again, there is a problem you people have not realized. On page 5, a paragraph that begins, “As noted in the last financial year”, the sector objectives are mixed up with objectives and outcome, which distorts the clear and effective implementation programming and execution of duties. The situation is further aggravated, Madam Speaker, by the fact that MAAIF has not carried out sector household survey since just two years after we had jumped out of the bush, 1988. So, Madam Speaker, I do not know - I know you represent Kamuli and I have ever been in your local village. If an old woman asked you from Mbulamuti there in Kamuli, “Madam Alitwala, what is the essence of this sector of the Ministry of agriculture?” How would you reply, how will you justify?  In fact, to sum it -(Interruption)

MS WONEKHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to engage the Speaker in the debate in the House, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member is really carried away with unhappiness about the agriculture sector, and was wondering whether my people also understand it.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, let me finish. I know I am considered to be a stubborn man in this House.  But you see, these are challenges. I have told you of the two percent budgetary allocation to this sector every fiscal year. Honourable members, these are serious matters. If this sector is so important, it should be reflected in the resource allocation; let us stop the jokes.

MR OKUPA: On the allocation of the budget to the ministry, when you talk of a percentage we may be thinking it is a very big figure. But in the Background to the Budget, out of the 3,600 plus billion of our Budget, it is only 9.3 billion that is allocated to agriculture.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam speaker, on page 4, the committee is saying that the mandate of the ministry still ignores the spearheading of the production of crops, livestock and fisheries. Instead, they are hiding under support to promote, to guide. This is a problem, which is also part of the problem why hon. Rukutana is now having at his hands, a declining economy, because even again the economic planners in this country are forgetting that we are in a society where 80 percent are subsisters actually; we have forgotten that. Then you assume that the moment you put in place the macro economic environment, then everything will fall in line.  No, thank you; things will not fall in line because the majority of people do not understand what you mean by inflation, interest rate, what you mean by X, Y and Z.  

So, for the ministry to hide under guiding, promoting, seminars, enabling environment, and you think that people will appreciate that the environment is enabling indeed and you take advantage of it, is extremely unrealistic. Perhaps we have to go and live in America and Britain where people will understand this enabling environment.

To sum it up, Madam Speaker, the Chief Executive in this country - you know, some of us do not know how to listen when big people are talking. The Chief Executive, who is the President, has summed it up, I think more than twice. I have listened to him; he has said that he does not see serious cultivation in this country; on many occasions I think, but I remember twice. That when he is driving or when he is in his helicopter, on Masaka road going to Mbarara or Lyantonde, he does not see any serious cultivation. That is actually a very serious statement of a vote of no confidence, probably in his Minister, I do not know. I am only reminding you, should you have forgotten, that he does not see any serious cultivation. He cites only one coffee plantation just before Mbirizi; the rest, there is nothing.  

Madam Speaker, can I finally say, that distinguished leaders like myself expect and plan for disasters like hunger in this country, because when you move from East to West, you see signs of hunger and starvation, a country that has been a food basket.  

1.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Sebunya Kibirige): Madam Speaker, we are very grateful to the chairman and his committee for compiling our own complaints. I really want to thank them for that deep interaction that they had with us.  Frankly, when I read the report, at one time I thought maybe it had been written by my staff, but eventually I realized that it was a report from the committee with which we interacted very deeply during its processing.  

I do not know what happened this morning because, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, there is a serious statement from the Minister of Agriculture.  He is thanking the committee for having compiled the ministry’s complaints. What exactly is he trying to tell this House?  

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, may I come to that later in due course. I thank you. I do not know what happened this morning because what we are handling is actually a multi-sectoral approach and I had hoped that the Minister for roads would be here to talk about rural roads, that the Minister for Energy would be here to talk about rural electrification. I realize hon. Nduhuura is here to talk about agro-processing and marketing, and I thought that hon. Khiddu Makubuya would be here to talk about education and hon. Rukutana is here, he will be talking about rural finance. In summary, that is what we refer to as the framework to modernize agriculture; about seven ministries are involved in this exercise. 

May I at this juncture call upon hon. Mugyenyi Mary to respond to those questions that were referred to mainly livestock and the general sector.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, what we have just heard from the Minister in charge of Agriculture is lamentation that some of his colleagues are not here.  Given that scenario, are we really going to proceed properly, because he has already started calling one by one? Now, for those who are not here, what is going to happen? We are worried that we may not get answers to questions that relate to those sectors. He has told us that there are seven ministries because he looks like he would not be able to answer for all those.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Acting Minister of Agriculture, when hon. Mugyenyi finishes talking about livestock, who is going to talk about the overall policy on the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA), on National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and so on?  Are you going to do it or you are going to look for somebody to do it?

1.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has requested me to answer for livestock. Issues of a general nature, he will handle as the Minister of Agriculture, and of course Fisheries, because the Minister of State in charge of Fisheries is not here. So, with your permission, let us handle it like that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then what shall we do on those areas where the ministers are not present?

MRS MUGYENYI: He will answer for the absent ministers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope so, because it is a very unusual way of doing work, but let us proceed.  Answer, please.  

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, hon. Members, let me start by thanking you for the opportunity you have given us to share the responsibility, which is not usually the practice of Parliament; but I think sharing is important.  

Let me start by thanking the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries for a job well done. I say this with sincerity because everything that we discussed in the sessional committee has been very well captured in this report.  So, when the Minister said that, “Thank you for compiling our lamentations,” probably he had a point because we had agreed on this position with our Committee in charge of Agriculture. So, in other words, we take the report as mainly true and we accept it and we will work together in future to improve areas that need to be improved.  

But maybe to start with, let me just add a few bits of information that could have been left out or have just occurred in the process of writing the report. On Page 19, it is talking about Livestock Sub-sector and about diseases around the country.  To note now, there is no district in Uganda with a reported case of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) as we talk now. They were there; we have immunized, vaccinated where the outbreak were, and as I speak now we do not have a case of reported Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD).  

So, that is a new achievement and this has happened because of the availability of funds from the Ministry of Finance. We hope that in future the situation will continue to improve so that we are able to respond to outbreaks of contagious, epidemic diseases as they occur. We do not need to emphasize the need for the control of livestock diseases, particularly the control of –(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I want to get clarification from the honourable minister. She is talking about the Foot and Mouth Disease, yes, it is true as we talk now this month of August - we are now in August but since 1996, have you treated any cattle suffering from Foot and Mouth Disease in Karamoja? I have 7,000 cattle in my constituency, have you even treated one since 1996, if you say you have been doing it well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem is telling you that he has got 7,000 head of cattle in his constituency, that is Upe. He is asking whether - you have said you are doing well so since 1996 have you actually immunized any of those 7,000 cattle in Upe County? That is what he is asking.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, as I said we respond to a case of FMD or CBPP or whichever disease, as long as it is reported. So, from the information that we have we are not aware that there is an outbreak of FMD in the member’s constituency that we have not been able respond to as of now. That is all that I can say.

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I stand here to say something because we are most affected - we have veterinary officers in the district. But our problem is, we have cattle, goats and camels and since 1994, the 14th of September 1994, that was the time the cattle were treated. I was still a headmaster teaching somewhere. From 1994 until now they have never treated any cattle in my constituency. Last year we reported this case, it was even on air, but no action was taken. 

Here they are saying on page 10 that for FMD, they have treated so many animals; “The committee learnt that only 39,773 head of cattle out of more than six million in the country were vaccinated against CBPP; 350,000 head of cattle were vaccinated against FMD and only 2,884 head of cattle were immunised against East Coast Fever.” I have never seen any treated. I have never, with my two eyes - I have three sub-counties but the Government has never treated even one cow -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: I worked in Karamoja from 1995 up to the year 2000 and to the best of my knowledge in 1997 and also in 1998 for two weeks in each of those years I camped in your constituency and vaccinated - I do not have the figures here. We carried out mass vaccination of livestock against the CBPP. In fact I even had a very large stock of animal drugs and carried out a caesarean operation in Karita. Well, he was heading some school and indeed I do not have the figures here, but from that time, work has really been going on. If you had alerted me I would have come with the data. Thank you.

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Dr Epetait at that time was working under a certain NGO called Karamoja Programme Implementation Unit. If he treated cows then I think at that time he did so as an NGO but not as a Government worker. He was –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem, is your problem the fact that the medicine did not come from the Government?

MR LOLEM: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is your problem; you did not want it to come from an NGO?

MR LOLEM: No, I wanted - all departments are to come –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this is clear. I want to tell you, my brother was working there as an NGO worker up to the time he came to Parliament. But mine is –(Interruption)

DR EPETIAT: Is it in order for the honourable member to distort facts when he knows that Karamoja Programme Project Implementation Unit was actually under the Ministry of State for Karamoja, and in fact all the funding was coming in with the consent of Government? Is he in order to distort facts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem, I really want to understand this. Is your problem that the drugs did not come from the central Government and yet the honourable member says he was working under the Ministry in Charge of Karamoja, which is part of the Government? Is that your problem? 

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, he says it is from 1995 to 2001 when he joined politics, but what has the ministry done from 2001 up to today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister will answer that. Do you have an outbreak, which has not been attended to?

MR LOLEM: Every year cattle in my constituency suffer from Foot and Mouth Disease. As we speak now, if the minister is ready, she can go with me tomorrow; I will not take her only to sub-counties, I will take her to the main headquarters, Amuda sub-county, then I will let her see the cattle they bring everyday to the trading center. I will not take her anywhere else. This is practical. If she is ready and has fuel, she has to take me there and I show her practically the eight cattle they bring everyday to Amuda trading center; and it is the Army who are buying the beef because we do not eat it. If she is ready, I am ready to leave now and go with her; eight die everyday in Chamakanyi parish.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the member for the information he has given, and I am ready to go with you to Karamoja; as you know the Karamoja region is not new to me. One of the areas that I visited upon coming to this office was actually the Karamoja region, when it was most difficult to go to the area. The Minister in charge of Karamoja will bear witness to that and we went to almost every constituency in Karamoja. So, I am ready to go again and get this information.  

But if you talk about outbreaks of diseases around the year, that does not give us the real picture for now. I am not talking about two months ago, I am talking about now. As far as my information is concerned I know that there is CBPP in Karamoja region and I cannot deny that because it is there. There is CBPP in Karamoja, in Bundibugyo and in Lira Districts, but FMD, I am not sure. 

This country has been free of Rinderpest for I think two years now. So, Rinderpest, yes, we have not been declared Rinderpest free but we have not had cases of Rinderpest for sometime now.

Madam Speaker, on page 10 the committee talks about the strategy document on livestock disease control, and I am sure the committee read it. I wish to lay it on the Table, for the benefit of other members as well. The document is entitled: “Prevention, Control and Eradication of Animal Diseases and Disease Vectors”, it is by the Directorate of Animal Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, dated March 2003. So, we have a strategy in place. What we have really lacked are the funds to implement this strategy, and I hope that in the years to come we will have funds to implement it, then we will have no more lamentations about diseases. I thank you.

Then on the same page the committee observed that there are inadequate provisions to stop animal diseases from spreading, which has led to an increase in notifiable diseases. We hope that the ADB project that you approved here last year, which has started and which is going to be launched on the 13th of next month in Soroti, will avail us some funds to address some of these problems. I just wanted to bring that to your attention as well.  

Then on page 11, we are talking about NAADS and the support to livestock. I want to really bring it to your attention, particularly on apiculture and goat rearing, that NAADS has supported these two areas. There was no specific funding for apiculture and NAADS has come in to support apiculture development in this country. That should be acknowledged; and so has goat rearing been supported, mainly by NAADS.

Then on page 12, bullet No. 6 is talking about lack of guidelines to control the movement of livestock. I wish to note here and to inform the House, Madam Speaker, that we have guidelines to control the movement of livestock. I would like to call your attention to the availability of a document from the directorate again, which I wish to lay on the Table. It is entitled, “Guidelines for the Management of Livestock Movements as a Disease Control Measure,” and we recognize that the control of movement of livestock is very paramount. It is a primary way of controlling diseases, which if we had the infrastructure and again the resources to put these guidelines in place and to sensitize the population and the different stakeholders on their different roles, we will be able to go a long way and we will spend less money on vaccinations, which are very expensive. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this on the Table as well.

DR NKUUHE: These documents that are laid on the Table are a very good idea but when you try to follow them you find that maybe they are very difficult to access. So, may I suggest that in addition to the document, they should also bring a diskette so that I can go and get a copy? It would be easier. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just wondering, when the minister was interacting with the committee, why were these documents not available? Now you have given me the duty of putting them in the library so that people can read them. Okay, the documents will be placed in the library for you to access and read them. Proceed. 

MR OKUPA: We do agree that there are guidelines, but the main problem is, are these guidelines followed? Why am I saying this? It is now over two years, there has been an influx of some cattle keepers in the Teso region, and they are still coming in up to today. Did you realize that they are moving without going through cleared procedure? So, there is a problem with implementation of these guidelines. They are not being followed, they are just there in paper and that is our concern. And that was the major reason we were raising at that time: the problem of these people who have settled in the camps. There was a threat of disease outbreak and Dr Epetait here did raise it in the House that there was an outbreak, he is a veterinary doctor. So, that is the problem. It is not just that, “Do you have the guidelines”? They are there.  

MRS MUGYENYI: I take the view of the honourable member that has just been on the Floor. We are aware that we have lacked infrastructure in particular to implement the law, the 1964 Act on livestock disease control. As I said with the coming in of ADB and hopefully with more positivity from the Ministry of Finance, we hope to put this infrastructure in place and also to carry out the sensitization of the different stakeholders on their different roles. You all know that two things have happened to the sector. 

One, of course during the bad days the infrastructure broke down, and much of that infrastructure has not been put back in place. I think decentralization and the merger of the ministry indeed could also have contributed to this lack of focus in the way things used to be done. But I am very positive that there is light at the end of the tunnel. We have some funding coming in now, we will put things in place and, I hope, for better results. Let us wait and see what happens this time next year when we are dealing with the policy statement of the ministry.

When I look at page 15, Madam Speaker, and somewhere in one of the bullets, it is talking about the performance of the goats in terms of reproduction. I think on average the goats have performed well. The report that we have, and indeed we can avail you with a follow-up report on the goats that were imported from South Africa, the billy goats and their performance in reproduction, on average they have performed quite well only that they were few. But now we are multiplying them on our farms, on the Makerere University farm at Kabanyoro and on the farms of breeders around the country, particularly in the cattle corridor. 

Then the issue of the 77 Boran bulls - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister is talking about the goats, but the committee was saying there was non-performance of these goats and high cases of mortality. They are also lamenting that only 52 farmers were trained. This is a result of poor planning. Strategic management and planning says - there is a phrase that, “When you fail to plan, then you have planned to fail”. How do you end up importing these goats when you have not prepared the farmers for this? It should have been that you prepare the farmers first then you import the goats.

Going further on the issue of 150 females to 150 males; even just two he-goats would be enough for all these goats. There is artificial insemination. Just one he-goat would be able to handle this. I remember hon. Kibirige one time made a statement about artificial insemination, which I do not want to repeat here because it sounded vulgar; but artificial insemination is one of those ways in which we would have cut the costs. We would have imported 290 or 299 females and one male and used artificial insemination to multiply. The rate of multiplication would be higher than having the same number of goats; 150 female and 150 male.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, I can clarify on that point since that is my profession. In my constituency I have imported in fact over 200 goats, while the Government was importing 300. But the point hon. Okupa has is that it took me two years of planning before those goats came in. I do not know how long the Government took in planning, because the critical factor is fighting poverty; it is not the goat you are giving but the knowledge that you smuggle through that goat into the community. So, you have to spend a lot of time doing the knowledge transfer before you bring in the goat.

In fact the experience we have, because we have some farmers who have received the Government goats, others through our own contacts; and our goats are doing much better. I would encourage people, if you want to buy the pure breed, for us we have records, we know which was bred by which, which is the mother of this and we follow them up. So, we have all the records. Government records, somehow they disappear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nkuuhe, I heard this week that you are a consultant to the Government in many areas. How are you advising them?

DR NKUUHE: No, you see, what she said is, they meet me in the corridor and consult. That is my understanding. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Nkuuhe, on Tuesday I asked you whether you are paid for those consultancy services and you said, “Of course”.

DR NKUUHE: No, I am not. For the consultancy services, I am paid in kind. If you thank me, if you pay me in kind, I appreciate. Definitely the point I want to stress is that Government projects go in without Government adequately planning for them. It is very important that the planning takes a long time and then the people can carry on the projects. I thank you very much. 

As for the two goats, importing male and female, they use the male for crossbreeding and then they use the female to produce pure breeds. So, they use that male to mate with the female to produce a pure boar goat, but then they use the boar male to multiply with the local animals so that they produce crossbreeds. If you want a pure breed you have to use the pure one, and that is where I score because I will be putting an advert out soon to say that, “If you want pure animals - milk goats and meat goats - you come to Isingiro South”. Thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the members for the information given, particularly hon. Nkuuhe who is a Member of the Agricultural Committee of Parliament. He has given information on why we imported this number of male and female goats. That actually also shows that he came across the plan on how we are going to implement this project on goats.

Madam Speaker, we plan and indeed again I can avail you with a document on how we planned to go about breeding these goats; and we do also train people. Sometimes I get confused by my colleagues in Parliament because when we budget and put money for training, consultation and sensitization, then you also get a lot of accusations such as, “You are wasting money on these other activities, you are going to buy fuel, you are going to buy Pajeros”. But in order for people to be trained, the trainers have to move and so on. So, we need to balance here. The training went on and indeed in the year 2002/2003 more training took place, although we did not train for two years like hon. Nkuuhe’s constituents who were trained by Heifer Project International for two years. 

Do not forget, hon. Nkuuhe that I went with you to receive those goats. So, the honourable member did not import them; Heifer Project International imported them. Otherwise, we will be accused of, “How was the member able to import 200 goats and not others?” I was there to receive them with you.

Madam Speaker, I do not think that I have more on this document but let me lastly say that on the contents of page 17, I commend the committee. As you know, we have had severe drought and we need machinery indeed to de-silt the silted dams. So, the idea of having a component of water in our ministry is a very welcome idea, because even if water is being provided by the Ministry in charge of Water, they do not actually maintain it. Once a dam is constructed, it is handed over to you and that is it, yet there is need to maintain it. We have had drought and shortage of water in the cattle corridor, which drought was severe in some areas. The very good dams that were constructed at one time have silted over time and there is no provision for that type of maintenance.

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the minister was interrupted, she was trying to develop a point on the bulls being imported.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what?

MR SEKIKUBO: Bulls, the 77 bulls - before the interruption from the members. My emphasis on that issue is that she should get back to that point and tell us how the 77 bulls are expected to multiply amongst the 6.8 million head of cattle we have in this country. And most importantly, I insist on that because of the feeling that any effort in livestock and dairy production should be demand driven yet our markets here are not streamlined. 

Even the milk collection centers, as she may bear witness to this, for instance in that cattle corridor, from Lwemiyaga, Ntusi, to Sembabule, we do not have any dairy collection center. So, as we put efforts in place to have the multiplied milk production in that corridor, what programme is she having in place for marketing? Without that, how will the farmers be expected to promote dairy production in the area when there are no market facilities for that milk, Madam Speaker? I want her to go back to that point.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, the Member for Lwemiyaga. I beg your pardon. I skipped it, I forgot that I had not dealt with the goats, and I think what the committee reported was that they were too few to have made an impact on the country, and I do agree. But again it is a question of funding. If there are limited resources and all that we have can import 77 bulls, then you do not expect the Ministry in charge of Agriculture to have made a big impact with these beef producing animals if they are too few to have made an impact in the country. 

So, we hope that in the next financial year we will import another 200 Boran bulls, and we must separate dairy from beef. When we plan, and now that we are going into zoning, we know that there are areas that are suitable for dairy producing animals, and then we have areas that we plan for stock for beef. For example, the ADB project specifically focuses on beef, and your district and so your constituency, Lwemiyaga, is part of that plan. You will benefit from the infrastructure for beef production, and here I am not saying that Lwemiyaga cannot produce milk. I am sure indeed you are producing milk right now. I do not know how you expect the ministry to help, now that we no longer provide milk coolers and even the only corporation we had, Dairy Corporation, is no longer in our ministry as you realize? It is in the Ministry of Finance due for privatization.

So, again it goes back to the private sector. Once there is a commodity, inform your constituents that there is milk as a commodity and so if one puts a cooler in place, they would make some money. With the coming in of the school feeding programme, which has been budgeted for, which should be taking off in February next year, your milk will have a market, a good market, and a sure market. So, try and start informing the private sector about this good that you have in your constituency that can be marketed. But it is not entirely our responsibility. It is our responsibility, particularly through NAADS, to inform people about the availability of markets, but we work also in collaboration with the private sector, given that we have liberalized, to carry out these businesses.

If I can go to individual contributions from the honourable members, hon. Yiga commented on the local Government and the spread of livestock diseases. I hate to apportion blame and hon. Kabwegyere, the Minister for Local Government will not like me for that, if I say that it is local governments that are responsible for spreading diseases. That is not what we are saying. 

We are only saying that the policy of decentralization has meant that the central Government is no longer in charge of what happens all the way to the sub-county level. You have other governments in place, that are in operation. So, at the central level we have a very well planned veterinary services structure. Yes, we are understaffed but the structure is there. When it comes to the way we connect with the districts, those veterinary doctors are not under us, we can only advise them. We can only be willing to co-operate with them but we do not hire them, we do not fire them, neither do we directly control their work. That is all that we are saying.

Hon. Dr Mallinga, I am sorry he has gone because we had discussed this issue of his Friesian animals being lost to Tick Bone diseases. I regret to hear that. But let us also try to remember the policy of Government, which you approved here in Parliament. There are certain diseases that the central Government is in charge of, and that is the epidemic diseases, the FMD, the CBPP, and the rabies. But we do not provide accarricides for controlling ticks and this needs to be known. If you do not realize that as Members of Parliament, then what about the ordinary person, the farmer in your constituency? So, we beg you to pass on this information. Tick Bone diseases are the responsibility of the individual farmer, and hon. Mallinga’s cows died of ticks.

The other issue he raised was the fact that Pallisa, his district, is not considered to be in the cattle corridor. That is absolutely wrong. This House should note that Pallisa District has always been one of the districts of the cattle corridor. In my memory of anything that we have done, any plan we have put in place, including this ADB project that is just about to be launched, Pallisa District is part of the cattle corridor. Please, check the map.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. You have just mentioned here that Government policy on disease control is disease specific. For the case of hon. Dr Mallinga’s animals, which succumbed to Tick Bone diseases, may I know the policy of Government in as far as provision of tick control infrastructure facilities like cattle dips and maybe sprays and cattle crashes all over the country, is concerned? In that case, cattle dips should be available for a parish for example, then the farmers there can be mobilized to undertake tick control on their stock. May I know what the Government policy on cattle dips is concerned? Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After hon. Mallinga raised this question of loss of his animals, I wrote him a note - I wish he were here - and asked him whether he thought that Government was supposed to provide accarricides for his cows. His answer is that the neighbors should be enabled not to have ticks, so that his cows can survive. I think the impression some people seem to have is that Government is supposed to provide accarricides or drugs for private cattle keeping, which is absolutely incorrect. However, the advice on how to control ticks should still be in the hands of Government, and I think that is correct.

MRS MUGYENYI: I thank you, honourable member for that information. If I can answer hon. Epetait’s question on Government policy and the availability of infrastructure, yes, I agree with you that Government should guide the farming community and also provide some infrastructure where it is needed. Though really, it is not mandatory as far as the policy is concerned, that we should provide dip tanks and so on. But we realize that there are areas where the farmers still need to be supported like that. 

So, what the Government has done is through this livestock productivity improvement project funded by the ADB, on realization that some areas of our country still need that support, we are going to construct dip tanks using this loan. Karamoja region, Teso region including Pallisa, and mainly the East and Northern region are in need of these dip tanks that are communally used.

I am not so sure if you brought these dip tanks to some areas, for example of the Central region or the Southwest, whether they might be needed. So, our implementation will be guided by he need that is there. But yes, there is a plan, hon. Epetait.

Milk marketing was also raised by hon. Mallinga and he talked about the children’s need for milk in schools. I think the Minister in charge of Primary Education should have informed you that this is in the plan, at least as far as I know. However, I also think that now with the interest that I see coming in from the private investors in processing milk and adding value to milk, I can declare that I see light at the end of the tunnel. We might be having more processors of milk coming in, in which case that might provide a solution to the milk that is being wasted yet there is a market in the region.

Then hon. Epetait at a later time talked about the dozes of vaccines that were imported, saying that 200 were too few and that very clearly explains why the FMD disease continued to spread uncontrolled. Our budget now is over half a million dozes, so I hope for better performance in the next financial year, if the money indeed will be provided as planned. It is not enough but it is better than where we have been.

I think it was hon. Capt. Matovu who raised the issue of animals crossing to Tanzania. I must say that we are putting a lot of emphasis on collaboration with our neighbouring countries in the area of controlling safety of animals but also in carrying out joint programmes and operations in controlling livestock diseases, including livestock movement. We are undertaking branding of all the animals in our districts. The brands are ready, we are just waiting for funds, and the districts will mainly be in charge of branding their animals. We have held several meetings with our neighbouring countries, that is Tanzania, Rwanda, Kenya of recent, and Sudan. It is probably only the Democratic Republic of Congo with which we have not had any collaboration on livestock movement control so far. We even have joint programmes of controlling epidemic diseases, including tsetse flies.

Then, hon. Guma finally; yes there is potential for livestock in this country; we all acknowledge that. That does not need to be re-emphasized but we do not need Bazungu in order to invest in livestock production. Yes, they are welcome if they want to come, but our grandfathers raised cattle and goats and sheep in bigger numbers than we even have today and they had not even gone to school. I think we need to improve the environment and facilitate our farmers to produce more livestock. It is also unacceptable to totally dismiss the role of the Ministry of Agriculture and Government in general when the people of Ibanda North have benefited heavily from the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture, including the construction of modern roads, markets, increase in coffee production, and increase in milk production. In fact the honourable member’s constituency - I am sorry he is not here, I thought he was - provides one of the largest amount of milk that we have on record in this country; even Matooke, name it. Yes, it is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you talk about the opportunities that are available, there has been a long standing demand for an agricultural bank in this country to facilitate farmers to actually improve on agriculture and go commercial. But it seems each year nobody talks about it. How many new commercial farms have been set up in this country since PMA and all these other things started? That is what members want to know. What is it you are doing to facilitate the people of Uganda to go into commercial farming? That is what members want to hear.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I will leave that general question to my minister since he is going to wind up, but I think the most important thing to note, the issue that I was trying to raise, is that there has been an improvement in farming in this country. And if I can use that particular constituency of the honourable member who totally dismissed the role of Government, it is even more possible to do statistics in his constituency and establish how many modern farms are there either of crops or livestock. Indeed one of our responsibilities is to have good statistics on who is doing what in this country in the farming sector.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The best way to go about that is make a value chain analysis, which can portray to members how PMA was started, where we are now, and where we want to go. If that report is given, members could not even bother to see - because the way I understand it is that PMA is just multi-sectoral, which takes a long time. It is a plan ahead. So, if that value chain analysis is not around, you find that people keep on demanding.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I wish to conclude my response by saying that this question, as I said, I am going to leave it to my minister because it is a question of a general nature. My responsibility was particularly to focus on the area of livestock, but I thought that the Minister of Finance had of recent done well by providing even weekly information, an up-date on PMA performance. Thank you so much for your interest in the area of agriculture and for all your contributions.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, in the presence of the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Agriculture, I would not want us to brush the issue raised by hon. Mallinga aside. It calls for some kind of legislation to contain - if a farmer is in a locality he endeavors to control ticks and yet the farmers surrounding him are not compelled to control the ticks, in which case they become the source of the problem. I am wondering whether some sort of legislation is not required in this aspect, considering that the veterinary services are also decentralized. I am wondering whether that is not required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not know. The number of Bills, which are before this House, that is what the committee was reporting about. I do not know the contents. But probably this could be one of them. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, local governments have powers under the law to have by-laws. I know of one district where they have a by-law on tick control. This is within the powers of the districts to manage their animals, to manage crops, and they can do all sorts of things. So, we need to encourage our districts to use the powers they have to make sure that we control diseases.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, I am thinking that you may want to adjourn this sitting for lunch, but a very serious allegation –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to adjourn after I have finished with your ministry. 

DR KIBIRIGE: But a very serious allegation was made about the Ministry of Finance. The allegation was that the Ministry of Finance has allowed a levy on the cotton producers and that levy is benefiting CDO. The allegation was that the Ministry of Finance has imported tractors and passed them to ginners and that ginners are exploiting the producers. With your permission, may I request the Minister of Finance to answer those charges before I conclude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the minister have the answers?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I was preparing my own response, which I would give at my own pace –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:	Were you going to do it comprehensively? 

MR RUKUTANA: But if the issue on cotton farming is so burning, I can respond immediately by saying, subject to giving further information –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable minister, are you sure about the information you are going to give? Because you might give information here and we get a lengthy debate, then you say, “Give me two more days”. If you are ready, please confirm that you are ready.

MR RUKUTANA : In a nutshell, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the cotton sector was liberalized in 1996. On liberalization, a revolving fund was created to purchase and distribute seeds to farmers. Money was provided by Government, seeds are purchased by Cotton Development Authority, they are packaged, they are transported and they are delivered to farmers. It is that money that farmers are supposed to repay into the revolving fund so that more seeds are purchased. To-date, no single farmer can say that he buys seeds on his own. So, it is a continuous and revolving fund for buying, packaging, transporting and delivering cotton seeds to farmers. I can give further details later when I respond.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does it concern the tax, which we were told was being levied against the ginners? Does that concern the levy?

MR OKUPA: Yes, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time this matter is coming out. I remember last year when we met His Excellency the President, there were three committees of Parliament and hon. Cecilia Ogwal did raise this matter. In that meeting there were ministers, including the Prime Minister, and the President was very bitter about this extortion of money from farmers. He did instruct the Minister of Agriculture, through the Prime Minister - the one who has left in fact - to bring a report on this matter. So, the Minister of Agriculture should not shy away from this. There was a directive from His Excellency as regards this matter. He was not happy with the way farmers had been suffering from extortion and he did say it was not the first time he was hearing about that matter. So, the Minister of Agriculture should bring a report to this House about this money.

There is a lot behind this money, let us not shy away and sweep things under the carpet. Let us have a substantive statement from the ministry where we shall be able to debate this matter thoroughly. I know the Minister of Finance will not know much, but the Ministry of Agriculture should bring a statement in this House.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister should be very careful and actually draw comparative examples, because the same thing happens with coffee growers. Coffee seedlings have been provided free of charge to the people and they are not expected to pay anything back. However, when we put a levy to the cotton growers yet our sole objective is to revamp the sector, I do not know how the comparison could actually be looked at.  

Madam Speaker, what he has just explained, he has said it is a revolving fund and they are only expected to pay back those costs involved in the delivery of the seeds. This cannot translate into a levy. It should be put in another way, but not a levy. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a statutory instrument dealing with this levy or is it administrative? How does this money get collected?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I wish to categorically state that there is no levy by the Ministry of Finance on cotton producers. As I told you, this money they are required to pay to CDO - call it a repayment on the seeds they get – it is actually determined per kilo of seeds granted to the farmers. So, it is not a levy; a levy is a tax; it is not a tax all.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in this document, which hon. Byaruhanga did lay on the Table, which is stamped by the CDO, it is indeed put there as a sales levy. So, I do not know now what the minister is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could we ask the Minister of Agriculture to report to this House next week on this question of cotton, on whether it is a levy or whatever they call it?

DR KIBIRIGE: Even though I haven’t received a handover report from Addis Ababa, I certainly will oblige.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wherever you get the information from, please get the information and bring it here.

DR KIBIRIGE: I will do that.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I should put it on record that the Ministry of Education and Sports is implementing the agricultural education component of the PMA. We have already for the last one year or so, introduced Agriculture as a subject in the primary schools. Several districts and several schools have been picked on in the pilot phase, but we are rolling down the programme to all the schools.

Secondly, under the same project, we are training teachers for agriculture because we think if we do not stem this idea right from the early education system, we cannot get the adults who will be interested in agriculture as such, and the emphasis is on practical agriculture. It is not theory at that lower level; it becomes theoretical as you move up at university level and so on. So, what I would like to appeal to the Members of Parliament to do is to help us kill the negative attitude.  Even now we are struggling with these small children to tell them that they must handle a hoe, they must learn to sow and weed and so on. It is the attitude, which I think we should start fighting with, but otherwise agriculture is being mainstreamed in the education system. I thank you.

MS WONEKA: Madam Speaker, thank you. Before the minister winds up, I could see you sharing our concern as Committee of Agriculture on who really should give us a report on PMA. It has seven pillars. We are aware in the committee that agriculture is handling extension and research.  Now, we are haphazardly getting bits and pieces of information on PMA. As far as agricultural education is concerned, now we have heard something. I saw one of the ministers who should tell us about agro-processing and marketing walking out.  

Madam Speaker, you are aware of how concerned Members are on rural finance; we want to hear something about it. So, at the end of the day, who is to give us a comprehensive report on the progress of PMA, on the seven pillars systematically? That is the clarification I am seeking.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whenever a matter is consistently being raised, either itself it is at fault or people do not understand it. And once people do not understand it, it means it is ripe for review and re-direction, and I think it is very important that these Members on the front bench should accept. Members of the Committee on Agriculture have continuously raised the matters of PMA, Madam Speaker, you are also raising the same things. That means there is a problem with PMA and people should accept and they should not continuously justify! There is a problem, we should sit down and agree on which direction this thing they call PMA should take. Otherwise, to continuously justify will not help.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what are you proposing?

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, we may need a special committee to look at this matter they call PMA.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, PMA is a multi-sectoral plan. It has components in many ministries. Some components are in the Ministry of Finance like the planning, the financing and others; but the secretariat is in the Ministry of Agriculture. The secretariat is supposed to cover each and everything, and sum it up. I am not trying to apportion blame, but if there are any questions to be answered about PMA, Ministry of Agriculture ought, as indeed I know it did. I know that at one time this Parliament tasked the honourable Minister of Agriculture to come and address it on PMA, which hon. Kisamba Mugerwa came and did.  

But if there is need for further and better explanations on PMA, there is no problem. We can sit together and maybe arrange a workshop and we address Members of Parliament. I do not see any problem with that. I am not belittling any matters, Madam Speaker, I am saying that if Members require further information, there is no difficulty in all the ministries and sectors involved in PMA coming together and preparing to brief Parliament on the matter. I do not see any problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, my difficulty is that I had planned that we finish with Ministry of Agriculture by lunchtime. Now, for purposes of concluding the debate on the Agriculture Ministry, who is going to answer whatever else is remaining because in the afternoon I want to go to Natural Resources? That is what is at issue now.  

2.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, we are really very grateful for the input that we have received from this House. We took it that most of the issues raised were actually being brought to our attention so that we can handle them in the next financial year, and we are very grateful for this. Frankly, I just wanted to thank everybody for their contributions, and particularly the Committee and to beg that this House in due course passes our budget. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dr. Kibirige Sebunya, I really enjoy working with you. But when you tell me that the questions we have asked this financial year will be answered next financial year, I do not think you are being helpful to this House.

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, I actually wrote a booklet when I was down here and –(Laughter)- I was just thanking everybody seriously for having pointed out the issues about tobacco in West Nile. This Kayanja problem, I am going to consult Kayanja why he is harassing people. The problem of the landing sites, I have noted. The issues of NAADS, NAADS is going to succeed. I like NAADS; it is empowering – (Laughter and Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I think you can sit down.  

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, is this House turning into a nursery school or what? If we are to come here and be paid so much money to listen to somebody shuffling papers, then we have some serious thinking to do. I think it is high time that some people started taking us seriously. We are no longer nursery kids; we are here to represent people and the sector on which the livelihood of this country depends. So, is the Minister in order to treat Parliament with so much contempt as a comedian and as somebody who does not –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is my directive. Just as we directed the Minister of Education, next week the Minister of Agriculture, we shall give you two sittings where you will come back to brief us on PMA and all those other sectors. That is my directive – next week.

2.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the House for the special interest and attention you have paid to this sector. I know that not a single colleague from here can claim that is not voted by a farmer, and not a commercial farmer, but what we call “peasant” farmers. For us who sit in the sector we have been advised by the authority in agriculture that we should not call those farmers “peasants” they are supposed to be called “small-scale” farmers. In whatever scale they are, they are farmers and so they are our voters and we are right to talk at length about them. 

They are not only our voters; they constitute the largest component of the taxpayers in this country. And apart from that, small as they are as individuals, they may not mean anything but when you collect their contribution to this country and the economy, they are far bigger than the investors we have talked bout and they are permanent and they are reliable. So, it is in that context that I want to appreciate the contribution and the interest shown in this House on this sector.  

Finally, I want to thank the Minister responsible for Livestock for laying a number of documents on Table, we shall receive them at an appropriate time. But I want the country to know that Uganda has never received a certification, has never been declared a disease-free zone; and that is why we are emphasising much more on disease control so that we are at ease to export our livestock.  

I had the opportunity, with the sponsorship from the Egyptian Government, early this year to lead a small delegation of Members of Parliament from here, and I met the Minister of Agriculture, who is the Deputy Prime Minister in Egypt. These people are more than willing to promote the export of livestock from our country to Egypt in the first place and through Egypt to the Middle East. But they warned us that, “You need to do something about disease control in your country” because they are importing from New Zealand, Argentina and Australia, and yet we are much nearer and they have looked at the population of our animals. 

We would not want to blow this problem beyond proportion, but the diseases are there and we need to call OIE to give us certification. So, this is an area for emphasis, and I also know that the minister has explained that at the headquarter level, there is structure for livestock veterinary services. But she expressed difficulty when it came to the district, how they relate, and we have emphasized decentralisation policy of agricultural services. And that is why we are insisting they should revisit this area of weakness so that we can perform better and deliver this country from where we are.  

We agree that there is no empirical evidence to show that PMA has given any impact. It is true, Madam Speaker, we have raised this question, “How many people have been graduated from subsistence to commercial?” They are not there! How many people have improved their income through increasing the roads, through the handsets, through this agro-processing? They are not there! But we know that we have put this deliberately because we have never had a best land survey done when this framework was being put in place; and the report is clear, since 1988 agricultural household census has never been taken. 

So, we want to call upon Government to take this exercise very seriously, so that we know the direction we are intending to lead to. You just go to Tanzania here, you will see an export village clearly spelt out and nobody will need to tell you that, “This is an export village for agriculture.”  So, we are appealing to Government to really respond very positively. We have a potential and I think we need to accept to address the concerns.

Basically, the other areas of concern are matters that we are going to pursue. Honourable members have talked about Cotton Development Organisation (CDO). At our level we had promised that we would pursue the matter in detail and also report back to the House at an appropriate time. We are also going to tackle the issue of beef industry in this country, by visiting the ranches and we shall report fully to the House the status of this project, which has just been started. 

I think, we shall also be able to pay more attention to the area of strategic intervention for export, and we shall also prepare report on its own right. This will constitute the exercise as we play our oversight function, and I think within two or three months, we should start generating the reports for the House to be updated on these areas of concern. Otherwise, I am very grateful.  

It is difficult to handle PMA particularly when we know that the former minister used to tackle it alone and now we have new players in the field. But we shall all work together and make sure that the House understands what it means by bringing all the seven pillars on board. I want to thank you very much, and thank all the Members. May God bless you!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson, and I hope the minister will take our directive very seriously on this matter, and come next week and we deal with the seven pillars and other things. Now, I want to suspend the proceedings until 3.30 p.m. in the afternoon so that we can deal with the report from Committee on Natural Resources. The House is suspended until 3.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.25 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.48 p.m. _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Gallery we have pupils from St Cecilia Boarding Primary School Buyamba in Kooki County, Rakai District. They have been brought here courtesy of their Member of Parliament, hon. Capt. Matovu. You are welcome children! (Applause).

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/05

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have no intention of derailing the process of report presentation, save that I would like you to allay my fears that the report, which has been waiting for such a long time namely; the Electricity Tariffs Petition report, has up to now not been presented. What is the fate of that report before we can proceed with the report on Natural Resources?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, that report does not form part of the Budget.  

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Umar Lule Mawiya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have the honour to present the report of the Committee on Natural Resources, on the ministerial policy statement and the budgetary estimates for the financial year 2004/05.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Natural Resources Committee is specifically mandated to cover the policy statements and budgetary estimates for the following Votes:

• Vote 017 - Energy and Mineral Development; and
• Vote 012 - Water, Lands and Environment.

Because of time, Madam Speaker, some of these I will just go through because this is common knowledge to honourable members. I will go straight to page 4, the energy sector.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the overall policy objective of Government in the energy sector is to improve the quality and quantity of services, through appropriate sector reforms, and establishment of an enabling environment; the promotion of efficient utilisation of energy resources and extension of electricity to rural areas.  

Activities in the sector

Policy and legislation:

The Petroleum Supply Bill was enacted by Parliament and assented to by His Excellency, the President and became operational in November 2003. The law aims at streamlining and regulating downstream petroleum operations.  

The Ministry is in the process of amending the Electricity Act, 1999. A review consultant has been appointed. Consultations with development partners and stakeholders have been held. A Cabinet paper is to be produced and presented to Cabinet.  

The Power Sector Reform:

A concession agreement of the operations of Uganda Electricity Distribution Company was signed between the Government of Uganda and Umeme Limited in line with Government’s objective of improving the efficiency of the main electricity supply. Umeme Limited is a joint venture between Eskom of South Africa, which owns 44 per cent of the shares, and CDC Globeleq of United Kingdom, which owns 56 per cent of the shares.  

Electricity power generation programme

Owen Falls Extension (Kiira Power Station):

Madam Speaker, honourable members, installation work on the units 14 and 15 at Kiira Power Station, which are to provide 80 megawatts was embarked on.  This project is to be finalised this year.  

Bujagali Hydro-Power Project:

Government is working with development partners to identify a new project sponsor and develop the project in a private-public partnership.  

Government has issued a number of draft documents to potential sponsors including, Draft Implementation Agreement, Draft Power Purchase Agreement and key design drawings. The potential sponsors are expected to comment on these documents by mid August. These comments will then be incorporated and the final version of the prospectus issued to potential sponsors. Potential sponsors are expected to submit their proposals to Government during October-November 2004.  

The Committee was informed that the Government did not incur any direct financial loss as it was being commented about when AES pulled out, except the impact on Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and delay in commissioning of the plant with its resultant load shedding.  

Government, however, gained through inheritance of intellectual property and the preparatory development that had been made by AES amounting to about US$50 million.

Karuma Power Project:

The project is still in the ministry’s programme.  It is however ranked after the Bujagali project.  

Kakira Co-Generation:

The project involves generating 14 megawatts using bagasse. Construction is in advanced stages. The Power Purchase Agreement is in place for the sale of seven megawatts. All procurements have been done.  

Nyagak-Mini-Hydro:

A private company called WENRECO was granted a concession to build Nyagak-mini-hydro, manage the new distribution network and connect at least 1,000 customers per year.  

WENRECO has completed Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) plant near Arua town and is conducting test runs before commissioning it. Madam Speaker and honourable members, this will produce power for 18 hours a day as opposed to the four hours that has been received by these people. The developer will then embark on expanding the distribution network to other areas, and at the same time start building the mini-hydro at Nyagak.

Rural Electrification:

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee was informed that rural electrification access has increased from one per cent in 2001 to three per cent in 2003. The district of Sembabule was linked to the grid; Apac interconnected with Masindi; Arua interconnected with Nebbi; and a accumulative total of 185 rural schemes accomplished since 2000. Grid extension projects including the Corner Kilak-Patongo-Abim, Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Nyahuka, Rugombe-Kyenjojo and Namutere-Namayemba under SIDA II financing are expected to commence during the financial year.

Construction work of other rural electrification schemes financed by resources from tariff will continue while new schemes using donor resources from the Energy for Rural Transformation will be undertaken. The districts of Kabale, Katakwi, Moroto and Kanungu will be key beneficiaries.

The following new five schemes have been packaged for private sector bidding:

• Kyotera, Kasensero, Mutukula plus Masaka-Bukakata-Kalangala.

• Mbarara, Kikagati, Kabuyanda plus the mining areas of Ntungamo.

• Kiganda, Mubende, Kyegegwa, Kyejojo, Kakumiro, Kibaale, Kagadi.

• Bubulo, Magale, Lwakhakha.

• Soroti, Katakwi, Moroto and Katine, Kaberamaido.

Petroleum Supplies and Distribution:

Madam speaker, and honourable members, Government is to continue maintaining and developing the national strategic oil reserves and promote fair competition within the petroleum supply market.  Government raised Shs 623 million through hospitality arrangements being offered to oil companies.
 
Kenya-Uganda pipeline:

The committee was informed that identification of a private partner to implement the oil pipeline extension project is to be finalised, and work is expected to commence during this financial year.

Observations:

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee observed the following:  

• The Committee appreciates the criteria used by the ministry in extending the grid to rural areas namely:

- Economic centres
- Reconstruction of vandalised lines
- System stability
- Connection to district headquarters 
- Catering for new load centres and system improvement.

The Committee however, noted that other areas are yet to benefit, for example, areas around Lake Kyoga and others.

• As a result of inadequate power supply and poor transmission, the country continues to suffer from acute power cuts. 

• Uganda continues to import electricity poles due to limited local supply leading to loss of foreign exchange.

• Installation and maintenance of electricity networks are being carried out poorly as evidenced by poor sagging wires and fallen poles or fallen electricity wires.

• Electricity billing is still problematic.

• Bujagali hydro-power is totally behind schedule.

• Provision of other renewable energy sources as alternative sources of power has been hampered by lack of adequate funds for research and eventual implementation.

• Despite the fact that the feasibility study for the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline was carried out in 1998, the project is still at promotional stage.

• There is no technical petroleum committee in place currently. 

• The Ministry of Public Service is yet to approve a 42-staff organisational structure for the petroleum supplies department that is mandated to monitor the petroleum supplies sector.  

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, the Committee recommended the following:

• Government should hasten the installation of units 14 and 15 of the Kiira power plant to meet the ever-increasing electricity demands.

• UMEME should consider using prepayment meters to handle the persistent billing problems.

• Government is encouraged to proceed with plans to identify a new project sponsor for the Bujagali project.

• More funding should be sought to promote renewable energy sources like geo-thermal.

• The process of amending the Electricity Act should be hastened to cope with developments in the sector.

• Uganda should be encouraged to grow more eucalyptus trees to meet increased demand for electricity poles in the sector.

• The development of the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline should be considered as a priority to Government. This will reduce, the cost of oil products, oil spillage, and accidents among others.

• The Ministry of Public Service should finalise staff recruitment in the newly established petroleum supply department mandated to monitor the petroleum supply sector.

The Mineral Sector:

Honourable members, you can go through the activities of the sector. 
 
Kasese Cobalt Company Limited: 

The company had temporarily closed due to low prices of cobalt in the world market; the company has however resumed production after a rise in the price of cobalt.

Kilembe Mines Limited:

The company is due for divesture. It is currently on care and maintenance. The company, however, continues to produce electricity, which is added to the main grid.

Observations:

• A total loan of US$39.7 million was approved by this august House for the mineral investment programme. This provides a ray of hope for the sector.

• Infrastructure provision remains a hindrance to the otherwise promising sector. Electricity and proper road network are lacking in many areas as presented in ANNEX 2.

• Kilembe mines remains under care and maintenance with massive infrastructure unutilised.

• Kasese Cobalt Company Limited resumed production with the increase in the price of cobalt. This is likely to increase revenue in the sector.

• Government realised over Shs 21 billion from the mineral sector; this is evidence that if developed the sector can greatly contribute to the development of the country.

• Mineral products should be included in the Strategic Exports Initiative.

Recommendations:

• The Government should identify alternative use for Kilembe mines.

• More funds should be injected into infrastructure development to stimulate production of minerals.

• Funds released under the mineral investment programme should be efficiently utilised.

The Petroleum Exploration Sector: 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Committee observed the following:

• Exploration AREA 5 (the Rhino Camp Basin) extends across both sides of Albertine Nile in the districts of Moyo, Adjuman and Gulu. Parts of this area especially Gulu have not been secure enough for the surveys to be undertaken.

• Meagre funds were released to facilitate petroleum exploration, for example, the ministry could not undertake environmental studies for drilling an exploration well in the Northern Lake Albert basin.

• Several staff are being offered professional training by the ministry. Their sustainability is however questionable due to poor civil service pay.

• The geology of the Semiliki basin had not been thoroughly understood. As a result, drilling rigs imported by Heritage Oil and Gas Company have ended up getting stuck underground before testing the targeted zone.

• Though Government has accepted to host the second conference on the petroleum potential and investment opportunities in East Africa, only Shs 20 million has been released for the conference. This conference would, among others, enable Uganda market its petroleum potential. 

The Committee recommended the following:

• Government should continue with its efforts to maintain peace in the Rhino Camp Basin so as to enable exploration continue.

• Government should provide adequate funds for the department to survey and map unlicensed areas. Funds are also required for monitoring licensed areas.

• Government should seek means of providing trained staff in this sector with competitive remuneration to ensure sustainability of qualified staff.

• More studies should be done on the geology of the Semiliki region to ensure that investors procure appropriate rigs.

• Government should provide sufficient funds for the East African Petroleum Conference to enable Uganda market its potential. 

Budgetary proposals:   

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee recommends that the following amount be approved for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the financial year 2004/05:

Recurrent expenditure:	 		
Shs 2,570,378,000

Development expenditure:	     	
Shs 57,377,640,000

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee went ahead to examine Vote 012 – Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. Honourable members, you can go through the structure of the ministry and its mandate. I am sure you have already gone through because the reports were circulated in good time.

Management and support services:

The ministry has two departments and three specialised units that provide support services to a political level and technical directorates.  These are: 

• Finance and Administration department
• Planning and Quality Assurance department
• Policy Analysis Unit, 
• Resource Centre and Information Unit and
• A Procurement and Disposal Unit.

The Committee observed the following:

• During the financial year 2003/04, the department of Finance and Administration received only Shs 3.018 billion out of a total of Shs 3.328 billion budgeted for. This affected the whole ministry across the board.  Areas affected include travel, procurement of stationery, and supervision of field activities among others.

• In addition to budget cuts, late releases of funds have adversely affected service delivery in the ministry. Funds are sometimes released a few months to the end of the financial year; as a result planned activities are not implemented.

• The ministry has failed to honour its obligations to international conventions and protocols as a result of inadequate financial releases. The conventions affected include the African Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW), Nile Basin Initiative, RAMSAR, East African Community, African Ministerial Council on Environment (AMCEN), World Metrological Organisation. The benefits from such affiliations are numerous and cannot be overemphasized.

• Funds to cover ministers’ entitlements like medical insurance have not been fully provided by the Ministry of Finance; as a result the ministry is forced to divert funds to cover for them.

• Policy analysis units were created in all ministries inter alia to strengthen policy analysis and enhance coordination among various sectors. The policy unit in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is however totally under funded and, therefore, unable to implement its objectives.

• Like the policy analysis unit, the resource and information unit responsible for collection, processing, storage and dissemination of information though crucial for the functioning of the department is equally under funded. It should however be noted that information is a necessity for development.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance should avail adequate funds to enable the ministry implement its mandate. The funds should be availed on time to give room for implementation.

Directorate of Water Development: 

The Directorate of Water Development is the Government sector lead agency responsible for managing water resources, coordinating and regulating all sector activities and provides support services to local governments and other service providers. Its activities are sub divided into four major components namely:

• Rural water and sanitation

• Urban water and sewerage

• Water for production, whose concern came out very vividly in the report of Agriculture, and

• Water for resources management.

Rural Water and Sanitation:  
In the rural water sub-sector, service coverage increased from 55.3 per cent in June 2003 to 57.2 per cent in March 2003 serving additional 435000 people as annexed in 3.  

Observations:

• The Committee observed that there have been problems in provision of water in IDPs as a result of insecurity in the Northern region.  Kitgum District has particularly been hit by this problem; the district has some of the oldest IDPs with between 10 to 40 thousand people. This is mainly because engineers and other technical staff are afraid of insecurity in the area. Government is however developing a comprehensive strategy for water supply and sanitation to the IDPs. 

• Non-governmental organisations have played a great role in implementing Government efforts in the provision of safe water for the rural areas. AMREF with funding from UNICEF is currently constructing four water supply systems in IDP camps in Gulu.

• There is difficulty in the operation and maintenance of boreholes using the Community Based Maintenance System (CBMS). Though there are water and sanitation user committees and a trained caretaker in charge of maintenance and pump mechanics for the repair, maintenance of boreholes has remained a problem. As a result of poor maintenance, the ministry has spent Shs 563 million rehabilitating boreholes. This is way above Shs 256,713,000 spent during the financial year 2002/03.

• There are no borehole spare parts being manufactured locally. An initiative for a local manufacturer through Victoria Pumps has not been successful because of low turnover, low profit margin and competition from well-established foreign manufacturers.

• The Committee appreciates the efforts made by Government to promote rainwater harvesting.  Provision of rainwater harvesting tanks increased during the financial year. Rainwater tanks are most cost effective, less complex in installation and should, therefore, be encouraged.

• The Committee notes that Government has not taken advantage of gravity flow potential wherever applicable.

• Some district leaders have been reported to divert some sector facilities for other purposes.

• While the national average is 57.7 per cent, some districts have got as low as 30 per cent.  

Recommendations:

• The strategy for water supply and sanitation to IDPs developed by Government should be implemented by Government as a matter of urgency. 
 
• Community Based Maintenance Systems for water supply should be reviewed and adjusted to suit local communities. Massive sensitisation of users is required.

• The ministry should increase supervision and monitoring of funds released into the water sector. 

• The ministry should endeavour to address the disparity in safe water coverage.

• Government should continue promoting provision of cheap water sources like rainwater harvesting and gravity sources wherever applicable.

Urban water and sewerage: 

Madam Speaker, the sub-sector is responsible for the provision only of adequate supply of water for human consumption, industrial and other uses in urban centres. Under this scheme, over 5000 households are provided with safe water. This sub-sector is divided into, small towns water and sanitation sub-sector run by local governments with support from DWD, and the large towns managed by National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

Small towns water and sanitation:

The sub-sector is responsible for the provision of water and sanitation in gazetted and upcoming small towns.  

The Committee, Madam Speaker and honourable members, observed the following:

• Construction of 26 small towns schemes were completed. However, only 2,549 connections were made out of the 10,000 as planned due to the late procurement of water meters.

• The private operators were procured to manage the water supply systems in 16 towns.  Procurement of private operators for the 12 towns is ongoing.

• Only 45 ecological sanitation toilets were constructed out of the 220 planned. These figures indicate that sanitation is not adequately being catered for, although it has a direct bearing on the lives of the people. A number of people in this country still die from water borne diseases. 

• Planning and management of these services leave a lot to be desired from beneficiaries. People who paid for connections have taken long to be connected.

• Services designed to reach particular sensitive consumer points do not reach the planned destinations, for example, schools and health centres have been left out. 

• The tariff has been found to be high and unaffordable to the rural poor. People have, therefore, continued to consume unsafe water.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the Committee recommended that: 

• Funds for procurement of equipment like meters should be released on time to ensure effective delivery of services. 

• Government should reveal existing water tariffs in view of making them affordable.

• Designed plans should take care of schools, health units, trading centres and other priority areas.

• Planned extensions should be implemented.

• The involvement of private sector in the provision of water services should be well spelt and their activities monitored.

• Adequate funds should be allocated towards sanitation.

Water for production:

Madam Speaker, honourable members, there is an Annex 2 for your review. The Committee observed the following:

• The Committee noted that the water for irrigation study has been completed and US$169 million is required for its implementation.  This will cover rehabilitation of old schemes, establishment of appropriate irrigation technology, demonstration sites and training of professionals and extension staff.

• There is a problem in maintaining of dams and valley tanks. Some have actually silted beyond repair. According to the current policy, dam maintenance is primarily a responsibility of the users. The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment mobilises the users committees who take charge of maintenance. Thereafter, Ministry of Agriculture takes charge of overall responsibility for regulation of use and maintenance in accordance with the water for production reform study recommendations. I think, honourable members, this could provide some of the answers for concern you raised under the Agriculture sector.

• Members are not satisfied with the distribution criteria for construction of dams and valley tanks. The Committee was informed that the criterion is the number of cattle in any given area, that is, cattle density. This information is only known to the MAAIF, which is the institution responsible for the livestock sub-sector. The water sector seeks advice from the Directorate of Animal Resources on locations that are in greatest need and they are handled in the order of priority.

Recommendations:

• The committee recommended that Government should mobilize resources required to implement the irrigation programme in phases.  

• Valley dams and tanks that are silted should be rehabilitated.  

• Appropriate measures should be taken to protect valley dams, for example, provision of vegetation cover.  

• Government should take deliberate steps to address disparity in provision of water for production.  

Large Towns under NWSC:

The NWSC operates in 15 large towns, as you can see in the report. The committee observed the following:

• The committee commended the corporation for winning an international award for management merit from the Worldwide Marketing Organization as a result of excellent performance.
  
• The corporation made significant achievements in installation of kiosks and standpipes. In Lira, for example, the corporation facilitated IDPs in Erute Corner Dakatal and Ambalala, who were in dire need for water.  

• Unaccounted for water in Kampala has decreased from 44.5 percent to 39 percent as a result of Kampala Network Rehabilitation Project.

The corporation’s connection is on water and not sewerage provisions. Only 15.37 kilometres of sewer lines were extended by March 2004, as indicated on page 22. There is a direct link between the provisions of sewerage services and the health of society. A survey revealed that out of the 803 spring wells in Kampala, only one delivers safe water. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, even the other year this is actually what was reported.  

There is low capacity utilization in some towns due to existence of access capacities and low growth in demand. In contrast to the above, there are areas where there is demand for water, pipes have actually been laid but they remain dry, that is, Nakaloke in Mbale, and Amagoro in Tororo.  Nakaloke alone, I think this has been unfunctional for the last 12 months.

The committee notes that there are a lot of pipes damaged when roads are being constructed. The Managing Director informed the committee that this is as a result of careless work by contractors during the repairing of roads.  

Despite the committee’s recommendation last financial year that water tariffs should be lowered in order to minimize disconnections, the NWSC quietly increased the tariff by 10.7 percent in July. Targets are unrealistically low hence giving the false impression of high performance. The corporation’s arrears have reduced from Shs 24.6 billion to Shs 21 billion. The reduction in arrears is an achievement since it signifies increased cash flow to the NWSC. 

The committee commends Government for endeavoring to pay its bills as shown below. You can go through the table, honourable members.  

The committee recommended the following:

• The corporation should put more effort on recovery of arrears. Special emphasis should be on domestic consumers who constitute 40 percent of the debtors.  

• The corporation should take provision of sewerage as a matter of emphasis.

• Target setting should be reviewed.  

• NWSC should hold talks with the Ministry of Works to ensure that constructors repair damaged pipes - actually the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Local Government also, and the Local Councils because some of these fall under such categories.

• NWSC should increase installation of new connections to increase capacity utilisation. Additionally where pipes still remain dry like Nakaloke and Amagoro, the NWSC should make sure people get the service.  

• Yard taps should be provided to the urban poor who currently buy water at Shs 100 per jerrican.  

Directorate of Lands and Environment:

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Directorate comprises of the following sub-sectors: Lands, Forestry, Meteorology, Wetlands, Environment Management.

Land Sector:

The sector is responsible for management and administration of land resources guided by the Land Sector Strategic Plan (2001-2011). The Land Sector Strategic Plan is being implemented by the Land Tenure Reform Project. The committee observed the following:

• Records in the existing registry are in fragile and often illegible condition, out of date or ambiguous, accessible only at a very high cost and insufficiently protected against disaster. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, those of you who attended some workshop organized recently, I think in Munyonyo, heard how this sector is in shambles, so you cannot access anything.  Those were the words by the officer who is in charge of that.

• There is acute shortage of manpower in the land registry. There are only two registrars out of the 14 required to do the job. Clerical staff have reduced from 35 to 14, and at times if you go there you are required to do the work yourself.

• Public Service has been slow in recruitment of tribunal staff causing inefficiencies in operations of tribunals.  

• Some of the 18 circuits created to handle land disputes are too big and difficult to manage.  This has caused a lot of delays and congestion in handling land matters.  

• There is difficulty in confirming to sound land use principles without a land use policy.  

• Some district boundaries are not clearly demarcated and this has caused several disputes throughout the country. The committee was informed that marking district boundaries is an expensive venture, requiring Shs 60 million on average. Attempts to secure required funds from the Central Government or individual districts for demarcation of boundaries have however failed.  

• There exists many forged titles on the market.

Madam Speaker, hon. Members the committee recommended the following:
 
• There is need to rehabilitate land records and establish a Land Information System that can provide up-to-date information on land ownership at a low cost. This will actually reduce even the time you spend when you go to get information on some of the titles because it takes about three days, at times a week.  

• There is need to decentralize the land registry in order to create efficiency.  

• The process of formulation of the land use policy should be expedited to guide land use in the country.

• The Public Service Commission should recruit all the remaining tribunal staff.

• Lastly the composition of circuits should be reconsidered to ensure that they are manageable.

Wetlands Division:

The department is responsible for conservation, wise use and protection of wetlands in Uganda through increased appreciation and effective management as a means to achieving sustainable development throughout the country.

Observations:

• There have been attempts by Government to restore wetlands.  NEMA, in collaboration with Wetlands Inspection Division, has issued restoration orders to developers in wetlands such as Nakivubo, Kinawataka and Nabajjuzi in Masaka. 

• Government has also attempted to discourage further human settlements in wetlands. The Wetlands Inspection Division has embarked on boundary marking for all wetlands in Kampala starting with critical areas like Nakivubo and Kinawataka.  

• Landless and displaced people have continued to settle on wetlands partly due to lack of resettlement policy; this is particularly true in Teso.  Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee visited the wetlands in Teso where many migrants from other areas have settled. This has caused a lot of problems in the area.  NEMA issued restoration orders some time back in this area of Teso, which were not responded to, so the settlement continues to take place in this area.

• Weak enforcement of laws compounded by the legacy of previous policies, which encourage developments in wetlands are a major hindrance to the sector.

Recommendations  

• Regulations on sustainable management of wetlands should be disseminated to the masses.
  
• Wetlands should be gazetted nationally to reduce encroachment. 

• Specific laws on wetlands should be enacted and enforced by relevant authorities.

• Formulation and publication of resettlement policy must be expedited.

The Uganda Land Commission:

Madam Speaker, hon. Members, the Commission is to effectively manage land and any development thereon held or acquired by Government in Uganda or abroad, as well as the land fund in a sustainable manner as stipulated in the Constitution, 1995 and the Land Act of 1998.

The commission has commenced the process of purchasing registered land in Kibaale using the land fund.

Observations:

• Not all money availed to the Commission for the purchase of land in Kibaale was utilized. This is because land is bought on a policy of willing buyer, willing seller. Only those titles surrendered were valued and paid for.  

• The progress of work in Kibaale is very slow. This is due to inter alia issues of succession among beneficiaries. This has become critical and is taking long to resolve. As a result, this has delayed demarcation and reallocation of land.

Recommendations:

The work in Kibaale should be hastened so that the land fund is extended to other equally deserving parts of the country like Nakasongola, Masindi, Kayunga and so many others.

The Forest Sector: 

Forest Department: 

Madam Speaker, hon. Members, the department has been transformed into the National Forestry Authority. Staff in the district will however continue with the forest sector activity until a time when the District Forest Services is in place.  The District Forest Services is part of the proposed structure for the Division of Environment and National Resources under local government restructuring. The report on the proposed restructuring of local government still awaits Cabinet approval.

The committee observed that forests and trees inside the central forest reserves constitute 70 percent of the national forest cover, and are supposed to be managed by local governments. It is therefore important that District Forest Services (DFS) are constituted.

Recommendations: Cabinet should consider the report of the proposed restructuring of the local government to enable local government recruit the DFS staff.

The National Forest Authority (NFA):  

The authority is responsible for managing the Central Forest Reserves on a sustainable basis. The NFA business plan set out the projected revenue and cost of establishing and running the organization.  

The Committee observed that:

• The authority started from a very low collection base; it will take some years of investment and reorganization to build up realistic and sustainable levels of income.  

• People have continued to deplete forests; this is especially the case in Bunyoro.  

• The NFA is still thin on the ground. It is, however, hoped that they will be able to address this problem.

• There has been some control in the issuance of permits and licenses for timber business.
  
• There is no vigorous campaign to encourage tree planting and yet supply of forest products have begun to dwindle as evidenced by soaring prices of timber.

• Funds for tree planting are only available for large farmers ignoring the small ones.

The Committee recommended that:

• NFA should recruit all necessary staff to enable it accomplish its mandate.  

• Tree planting should be given the prominence it deserves if the forest cover lost is to be replaced.

• Government should ensure that small planters are assisted and promoted.

Meteorology:

Madam Speaker, this department is responsible for weather, climate and issuance of the necessary advisories for use by the different sectors on the economy such as aviation, agriculture and environment.  

Uganda is signatory to both the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol. Among others, Uganda will soon appoint a National Designated Authority to handle projects and programmes for a Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol. This will involve dissemination and exchange of climate change, information and mitigation measures between investors, the Uganda Investment Authority, the Developed Country Parties. Uganda has already benefited from this through the sale of carbon credits at the Nyagak mini-hydro project to the tune of US $ 4 million.  

Observations:  

• Weather and climate information is essential and critical for Uganda’s development. Both management of natural resources on which our development depends and development of infrastructure such as communication, health services and power. The success of PEAP and PMA is doubtful without provision of timely and accurate weather and climate information.  

• The Department of Meteorology provides essential services to the communities such as aviation; its operations are however hampered by bureaucratic procedures. The draft agentisation umbrella law does not provide the flexibility required for an agency.

• Recruitment and promotion in the Department of Meteorology was suspended pending agentisation.  However, because of delays in enacting the agentisation umbrella law the department was allowed to carry out limited recruitment and promotions.  

• The International Civil Aviation Organization has recommended that all meteorology offices issuing aeronautical meteorological information should receive ISO 9000 series by the year 2005. Major carriers will not use airports without this certification.

• Civil Aviation Authority is expected to pay Shs 48 million for services provided by the department in a decision taken in 1992 by the World Meteorological Organization, Uganda civil Aviation Authority and the Department of Meteorology. They however pay only Shs 22 million per month to the Consolidated Fund for the aviation services.  

• The Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol provides an opportunity for investment flow into Uganda. Uganda will benefit from the sale of carbon credits estimated at a tune US $ 4.0 million accruing from the Nyagak Mini-hydro Power to the World Bank Prototype Carbon Fund.

Recommendations:

• Government should conduct immediate negotiations between Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and the department regarding amounts to be paid by Civil Aviation Authority. The CAA has been paying only Shs 22 million per month instead of the Shs 48 million that was agreed upon; the accrued arrears should be paid immediately.  

• All monies paid into the Consolidated Fund for services rendered by the department must be appropriated to the development budget of the department.  

• Government should immediately consider turning the department into an agency. This would give the department autonomy in utilization of funds and eliminate the bureaucratic delays hence meeting the deadline of 2005 as mentioned above.

NEMA: 

The National Environment Management Authority is the principal agency in Uganda for the management of environment. It coordinates, monitors and supervises all activities in the field of environment in order to promote sound management and prudent use of environment and natural resources base by all Ugandans.

The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has been trying since 1999 to secure a vote for NEMA, which would have a main advantage of relieving the constraints on the MTEF ceiling on the Ministry’s vote. This process is still on-going; it has not been finalized. 

Observations:

• The sustainability of NEMA still remains a puzzle. NEMA is heavily donor funded, the committee has made several pleas to the Ministry of Finance to provide NEMA with an independent vote but in vain.  NEMA is the apex body for supervising, monitoring and coordinating all environmental management issues; its sustainability is therefore crucial.  

• The Ministry of Finance does not send conditional grants for environmental management as to districts and sub-counties.
  
• Government has been slow in handling the problem of polyethylene.  Measures put in place to curb the problem like taxation has not been effective. Polyethylene has continued to degrade the environment it is also responsible for blocking sewerage system causing a heavy problem to the population.  

• There is serious land degradation along riverbanks and land shores countrywide.

Recommendations:

• Government should provide NEMA with a vote to ensure its sustainability.  

• Production of polyethylene carrier bags should be burnt and replaced with degradable paper bags.

• NEMA should guide the masses on sustainable use of riverbanks and lakeshores. On this, hon. Members, the committee traveled with NEMA to the eastern region and I think it is now embarking on this one. The work so far done is commendable, but there are many areas where it has to come up.
·	NEMA authorities should sensitize the public about appropriate means of disposing of polyethylene carrier bags. Honourable members, I think what is most required here is the disposal policy of polyethylene bags, which is lacking, yet even in the other financial year we commented on it. 

• Government should provide conditional grants for environmental activities to districts.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the budgetary proposals for the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is a key ministry whose activities directly impact on the livelihood of the people.  I beg to move that the following amounts be approved for its recurrent and development budget for the financial year 2004/2005. Recurrent expenditure UShs 6,262,347,020 and development expenditure UShs 183,741,980,000.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and your committee.  I can confirm that the report has been signed by at least one-third of the members of the committee. Therefore, it meets the requirements of rule 170(1) of our Rules of Procedure.  So, you are at liberty to debate it.

3.54
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  My concerns are as follows. On page 20 the committee talks about water for production. My understanding of this water for production meant that we are going to use this water for both animals and crops.  But then I am a bit disappointed on the last statement where they are saying it is going to be based on the cattle density – the location of the dams and the valley tanks.  I need a clarification.  But more seriously, it is on the costing that we have seen here.  I could also have been very comfortable if we had been given the figure here for the study that was done for the irrigation.  

I would have also been happy if he had been very specific on how much we are going to use on the rehabilitation of the old schemes, establishment of appropriate irrigation technology, demonstration site and the training of professionals and extension staff. Because if we leave it the way it is here, I am seeing a very big loophole. We know very well that we have had a number of irrigation schemes in this country that need rehabilitation. I know some of them could be useless.  Why can we not use this money and construct new ones. Because when you look at the way this money has been presented, it leaves so many questions unanswered.  We need to get to know where these new irrigation schemes are going to be established.  There is no need for us to hide these new irrigation schemes. You should put a specific figure. How much is going to be used on implementation and the equipment that is needed for the irrigation scheme.

Madam Speaker, bullet 3, on page 20, it reads: “Members are not satisfied with the distribution criteria for the construction of dams and valley tanks.  The committee was informed that the criterion is a number of cattle in a given area, (cattle density).  This information is only known by the MAAIF, which is the institution responsible for livestock subsection.”  This is not classified information; it is the information that the public must benefit.  I do not know why the committee did not invoke its powers as stipulated in the Constitution, Article 90(4c), which reads, “In the exercise of their function under this Article, committees of Parliament shall have the powers of the High Court for-

(i)enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise;

(ii) Compelling the production of documents.

(iii) issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad.” They should have used this article in the Constitution, which empowers the committees to compel the ministers that have decided to hide the location of this as if it is classified information from the public.  

Madam Speaker, on the issue of wetlands, it is true NEMA issued letters to those people who have occupied Teso wetlands. What has happened, enforcement has not followed?  What is the problem, and what do we see today?  Just this very week, we have had a number of cattle being ferried to Teso, animals are being brought at night with trailers from Nakasongola and other parts of the country; the wetlands are being depleted.  Hon. Kibanzanga is saying that may be that is a way of restocking, but it is not the appropriate way of restocking Teso.  The indisplined NRA soldiers who were operating in Teso took the animals.  It is still a pain to the people of Teso.  We have been raising these issues of these people, who have come to the wetlands of Teso, but you have turned deaf ears to this; we are sitting on the volcano.  Our silence does not mean to say that we have forgotten. 

We have adopted that strategy for a purpose not to keep quiet.  Government should come up and address these issues.  When people encroach the wetlands in Kampala here, they are immediately evicted. The councillor, Nyakana, is being evicted for constructing in the wetlands.  Hon. Lukyamuzi, who is not even in the wetlands, is being threatened day and night.  But the wetlands of Teso where illegal people have invaded the Government is turning a deaf ear; it is closing its eyes.  It will be very dangerous for this country to see tomorrow that the people in the wetlands have suffered the wrath of the people of Teso because they have come there illegally.  So, NEMA must take it seriously and evict these people from the wetlands. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, can I be protected from hon. Mallinga?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  But I thought I should give this information.  Hon. Okupa has suggested that Government is not acting as far as the wetlands are concerned.  He has gone to the extent of even making implied threats, but this is not correct.  Even this morning, one of the reasons why I was not in this House, Madam Speaker, is that we were discussing matters pertaining to the environment, including the problem of the wetlands in Teso.  So, it is not correct to say that Government is doing nothing about it.  Perhaps the hon. member may be concerned about what he has not seen, but the truth is that Government is concerned and we are finding ways of handling this matter –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I must finish my information.  We are trying to plan a comprehensively strategic way of dealing with the matter.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, I do not know whether you have not added to the confusion.  Are you planning on how to deal with the matter of wetlands or are you planning to deal with the matter of the particular people they have been complaining about in Teso?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I am glad you raised that.  I said, not only are we dealing with the matters of wetlands, but we are dealing specifically with the matter of the pastoralists in the wetlands of Teso and other regions.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, the hon. professor has tried to make a good defence, but I have a very disappointing report to present here. I think the Minister of State (Defence) will have to respond later on.  In Akokoro, there is a Colonel called Semakula, who went with 2000 herds of cattle and occupied part of Maruzi ranch; and he has settled there.  The explanation is that he was creating a buffer zone to block LRA from crossing over to Apac. We have discovered that he has collected small herds of cattle from holders to cross over with these animals to Apac. The reason being that he can be feared more than the type of people who moved over to Teso.  So, we would like to get some good response from the hon. Professor, if he is aware of this kind of settlement as well.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Odit, when you say that he has cross with small holders of cattle, has he taken them for protection?  Are the small holders living with him and their small cattle; what is it?

MR ODIT: The truth of the matter as I got from the Chairman of Apac District Council is that these animals do not belong to him.  I think he has grabbed some animals, not in the manner of robbing, either from friends or from relatives, in order to be able to secure pastoral land for these people.  So, I think we need to really look at this settlement more closely than what the Professor is appearing to explain.  Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, this is not Government policy to allow a Colonel to create a buffer zone with cattle -(Interjections)- I have not said that he is not there. What I am saying is that it is not Government policy.  The most important thing is to find out how this Colonel went there.  We are aware; we have seen some of the documents he used. The districts of Apac and Lira are handling the matter together the Minister of State for Tourism, hon. Jovino Akaki.  He is also the area Member of Parliament, and the Chairman of the local high command of security. I have been told- because there was a meeting other day- that most of this cattle has been driven back to Masindi, or it is in the process of being taken back to Masindi, or it is in the process of being taken back.  Meanwhile, the UPDF is handling this case -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from Masindi.

MS NANKABIRWA: If I could finish this point, Madam Speaker. I will take it.  The UPDF is also handling this case because the Officer that has been talked about, as I speak now is in Jinja in the School of academy for a course; but he is supposed to answer some of these queries.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I wanted to inform the hon. minister that the person called Col.Semakula actually passed through Masindi and he used that office to get even the documents to cross through Masindi up to Apac. It is after that, that the RDC had a security meeting with the people of Apac after finding out that the man was using that office and he was not the rightful owner. In Masindi people are saying now that he crossed and they do not want him back with the cows in Masindi district.  Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: I want to thank my colleague for that information.  I talked about documents, which we are scrutinising, and my colleague has emphasized it that this colonel had certain documents.  We need to find who and how he got the documents and see how we can settle the problem.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you well informed, Minister of Agriculture?  

DR SEBUNYA KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, we are investigating this matter.  The facts we have so far is that the Colonel actually used coercion to get these documents from our Officers.  But we shall keep this House informed when we get the final answer.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the animals?

MR LUKYAMUZI: No, on an earlier point.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now to who?

MR LUKYAMUZI: To Prof. Kagonyera.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prof. Kagonyera was only giving information; he did not have the Floor.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker, is that under the liberalization programme, Government policy on wetlands protection is most speculative.  They have at random destroyed Namanve; they have destroyed the golf course; they have destroyed Lugogo.  What do I have to say?  That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, please wind up.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, these issues of the Colonel are not only limited to Apac and those districts.  I remember one time here, hon. Lolem Micah, raised the issue about the same colonel ferrying cows from his constituency.  He even quoted the number of the vehicle he used for ferrying cows from Upe County.  In Soroti in Arapai, when this man was in eastern region, he had again cows in Arapai region; and he used to scare people from the area by shooting in the air at night.  So, this is a very serious matter that the Minister of Defence must take seriously.  

Now coming to hon. Prof. Kagonyera, I do not know what else we need because we know that we have NEMA, we have the laws; but for the hon. Kagonyera to come and say, “We are discussing, we are looking at this.” I do not understand.  NEMA is there, it issued letters to these people to vacate the place, but they have failed to enforce.  Now, what is hon. Kagonyera talking about? I am pointing at specific area.  

I remember we went there with the National Political Commissar (NPC), hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, and he did assure us that the problem would be solved; it is now two years.  But I am surprised that up to today, what do we see, we are seeing more people getting to the wetlands of Teso.  It is good the National Political Commissar (NPC) again is going to Teso on the ekisanja business this week or next week, he will find these issues there; I do not know what he will have to tell us.  

Finally, on the issue of electricity, Madam Speaker, I have looked at this on page six, they have enumerated a number of districts that are going to benefit from the private sector and those that are going to benefit through the Government.  But also Annex (2), they have gone ahead to name the landing sites that are going to benefit from rural electrification.  Most of the landing sites are South of Lake Kyoga and these were the landing sites which we passed a loan to be developed, though up to now they have not been developed despite the local authorities responding and getting the land titles for these places.  But I am surprised that Kasilo county, which was meant to be a beneficiary of three landing sites, that is, Mulondo, Kagwara and Bugondo, none of them is mentioned for rural electrification.  

I had discussions with the minister and he did assure me that the landing sites would be a priority.  We have in Kasilo County some of the landing sites that had originally electricity; they only need rehabilitation.  I have been raising this matter since I came to this House- last year I was so disappointed when hon. Syda Bbumba did say here to my disappointment that, “Go and look for private investors; they will be the ones to do that.”  It is not even a surprise today that in this list I am not seeing those landing sites.  

I felt I should bring this out here again today, that if we really need to develop this country equitably, then we must have this rural electrification equitably distributed because this power line will not only improve on the landing sites, but also the Government has built a very wonderful Health Centre (IV), it has installed all the equipment that would need power.  It would be one of those that would benefit the people of Teso.  

This should have been the criterion that should have been used to address the issue of allocation or rehabilitation of the power lines.  We do not need new ones; we only need rehabilitation, the poles are still there and some of the transformers are still hanging on the trees.  But I am surprised that all this has been left out.  We even have a boarding primary school, one of the first modern boarding primary schools, which were built in the 1960s.  But then the children have gone, it is a boarding school but without power; they use candles at night.  So, how shall we improve on the education sector of the people?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.15
MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report.  Madam Speaker, when you look at page three, (3.1), the mandate of the ministry, when you really analyse it in relation to what the report is talking about providing power by Government and then providing power to the people using the private sector.  

I want to ask the minister, when you talk of the private sector providing power to the Ugandans in certain sections of Uganda, then Government providing direct to certain people in Uganda, what criteria do you use?  Who qualify to get power through the private investors and who are those who qualify to get power through Government? Because when you look at it, it is the responsibility of Government to take power to the people because something to do with private, it means profits.  

So, a place like Bugiri, apart from the lake, areas like Bukooli North, which is far from the lake, what is there to attract a private investor to bring power? Because it is private, it is business, so somebody will go to an area where he will get profit. So, will some Ugandans in areas like Karamoja really get power?  

Madam Speaker, page 25 talks about the Land Tribunals. Let me give the example of Busoga. There is one Chairman of the Land Tribunals of the districts of Busoga so he has to chair all the meetings all over the districts. The members of the Land Tribunal are also only two. When one is not present, they do not meet. As a result, land problems in the districts are now much more than they were before. Who is supervising these people as they do their work, because the problem is so big? 

I am supposed to have appeared before the Land Tribunal of Bugiri about six months ago, and whenever they call me I go there, but one person is always missing. So, they tell me to go back the following month. If that is happening to me, a Member of Parliament, what happens to my voters? So, the Minister in charge should look into this; please work on people’s problems.  

In Busoga there are two important issues, land and some other, which I want you to find out. If land is not really looked at very well, please hon. Minister, we shall have problems; people will die –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my colleague. She has talked of Busoga’s issue being land and another thing. I am seeking clarification; what is the other one so that we may learn from Busoga’s experience? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lumumba, she wants clarification about the two important things. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, this report is a report on Natural Resources. Under Natural Resources, we have Energy and Mineral Development, Water, Land and Environment. The day we debate Culture, unfortunately, I sit on the Social Services Committee that is when I will inform her.  Thank you very much.  

Madam Speaker, page 10 talks about the Meteorology Department. I want a clarification from the Minister; surely, do you think this department is performing? Do you think this department is of any help to us Ugandans? What are they doing to help us Ugandans? Our economy depends mostly on agriculture, and our agriculture depends mostly on natural phenomena like rain. How often do you, as a Minister in charge of this department inform Ugandans what is going to happen about the rain?  

We are now facing famine as a country and I want to take this opportunity to inform you, Minister, that there is famine in this country. But it is purely your responsibility as a Minister; you did not do your work as we Ugandans entrusted that work to you. You did not inform us when you were expecting the rains so that the farmers plant. Why don’t you tell us that you expect rains at this particular time so that the poor peasants of this country do not lose the seeds? They bury them in the soil and then there is no rain. So, as a Minister you did not perform very well on this. I am not really here to blame, but you have not really helped us; you did not give us statements as farmers, as peasants, when we should do what we are supposed to do, especially in relation to the natural phenomena.  

Madam speaker, I think there is a problem with NEMA’s performance, because NEMA will only work hard on the poor people. If you are a poor person, NEMA will get you; but if you are rich NEMA will not. When you are poor and you invest in the wetlands and you do anything that is against what NEMA is supposed to accept, NEMA descends on you with all their weight and they manage you. But if you are a rich person, hon. Minister in charge of Lands, what will happen; you will be an investor.  If you are rich, you just change the word and become an investor; there is nothing that they will do to you. That is why when it comes to wetlands the rich fill the wetland with murram during the night then during the day nothing is happening. Watch all these wetlands in Kampala, they fill the wetlands in the night, NEMA will say we did not see. Then after sometime somebody begins constructing, that is an investor -(Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, thank you hon. Lumumba for giving way.  

Madam Speaker, this is a serious allegation because if I can cite an example, there is a tannery in Mbarara, which used to belong to Hassan Basajjabalaba.  Basajjabalaba is one of the rich people we have in here, but this tannery was closed by none other than NEMA; and many others have been closed. I want actually the Member to cite examples to help us as a committee because we are in the process of going throughout the whole country to assess the performance of these sectors under our mandate. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you assist the committee with the information?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much for that information.  But I want to ask the Chair of this Committee, if you are really being sincere to yourself and the Ugandans who entrusted you to sit in that Chair, you mean you do not know that this is happening? What happened to the area where Garden City is located? Wasn’t that a wetland, wasn’t that an investor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you see, I did not hear what the hon. Member said.  

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, he wanted me to give examples. I gave an example of Garden City, that is a wetland and just close to us here, the supervisors of the ministry. We have Namanve, Shoprite and Game in Lugogo; we have Munyonyo. Actually for Muyonyo they get the murram from Kinawataka. So, Madam Speaker, does he want more information?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Lumumba. Madam Speaker, I want to give hon. Justine Lumumba some more information.  On the road between Bugolobi and Kireka, they have filled the wetland and the sewerage can no longer go to Lake Victoria. That place has broken blocked because of these investors in Kyambogo. So, if you pass that place, it is just flooded with smelly sewerage material. This is as a result of the investors in Bugolobi constructing and blocking the passage of the water and the sewerage to Lake Victoria. So, what the hon. Member is only raising to the chairperson is possibly an isolated case, but there are more serious cases within town here where most of the areas have been blocked. 

Madam Speaker, on our road in Ntinda, Semawata road down that valley, before you reach Ntinda market, people are busy ferrying soil to block that wetland; in fact, it flooded the houses behind the market. Therefore, the hon. Member is raising a very serious matter. So, what is the Chairman talking about?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, perhaps it is in order that I allow the Minister in charge of the Sector to say something. The reason I stand up to talk about this is because I happen to be the Chairman of the Ministerial Committee on the Environmental Policy of the Government of Uganda.  So, Madam Speaker, I speak on this subject with authority –(Interjection)- Yes, I do. Now if I can be allowed to speak, Madam Speaker. 

First of all, the law of this country - hon. Lukyamuzi is one of the culprits; he actually lives in a wetland –(Laughter)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament representing Lubaga South.  A whole Minister on Cabinet cannot simply stand and speculate on a character sketch of my kind. The place where I live was gazetted as a settlement area and even NEMA has clarified that, but people keep making all sorts of allegations. Is it in order for the hon. Minister to allege things he cannot justify without substantiation? Prove practically and scientifically that I live in a wetland –(Laughter)- Failure to do so, you should resign.  (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, it is difficult to rule on that matter because I do not know how the wetlands of this country have been gazetted. Until one of you, either the Minister or the hon. Member, tables something here, I really have no idea who lives or does not live in a wetland.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Members who have contributed on the subject of wetlands and other environmental concerns have genuine concerns; and it is from their reactions that my ministry and my department responsible for wise use of wetlands gets information in order to do what is good for our contemporary existence and the existence of those to succeed this world after us.  

Madam Speaker, as we all know, Parliament enacted the Environment Law here only nine years ago; and this law cannot be applied in retrospect. For example, when we look at the Golf Course, just below Garden City, we have got Centenary Park and below it we have got the Electoral Commission and other warehouses. If we are to protect that wetland - what sense does it make to protect the upland and not the downland? We have got to re-do the whole thing altogether.

Any developer who is building in a wetland now will have that development demolished at his or her own cost. Kampala has been mapped; the wetlands have been mapped by remote sensing and also by cadastre. For those wetlands for which we have a lot of respect and concern, number one is the Nakivubo Channel responsible for filtering our water in the Gaba take-in and the tributaries, the main one being Kinawataka; these we are protecting jealously. But, Madam Speaker, we are handling the problem with very few people, with very little manpower. NEMA is only 44 persons-strong and some districts have got only one person. We have just gazetted Environmental Inspectors/Monitors and we are calling upon environmentalists like my good friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, to be one of our monitors and keep pointing to the abusers so that collective action is done.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, NEMA is not simply sitting idle and protecting the rich people. When I was Director in charge of the sector, I shut down Gomba Fish Factory in Jinja who were emptying fatty stuff from the fish, the offal and washout, from the factory direct into the waters of Lake Victoria.  I said this is not permissible; the fish were no longer breeding because there was a film of fat on top of water, they could not breathe, you could see and all around some corpses of young and old fish, which had suffocated. 

From there I moved to Hima Cement Factory that was polluting the air of Kasese, and corrective measures were done. The Cobalt Plant about which the Chairperson of the Committee reported, we also put a temporary halt on the activities and caused them to treat the effluent that is let down the drainage. We have done so for many battery factories, tanneries, Mbarara University, who had no incinerator and were emptying whatever you can think of from a hospital, including amputated limbs in Rwizi River; I could go on and on. 

NEMA is a watchdog for a clean environment and we need the support that hon. Members are giving us through these interventions.  We do not take them as bad criticisms; we pick them to help us to improve our service delivery.

Finally, Teso wetlands: Last year NEMA issued eviction orders and the deadline was June 30th for the cattle keepers to vacate these wetlands.  But as we all know, Madam Speaker, that area was invaded by Kony and his running forces –(Interjection)- Yes, the Teso wetlands occupied by the people – I thought we were talking about wetlands in Kaberamaido, in Teso and Kumi, Agur – those are the wetlands I am talking about. There is an eviction order, which could not be enforced; there was neither Local Administration Police, nor Central Police to enforce these orders, not even people to sensitize the subjects about this matter.  

Now, as was explained by the Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister, he is actually the chairperson of the 11 ministers’ committee, a committee of Cabinet handling environmental matters. The others are Agriculture, Industry, Education, handling environmental matters; he is our Commander in the environmental management of this country –(Interjection)- If I could finish this explanation because it is beneficial to Kasilo people –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I beg that I clarify first, and I think that way everything will be clear. 

We have got many landless people in this country. It is not for the first time we are hearing the need for Government to put in place a resettlement policy. Again under the Office of the Prime Minister, I know the First Deputy Minister, Lt.Gen. Moses Ali, is working with technical officers from all relevant departments of Government to come out with a resettlement policy. 

You chase away 2,000 cows and so many families, some of them claim that before the NEMA law came into place they were actually living in Teso, in Lango, the area hon. Odit is talking about. They were living in Buruli, Busoga, and our political problems of the early 1980s and subsequent days are the ones, which displaced those people. They are retracing their ways back; but as they go back, they find there is a law forbidding them to settle in swamps. The resettlement policy is, through in a comprehensive way, Government will provide for the interest of all the parties. Our cattle are a very big component of our economic base and this should be taken into consideration.  That ends my clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, hon. Justine Lumumba.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, you are telling me to wind up, but the hon. Minister took my time and it is you who allowed him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I gave you three minutes, Madam, that is what everybody gets.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister has told us that the environmental law came in place nine years ago.  That shows that when Movement came in power, environment was not the priority, yet it is the basis for our economy.  Madam Speaker, the Environmental Law came in place nine years ago according to the Minister, but Garden City, Lugogo; have been constructed just two or three years ago.  

Madam Speaker, as we continue to talk today, people are still constructing in the valley in Ntinda, in the swamps in Kirombe, in Makindye, in Biina in Luzira; but we have Ministers in that Ministry.  Madam Speaker, as we talk, people are still constructing fuel filling stations in swamps and Ministers are watching.  Madam Speaker, then we say we are really environmentally aware as Ugandans.  I think it is in the negative.  

Madam Speaker, we went to Luzira with the Minister of Lands and we were supervising the LVEMP Project. The technical people told us that we are likely to have a problem, especially with the water in Kampala. Everyday the sewerage that is released into the lake is moving near the point where the water that is supplied to Kampala comes from. So, as the ministry in charge of Water, what have you done? And we are not really so sure that the water is treated so well, even the sewerage before it is released into the lake. 

We also have Uganda Breweries, which also pours direct all its products into the lake without even treating them. This is a big problem, Madam Speaker. We might have a problem, which can lead to the death of all people in Kampala. Can I have the Minister also to explain this, because it will also happen to him or her?

Madam Speaker, lastly I want to ask the ministry – actually, since there is a committee to deal with environment, we have a problem with water in areas where there is likely to be minerals and some areas have been identified to have minerals.  Let me give the example of my own village, Budde in Bugiri District. According to the ministry reports, there is gold in that place, but there is also a problem of water in that village. Can the Ministry of Mineral Resources please talk to the Ministry of Water that wherever there are minerals there is a problem with water. You cannot get good water, actually the water is so salty and it is hard water. So, it is a problem to the people in that area. Can you please work together to make sure that the Ministry of Water provides better water than what these people get? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a fair job done, especially in pointing out key issues. One, Madam Speaker, to the face of a hyena, I have to begin from home. I have gone ahead to write to the Ministry of Energy, especially to my hon. friend, hon. Syda Bbumba, and I have talked personally to my hon. friend, the Member of Parliament for Butebo. I have pointed out issues, which are on page 6 of this report. 

The Committee was informed that rural electrification access had increased from one percent in 2001 to three percent in 2003, and all the areas cited are district headquarters. But when it comes to a point - even the President wrote, I have a copy and all my other friends have copies. I have reminded the ministry and talked to them, but they have decided to go against the manifesto and the political will of this country. They have decided to be sectarian, if I may use that word, to go against the election results, which were popular in my constituency and Karamoja as a whole, that they have decided to stop electricity in the village. Corner Kilak, Patongo, Abim, what about Kotido district headquarters?  Can you technically explain why Kotido is not going to be connected, why you have removed it from the President’s manifesto? Why have you done that, or are you decampaigning the whole process?  

A friend of mine told me that this ministry has a hidden programme, that the rural electrification or thermal power or hydro-power is meant for crop growing areas, not for cattle keeping areas. That the electricity cannot go with cows, which are moving up and down. Should I believe this? It is very bad.  

Madam Speaker, coming to page 10 –(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Thank you, hon. colleague, for giving way.  I just wanted to give you information that while we rear animals and we move up and down with our cows, we give enough limestone to the Government. You remember Loro Sub-county, where I am born, everyday they go and collect limestone from Tororo, but there is nothing in this thing.  So, I just wanted to tell you that there is sectarianism somewhere.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, my hon. friend. Madam Speaker, in the very words he has just used, on page 10, I am happy that it is noted in the first paragraph that there is an increased production of limestone and other minerals, which have led to the booming of this country’s economy, raising the revenue in the previous financial year.  I am happy to note that even the ministry has realised the importance of why we should get some of these areas in Karamoja connected.

You know the 14 major minerals, which are existent in Karamoja; I do not need to cite them, the ministry has the record, I also have copies of these records. Surely Tororo has its umbilical cord in Moroto Mountain for the famous limestone and marble stone. These are very useful for the cement that we have, and we are saying, can we have a commitment that we do not really report things in papers and yet we do not have the commitment? You Ministers of that place, can you have faith, can we have political will, can we be ourselves, Movementists if it is possible, or else you are pushing some of us out of the system. It is very bad. Can we have affirmative action for some of these programmes?

Madam Speaker, Page 18, the first recommendation says, “The strategy for water supply and sanitation to IDPs developed by Government should be implemented by Government as a matter of urgency.”  I need some clarification. Mr chairman, what do you mean here? What was the strategy before, and who was implementing it? Does it mean that Government was not involved before? To me that statement seems to say there was lack of commitment from Government, is it so, and yet the perception I have is quite different?

Madam Speaker, page 20 - I want to be as brief as it should be. Observation 2 says in part, 
“There is a problem in maintaining dams and valley tanks and some have silted beyond repair.”  

Madam Speaker, we have gone with the Ministers of Water, especially hon. Mary Mutagamba, to Karamoja and visited some of these dams. A lot of it is also to blame on the technicians. When you look at the contours where you are supposed to create an embankment of a dam, they were put directly on the course of the river. Definitely when water comes, and you know most of the water, which flows from that region is through a greater force of gravity, most of the dams are broken off their banks. 

It is true, hon. Minister of Water, if she is around or my friend is there, hon. Baguma Isoke, can report for her, that Kailong dam, which we have been citing - we went there with six ministers and saw the fate of that dam. You continue reporting that you have money to repair this dam, but this is not happening. What is happening to this dam? Just like many others, all the dams that the President was supposed to go and launch have broken their banks, and we are here trying to deceive Government that, ‘You see, the problem is these Karimojong, they do not know how to use.’  But for sure we went there and cited so many things to blame. We must accept some of these things if we want to improve.  

So, can I invite you as Members of the Ministry to go there and we visit these places, and we see exactly what is happening, so that we come into the ministry and re-plan how to rehabilitate these things. Otherwise, we are zeroing on nothing and trying to blame that region for nothing. Just because we do not have the commitment, we do not have the faith and some us are really corrupt. It is on record that some houses near Makerere University have been named Valley Dam Houses. We are gathering this information, we shall avail it as soon as we get it on hand. But if you go to Makerere University and ask the students, there is a building down there, which they refer to as Valley Dams Hostels.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I want to point out clearly is that, we are piloted on this issue of dams.  We are piloted that the dams, which were dug in 1960s and 1950s by our colonial masters were not dug by mechanical means. These were excavated by hand, and if the funds we have brought are for poverty alleviation, why don’t we do some of these dams and pilot them? Let the people be given money per Parish or per sub-county and they excavate some of this land. We have redundant labour in Karamoja.  These youth who are disturbing us around here can be employed there and we get them off raiding. 

There is an experiment, which has been done in my constituency. I have worked together with Oxfam and we have constructed a dam at Karoporobong in Panyangara. We have excavated land and constructed there a dam dug manually at less than Shs 20 million, and we have water there. Kailong is also the same in my constituency. I have piloted it with Oxfam and it works. Why can’t you apply that?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, page 24. Madam Speaker, I like you for being patient. When you look at bullet 2, this is a matter of shortage of manpower in the Land Registry. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister; what has happened to the Survey Training Institute in Entebbe where we used to get technical persons in this field to attend to the needs of the wanainchi at district level? Go to all the districts - I was in Kyenjojo, and Kamwenge - in Kotido it is even worse; the land offices have no trained personnel. Even the office spaces are lacking. The personnel, of course, you have cut them from source. If you want, why don’t you start the courses at Kyambogo? Makerere University is only offering land surveyors, what about cartographers?  How do you complete the work in the Land Registry when you do not have all these personnel together, the land valuers? So, you should do something there very quickly. Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

5.54
MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for having produced this very good report that cuts across all these sectors. I also thank the sectors that took part in the formulation of this report. I can see there is a very big improvement when you compare this report with that one of the last financial year. However, that increment is still very little as compared to other countries.  

I am looking at page 5, under the Kiira power station: 80 megawatts are about to be completed.  But again this one challenges my understanding. Adverts have been going on radio that we should forgive the power suppliers because they will have less water at the source of power. What will happen when they complete this one? That means we must pray so hard that it rains and we get a lot of water reserve to keep on running those turbines because there is a shortage of water on the few turbines we have; now we are putting more on the same spot. That means some of these must be idle in the dry seasons. I do not know what the Minister can explain about this advert, which has been running throughout August. They said we should expect some breaks in electricity because there is less water, and I am looking at another project getting completed at the same spot.

I am glad that at least we did not lose any money when AES withdrew. I see we could have made some Uganda Shs 50 million out of that, but then I am wondering; who paid for this compensations? The people at Bujagali were compensated and now Uganda did not spend any coin! That is what the report says on page 5. So, who was compensating these people, and I think AES had its own financial problems; but Uganda made Shs 50 million out of the intellectual property. So, I do not know what happens with money.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The clarification I am seeking is exactly in line with your concerns for the AES project. It is said Uganda never lost any money, but the same sentence says, that the move impacted on the GDP. How negative or positive did it impact on the GDP?

MR LULE MAWIYA: I should give a response to this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait and respond at the end as the chairperson of the committee?

MR KABAREEBE: Of course GDP is Gross Domestic Product, and when there is no power, of course you do not expect much in increment in terms of money and profitability, and productivity among people. This is completely different from what I am talking about. I am talking about direct overhead loss, which the ministry is saying did not meet.  I hope I am not mixing two issues judging from the clarification Mr Lukyamuzi required from me. GDP concerns productivity whereby electricity or any loss could have been caused by people not producing, which is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it was directed at the chairperson and not you, because the document belongs to the chairperson.

MR KABAREEBE: So, let me go ahead. Madam Speaker, I was looking at page 6 where rural electrification has increased from one percent to three percent from 2001 to 2003 in a period of about two years. I do not know how long it will take to cover say 80 or 90 percent if we continue at this rate. 

I am looking at Bujagali, which has been mentioned also, there is Kalagala, Karuma and Mutili, which are all supposed to be built. But whenever there is an attempt, definitely there will be sabotage; you wait. Let us pray that Bujagali takes off because I was in Egypt recently with hon. Maria Mutagamba.  Their major interest is they want this water to run as quickly as possible to their end. 

Two, their electricity coverage is already 96 percent. They have put up a very strong grid, which is heading for Uganda and Kenya. They are going to supply us electricity here. The grid is coming already, and I hope the Energy Sector is aware. Therefore, we shall have problems with World Bank or any sourcing due to foreign interests. The power is coming from there and it will be exported to Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Congo and the neigbourhood using our water whereby we should not put our own power. So, I do not know what is going to happen. 

Egypt is saying that they need negotiations so that they can put up power projects, but I am wondering who is supposed to initiate that because we discussed it when hon. Maria Mutagamba was there, but unfortunately she is not here. I have also seen on page 20 that irrigation is to be sourced with Shs 169 million. 

I am also wondering about the 1929 Agreement, which says, “Nobody shall touch the waters of any lake, any river, so long as the Nile originates from there or has a small connection there.” So, once that agreement is still standing, there is no way you can talk about irrigation unless you are talking of pumping water from underground and you use it. But if you are thinking about Lake Victoria, any lake, any river, forget about it so long as the 1929 Agreement is standing.  

We agreed - I hope the Minister of Lands and Water and Environment is aware of that - that we shall still table that Motion on the 17th of October, if by then we would not have finished the negotiations. I have the protocols where I have seen that Egypt and Sudan have put very strong remarks and refusal actually on the 1929 Agreement and the other Agreements therein. So, I hope the Minister will help us to explain this. 

I am also looking at the billing system on page 8 in the report. It has remained problematic for a very long time. I was in Tanzania recently; the way they use the electricity is unique. They have got meters where you only insert in a card. You pay, you insert a card; about three days before it is exhausted, it indicates red then you go, get another card and use. 

When I was inquiring about it, the amount required for each meter is not much money. But we are having a lot of problems here due to that. I do not know whether you can make a study in Tanzania and see. They have no problem, they are not complaining at all. But here you can see what is happening –(Mr Ochieng rose_)

AN HON MEMBER: Madam Speaker, hon. Ochieng is a member of the National Resources Commitee, so was hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I do not know whether these interjections are procedurally okay.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you assisting the Chairperson or you are seeking clarification from the Member?

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, it is not true that I am a Member of the Natural Resources Committee, and I would request that you help me with this situation. People seem to talk about water for production. Can I get clarification as to whether really water can go to production when people in my constituency do not have water for drinking? What criteria are we talking about? We do not have water to drink; you are taking of water to animals, what type of thing is this –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ochieng, how can hon. Muzoora clarify that point? He is not the Minister for Water. He is talking about the use of the waters of the Nile. You want him to tell you how people in Bukooli will get drinking water; he is not the Minister for Water.

MR KABAREEBE: I looked at page 12 where it is said that our professionals in petroleum exploration are poorly paid. Of course you know, Madam Speaker and honourable members that once we land on this petroleum, Uganda can see its GDP grow ten times over, in a very short time. So, I am wondering why government cannot invest in these professionals. Twenty professionals were trained about ten years ago but because of this, about 16 did not come back to petroleum exploration because of this poor payment. And instead we prefer to bring in expatriates? They reach here and again begin learning from our professionals and they are paid ten times as much? I do not know the policy on petroleum exploration but I believe there is a very big problem when you poorly pay a man who understands petroleum, and you think he will remain here.

On page 30, I have learnt that CAA owes Shs 1,960,000,000 to the Meteorological Department. All along I have been wondering why my Meteorological Department in Entebbe has been suffering. I have just discovered that they have been providing free services, and you can imagine most of them are running away and retiring very early. I pray that these people are paid. But then CAA used to put in the newspapers a lot of profits made every year, that money I think would come to the consolidated fund. So, it is government to now pay back the Meteorological Department so that they can meet the required standards by 2005. If they do not, British Airways will go back, other airlines will go back; they will not come here and yet these people provide very vital information, otherwise the planes will begin crashing here.  

I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and if hon. Rukutana owned fuel tankers, I was going to blame him for failing to provide some money for the pipeline, which was surveyed and done in 1998, that is six years ago. But since he does not own them, it is still okay. But you should put more effort into making sure that this pipeline begins. Otherwise, we have lost so many people on the roads because of these trailers, and we have lost our roads. These trailers are too heavy; some of them are carrying 100 tonnes yet these roads were designed to carry only 40 tonnes. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to contribute to this report. I would like to thank the committee for this report. I will start with the observations made by the committee on the wetlands division, and especially under the displaced people.  

It is good that the committee came up with this other observation, but this has become a common trend in almost all the districts in Uganda. It is at this point that I would like to ask the minister to give me information and to clarify on what he intends to do with the people who were displaced in Mpumwe, in Kigumba sub-county, Masindi District since 2001, when the boundaries of the national park were being opened. These people were assured of being resettled in Ranch II but up to today they have not been resettled. We have an influx of the internally displaced people; the place is completely congested and now we have pastoralists who have resettled themselves on this ranch. I want to know what plans you have for these people, who were displaced from the national park.  

This does not affect only those people in Mpumwe, but also people from Kakwoko Parish in Mutunda sub-county. Madam Speaker, this sub-county is hosting internally displaced people, people who are running from the Northern region because of the insurgency.  When they come, we settle with them, although we continue sharing the same facilities that were meant for a few people. However, there are these pastoralists who have crossed all the way, we don’t know where they are coming from; they come and settle in this area. Some of the ranches were actually owned during the restructuring period in the 1990s by absentee landlords; to-date those people are not there. During the committee’s meetings I talked to the minister but the answer was not all that adequate because the pastoralists are coming in big numbers. We have just been told that some of them are crossing even to Apac, but Masindi is hosting a big number.  

I want the minister to assist me. Recently I was in Masindi and I was moving around my district and Kakwoko was one of those parishes in Mutunda sub-county, which has suffered such consequences. What plans do you have to settle our people when actually some people are coming and resettling themselves without anybody talking to them? They are grazing their animals on people’s crops. In Masindi we are predominantly agriculturalists and our people are farmers. When people come with big herds of animals and start displacing us, it is really sad. Could the minister help the people of Masindi and tell us what plans he has in resettling people in Mpumwe and in making sure that our people are protected from these pastoralists? What plans do you have for the absentee landlords of these ranches?  

Madam Speaker, the committee talked about the irrigation scheme and I am happy that at last the ministry is coming up with such a proposal. I represent the people of Masindi District, and it so happens that we share Lake Albert with the Democratic Republic of Congo. The people living near Lake Albert, in Buliisa sub-county, the women walk ten miles to go and fetch water; some even walk 20 miles to go and fetch water. Today as we talk there is a likelihood of famine erupting because there are no rains. After opening the report and looking at the ministerial policy statement, I was so happy that irrigation has been talked about. I want to find out from the minister whether Buliisa in Masindi District is also one of those other districts, which are going to benefit.  

Madam Speaker, on page five there has been –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Bintu for giving way. The information, which I want to provide, is that she should not be excited about this irrigation because the information on page 20, the observation by the committee is that they will establish appropriation irrigation technology demonstration sites. Actually, there is no irrigation scheme that is being set up.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. Apart from women in Buliisa walking long distances to fetch water, they are also faced with the hazard of being eaten by crocodiles. Many women, men, and even children, have been eaten by crocodiles. So, we are appealing to the ministry concerned to really think of sinking boreholes to save these women and men, who are eaten by crocodiles while looking for water. Thank you very much.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much for such information. All the same, although these irrigation schemes will be for demonstration purposes, I wish one of the demonstration sites is put on Lake Albert and in Masindi District in Buliisa County, then we shall be happy –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could hon. Kabakumba switch off that microphone where she is?

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. So many people are talking about the electricity and today I am happy to report that at least the Apac line to Masindi was installed and people have started benefiting from the lighting. However, there is still a problem because the power in Masindi that comes through Kiboga up to Hoima then Masindi, we do not receive it regularly. I have seen something concerning Karuma here on page 5. What has happened with Karuma power? Why can it not be worked on so that at least other regions, which are facing a problem of power, can tap into this power from the Karuma Falls Dam?

Lastly, on page 36, annex 4; I want to make this correction. We are happy that we received some valley tanks but the way it is reported on page 36, the annex that was retrieved, I believe the report has put some valley tanks in places they should not be. Like Jjejja valley tank in Masindi was put in Buruli and yet it belongs to Kibanda County. So, I wish it could be changed. Then Kyangamoyo valley tank in Buruli was placed in Kimengo sub-county but it belongs in Pakanyi, Kyakamese parish. I wish those were corrected. 

We believe that with the big number of IDPs, the minister will think of installing more boreholes in the parishes that are hosting the internally displaced, because we are facing a problem. The number is big; we are sharing the same boreholes, which we used to share among 700 people. Right now we are 1,500, so you can imagine how the women are suffering! They start lining up from 5.00 a.m. That means they leave their partners in bed, they come and line up for water until 2.00 p.m., and the children remain suffering. I wish the ministry could think of that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.15
MS OLIVE WONEKHA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for this report. Under the observations on Energy, they say, “Uganda continues to import electricity poles due to limited local supply, leading to loss of foreign exchange.” I remember last year the same concern was raised. My question is, what is being done about this issue so that we do not continue to lose the foreign exchange? And since for electricity we have only three percent coverage out there, that means the need for electricity poles is on. We shall continue to need them. So, what is going on in this particular area?  

MRS BALEMEZI: I would like to inform my colleague that a lot of tall trees were cut down in Mabira Forest and up to now they are lying there rotting. I really do not know whether the Ministry of Forestry could not liaise with the Ministry of Energy so that they could make good use of these fallen trees. There are a number of them, eight kilometers, along Mabira Forest. I thank you.

MS WONEKHA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for that information –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr David Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. I thought I should provide pertinent information on this issue. We definitely need electric poles, and we mainly use eucalyptus poles for purposes of laying our network. Some of these big logs in Mabira Forest are really not ideal for purposes of laying the network for distribution of electricity. However, some of these poles in Mabira Forest could be good for timber, for purposes of making furniture and some of those that are not used for furniture, we could use them for firewood, which is vital for energy purposes. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, that matter arose even yesterday. The question was, were you ready to demolish them or you were not ready? They were demolished and left in Mabira Forest to decompose. That was part of the question yesterday.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as you realise that does not really fall under our purview in Energy. However, given the fact that now we are aware that there is an energy source, which we could take advantage of for purposes of producing firewood and charcoal, we shall alert the stakeholders in the energy sector so that they can be in position to go and pick up those logs. I thank you.

MS WONEKHA: Nonetheless, because of the information given by my colleague, he did divert my question – my concern is on the electricity poles. What measures are being taken by the ministry? I thought the Ministry of Energy would say something in that direction. I still need an answer to that, Madam Speaker.  

MR MIGEREKO: It is true we are still importing some electric poles. We have been importing them because at times suppliers indicate that they will be in position to supply electric poles from our local sources, and they find themselves unable to. Currently we have this huge programme, the Rural Electrification Programme, and what we have done is to request the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited to move all over the country and identify possible suppliers of eucalyptus timber, seasoned and unseasoned, so that we can be in position to take advantage of whatever resources are available locally.

As a matter of fact, through our planning exercises we are in touch with the National Forestry Authority such that they can be in position to provide tracts (of land) to people to start planting eucalyptus on a reasonable scale so that our projections for rural electrification in future are not constrained due to lack of eucalyptus poles, which are vital in our rural electrification exercise. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, I think I have a problem with that. There is somebody in my constituency who in the last one and a half years I have tried to connect to UEDCL; they went and inspected his very big garden and they did not go back. It took me another telephone call to your people; I have called them three times, and I am the Deputy Speaker of this country, and this person’s eucalyptus has not been purchased -(Interjections)- that is true, I am the Deputy Speaker of this country and a man in my constituency has for two years been trying to sell eucalyptus to UEDCL.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Madam Speaker, there are a number of people who have indicated interest in supplying poles. Many of their forests have been inspected but some of the poles have been found not to be up to the desired levels. The UEDCL and UETCL, when they are buying poles, they are supposed to buy what are called seasoned poles. These are polls, which are already cut and have dried naturally for a period of not less than six months. However, we shall ask the companies to come and look at the forest and make a report. I will give you a telex response. I thank you.

MS WONEKHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the next point after the electricity poles, on page 8 there is the concern of the committee on the maintenance of electricity networks. They talk of sagging wires and fallen poles. Most of the people who are electrocuted by these sagging wires are women and children.  

Madam Speaker, on page 17 on rural water and sanitation, I am happy to note that the committee also observed that there is going to be increased provision of water to IDPs. Of course in IDP camps it is basically the women who are suffering most with the issue of lack of water. 

In that regard, I am concerned that Magale, a trading center in Mbale with a possible gravity scheme, whose feasibility study has been done, is not highlighted in this whole report. This is a trading center that holds about 6,000 people, it has got two primary schools, it has got five secondary schools of which two are boarding schools for girls; and you will appreciate the need for water in such an area, especially where the girl child is. We know that UPE is addressing those imbalances of the marginalized, but the girl child needs water in a special way. I am aware that the Minister of Water was in Mbale recently. I hope that he did look at Magale and that despite the presentation of the report there will be another report to say that Magale is under consideration.  

Madam Speaker, on page 20 of the report I was also disappointed to note that water for production is based on cattle density. We also raised it in our report of the Agriculture Committee, and I understand the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is the one responsible for water for production. I do not know what my fellow honourable members of this committee think, but we were also demanding for water for production where we are addressing both crops and animals.  

Finally under forestry on page 28, the committee has said, “There is no vigorous campaign to encourage tree planting and yet supply of forest products has begun to dwindle as evidenced by the soaring prices of timber.” What is the ministry doing in this particular area? I am aware that where agricultural education is concerned under PMA, something is being done on the curriculum so that students learn about issues of agriculture. What is the ministry doing about environmental studies? Do they have some strategic plan somewhere so that our populations grow up knowing about issues of environment and what they need to do about them?

Finally, on the issue meteorology; there is mention here of Uganda being a signatory to both the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and the Kyoto Protocol. There is a clear development mechanism. Madam Speaker, I demand for more information on this because it seems there is chance for this country to generate some money if only we knew what they were talking about in this particular area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.29
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for this elaborate report that has raised a wide range of issues that are pertinent to the development of our country. One puzzling question, any person who comes and visits Uganda, the question they ask is, why is Uganda poor with such natural endowments ranging from fertile soils, green vegetation, and availability of water, et cetera? This is a serious question for which I believe the committee has provoked us to look for more solutions than to the questions that are impeding our economic prosperity in this country. 

I wish not to address many issues but I will address and confine myself to a few; and one is on the National Forestry Authority. This authority, I believe, could be one of the important institutions in this country given support and empowerment to realize many uses that are beneficial to this country and its population. 

Swaziland in its geographical coverage is as big as a district in Uganda, like Masaka; that is the geographical area of Swaziland. But one third of its Gross Domestic Product is derived from forestry. Through the Commonwealth Development Co-operation’s support, the Government of Swaziland has installed factories, which are engaged in the production of pulp. We in Uganda, the President is always saying that we cannot as a country compete in this global market if we cannot add value to our products.  

I believe, Madam Speaker, that with this large land we have in Uganda, the National Forestry Authority could be given support so that they embark on planting trees that are of high economic value, like pines, which are used in the production of paper. I think our country could widen its tax base. I understand that Swaziland, under the Swazi Association for Pulp and Paper Industry, is exporting timber to the United States, Europe and Asia. Why can we not emulate this good venture and we undertake it too?  

I wish to comment on the last bulletin on the observations that were made by the committee, on page 28 that, “Funds for tree planting are only available for large farmers, ignoring small farmers.” What we should drive at as a country is to have mass production for commercial purposes, and we cannot confine ourselves to saying that we should support small farmers where we cannot even realize economies of scale in what we produce. I believe that the Forestry Department should continue to make expanded plans to plant trees on a large scale, whether it is on large or small farms, but our target is to have trees for commercial production that are marketable.  

I also wish to raise the matter, which the committee raised, in regard to electricity supply. As I mentioned, we are fully endowed with this important water resource in form of waterfalls. Madam Speaker, Uganda wasted a lot of time on the Bujagali project, which I believe by now could have started generating power for the benefit of our development. But as the committee pointed out, we hit a snag and one of the recommendations is that we should look for another sponsor to reactivate the same Bujagali Power Project. 

I propose, Madam Speaker, that Uganda, as a poor country should revisit its hydroelectric power supply. We should revisit it and look for sources that are cost effective, that are within reach of our pockets. And I would recommend to the Committee on Natural Resources that you invite His Excellency the Ugandan Ambassador to China here, China being a good example where generation of power has been done in a cost effective way. From there we could revisit the whole power generation issue in this country and we are not put in the heavily indebted situation in which we are by embarking on very expensive ventures. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.36
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sometime last year, on the Floor of this House, I asked the Front Bench a question I am going to ask again: every time they sit down to plan in their various ministries, do they have time to look at the manifesto of the chief executive of the Government to which they are loyal, that is the President of this country? Do they take the trouble to look at it and say, “As we are very busy writing our budget proposals and the rest, what did the President say?”  

Madam Speaker, I have stood on the Floor of this House many times to talk about electricity in Kibaale, and I will never get tired because it is for that reason that the people in Buyaga said, “You go, this electricity has refused to come for the last many years and I think this time you will come with it”, and the time is running out. Of all things, time is running out. If I remember the manifesto of His Excellency the President very well, he said that in extending electricity, priority would be given to connecting district headquarters. 

The district of Kibaale, which has been in existence for the last 14 years, if my memory is not very poor, has never seen electricity. When you talk about electricity in Kibaale – I was looking at some colleagues here referring to electricity at their sub-county, electricity the other site, the landing site; I was saying, “You mean we are not part of this country?” In Kibaale when you talk of electricity, it is news. My brother from Karamoja, I know your problems, possibly we could be in the same boat.  

A few months ago my colleagues and I took the trouble and we met the Minister of Energy on this issue. When I was reading this very report I was shocked because what she promised me is not here; what she promised us is not here. I was there with my colleagues, she promised that something from – she was talking of rural electrification financed by the source tariff, but it is not there -(Interjection)- -(Mr Migereko rose_)- you will give me information later on. Why do you not allow me to finish, honourable minister, because Kibaale is not here - unless you are telling me it is a typing error. (Laughter).  

When we go to page 7: “The following new schemes have been packaged for private sector bidding.” There is a word there that I have heard for the last three years I have been here, “packaged”. “We have packaged something for Kibaale, we have packaged for” - what is happening to the packages? Are they getting lost on the way? Year in, year out, packaging. This time I am packaged, and this is how – those of you who know the geography of this country and who have been to Kibaale, Kiganda, Mubende, Kyegegwa - how do you connect Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo then you come to Kibaale from Kyenjojo? Is someone really not deceiving me here? Is that proper packaging? 

Kyenjojo is on the other side and then you tell me - because I know that is the answer the minister wanted to give me. You know, we have been told a lot of lies, it is high time we were told the truth that, “You people of Kibaale should forget electricity”. That way I will go back and tell my people that, “Continue to buy generators if you can; continue to use your butadoba if you cannot”, so that we are comfortable. 

I have been promised this electricity, hon. Migereko, who has just walked away - I think he might have sensed that I was going to refer to him - went and promised electricity to the people of Kagadi. I took him there and he promised the people of Kagadi that power would be there in a very short time. He was not specific, but that was about two years ago and that power has never reached Kagadi. So, Madam Speaker, I want the minister for the good of this country –(Interjection)- I am coming to that. The minister should help us for the good of this country and for the good of the people of Kibaale, and especially my people of Buyaga who are very productive people. 

My brothers in this House, those of you who have been to Kagadi know how productive that place is. The other day the Ministry of Local Government, after looking at – you have seen how productive we are. In Kagadi town, to show how productive and hard working we are, we have over 200 generators and you say we cannot use power? Even the other good thing comes from that side. So, my appeal to the minister is that you have been packaging for me, it is high time you open the package and delivered to me.  

Of course I cannot sit down before talking about land, because that would be very bad. Madam Speaker, the other issue I have also been hearing on this Floor of the House is the land policy. It has been on for all the time since I came here. I do not know because I was not here in the Sixth Parliament, possibly it was also there. They say “the land policy is coming, the land settlement policy is coming”, but how long does a policy take to write? I do not know, I am not good at writing policies, and I am not a technical man, but how long does it take? I do not know whether it takes ten years to write a policy, or 20 years; and I am sure that is why we have got these problems in this country. That is why we have problems in a place like Kumi; that is why we had problems in Kibaale. 

People say that everybody is free to move. Yes, in your home when the mother cooks food, it means everybody is going to eat. But does everybody run to the sufuriya and begin to pick food? No, there must be some order -(Laughter)- you do not just run because the food is there. So, the land is there. Everybody can run from Mbarara, you go to Kumi; nobody cares because it is Uganda! We must have some order in this country; there must be some order. You do not move just like that, you do not just run all the way from Karamoja because there is free land in Kibaale; no. There must be some order. So, there should be a land settlement policy in this country to ensure that we are really moving very well, and show that we are a little bit orderly.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the honourable member holding the Floor. I think Article 29 of the Constitution provides that every Ugandan has a right to settle in any area in this country. Which organized way is he implying? If you are shifting to go to one area or the other, I seek a clarification on that organized way he is talking about.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. Article 30 of the same Constitution says that every Ugandan is free to access education, but you cannot just go to a classroom unless you have passed certain exams, you have paid fees and you have a school uniform. So, there are guidelines, which you must to follow in order to move. Therefore, the question of using Article 29 to invade Kibaale because there is land should not be an excuse. And when we get medicine to stop it, we should not be –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Thank you very much, colleagues, and thank you my brother from Bugangaizi. There is UPE today and all children are free to go to school. Does that mean that a child will be in Bweyogerere Primary School today and tomorrow he walks to Kinawataka and then the other day he goes to Nakasero, because there is freedom of education? (Laughter).

So, I am just appealing to my brothers on the frontbench to see how they can really expedite the land settlement policy. Land compensation in Kibaale, my brothers have noted very well, that is really going very slowly and the issues are being handled in a manner that makes my people wonder whether they will ever get their land back, or ever own that land. The speed at which these things are moving, I am not seeing progress. It might possibly be another generation, not even two generations to come because at this rate, the way government is handling it, I know my brother is saying yes but really there is need for government to see how best to move very quickly and then we see how best to own land in Kibaale.  

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of government land, which possibly I have not heard anybody mention -[Hon. Members: “The 9,000 miles?”] No, the 9,000 are not my issue. Government owns institutions, which institutions have got land. But what are we seeing today? A lot of land of government is being encroached upon and people are given land titles from the ministry, which is supposed to be protecting these things. Why this discrepancy? 

The other day I was reading of land in Nakasero, and the other day it was Butabika. What is happening? Why can we not have order in this country? When are we going to sit down and say now we are really moving in an orderly way? If government owns a piece of land and then tomorrow the land is sold off in the name of investment, and investment which has not been explained, really I think this country is not heading for good things.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and hope my brothers and sisters on the front bench are going to help me see how best I will go back to tell the people of Kibaale that, “This government, which you have been supporting for the last many years, which you have been giving 96 percent of your votes, cares for you and is really willing to serve you”. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Business Committee of this House had originally planned that we work throughout Monday to Saturday. However, I am disappointed that the same Members of the Business Committee have gone ahead to organize workshops. Today at lunchtime I was told that four committees will not be available tomorrow, and yet we had hoped that we would do a bit more work tomorrow. But if I do not have four committees tomorrow, it means I will not have a quorum. So, this level of laissez faire, I do not know how we are going to handle it because the same people in the Business Committee with whom we agreed are the ones who have run away from my plenary. 

Therefore, I will adjourn this House to 9.00 O’clock on Monday because tomorrow you have given yourselves the day off -(Interjections)- what do we do tomorrow? Do we tell them that they must be here so that we continue with business?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is very good news for me –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, Parliamentary business takes precedence over any other issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shall we then do with those who are here?

MR ODIT: This morning I heard from the Chairman of Parliamentary Commission that he was ready with his report, and he wanted even to submit this afternoon, that is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. If it is ready, why can we not make use of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not that we are not ready. My worry is, will I have a quorum to do my work tomorrow? That is my interest.

MR ODIT: You will have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay 10.00 O’clock tomorrow it is then. We will meet at 10.00 O’clock tomorrow, complete the Natural Resources report and deal with the other reports -(Interjection)- should they be directed to come back?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I will direct the Clerk to please make an announcement to bring back everybody who has gone to other places. So, the House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow morning. Thank you very much.
 
(The House rose at 6.49 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 27 August 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)



