Tuesday, 26  August 2003  

Parliament met at 10.33 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is just to remind you that we adjusted our programme so that we could sit in the morning and in the afternoon simply because we wanted to complete this budgeting process on time. 

According to the Budget Act, we are supposed to conclude the committee reports by 31st of this month. I am happy that we have tried, although it is inconveniencing you. Let us keep time so that we finish this process and then we shall go back to our usual time of sitting in the afternoon. We are remaining with four ministries. We shall also deal with the necessary bills that go with the budget.  After that, we shall resume our normal sitting time in the afternoon.  

MR AGGREY AWORI: Mr Speaker, regarding the plenary and committee meetings, I note with great concern that sometimes when the Plenary is sitting, some of us are required to be attending committee meetings.  

Is it possible to request chairpersons of committees that in mornings when we are meeting here, they allow us to come and attend? For instance, at the moment my committee, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, is meeting. So I am torn between the two.  Please advise the chairpersons of committees to allow us attend the Plenary in the mornings for the rest of the period.

THE SPEAKER: Well, those committees, which are sitting now, did not act fast when dealing with the policy statements. When this session started, the Business Committee sat and we gave you the whole month of July to sit as committees and have your reports ready. I think some committees were not able to finalize their reports and that is why they are sitting now. They are not supposed to be sitting now.  

The Business Committee had actually decided to forget about the reports of those particular committees, so that we progress with the Committee of Supply without their reports. This is, of course, history; even in the Sixth Parliament, these committees used not to be on time. 

I think let us give them time because we are supposed to finish these reports by Thursday. Next year, please let those committees - I do not want to name them - be on time like other committees.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the National Agricultural Research Policy, for record purposes. 

I also beg your indulgence to make some remarks. A number of policies are laid on Table as I am doing now, but naturally Parliament does not have the opportunity to discuss them. Once you formulate a draft policy, discuss it with the sessional committee, go to Cabinet and it is approved, it becomes a policy. By laying it on the Table, much as we have also circulated copies you cannot be sure that every Member of Parliament has read and internalised it.  

In light of this, I would like to say that the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA) has generated a number of policies in different components. And this was our focus during the general debate regarding the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President and the general debate on the budget. 

It is in that respect that I beg that on Tuesday, 9th next month, we are given an opportunity outside Parliament to meet all Members of Parliament at International Conference Centre, so that we can present various components of the PMA. They can then go out when they have internalised it.  

In the committee’s report, which was adopted here, they had suggested that we should have a debate on PMA. But with the nature of our debate here, it is difficult for the minister every time to stand up and make clarifications. There, I will be with my officials and it will give us the opportunity to answer all the questions. 

I, therefore, beg that Tuesday, 9 September 2003 be assigned by the Business Committee for Members of Parliament to go to the International Conference Centre to discuss PMA and the agricultural sector in its entirety.  

THE SPEAKER: So in a way you are inviting Parliament to participate.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: With your permission, Mr Speaker, I formally invite the Members of Parliament for a one-day workshop at International Conference Centre to discuss PMA and the agricultural sector in general.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you will agree with me that this is a very important programme as reflected in the kind of debates we had on the President’s State of the Nation Address and the Budget. I think we should go and participate together with other stakeholders. Therefore, I accept this invitation. We should make sure that we do not put any other programme on that day so that all of us can participate in this discussion. It is something that affects the majority of our people.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister for laying the document on the Table.

The Minister raised an issue of these policies not being debated. I wish suggest that in addition to the policy documents and any other documents that he gives, he makes what they call “policy briefs”, which are one or two page summaries of the pertinent issues. Busy people like us would get the gist of what is contained in the policy document from these briefs. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think that is for the Leader of Government Business to answer. I think it is directed to all ministries, not only this one. It seems he agrees with you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I sometimes need a bit of reflection before I readily say yes. The proposal would seem to be reasonable, but I shall reflect on it and be advised also by my technical staff before I finally say yes or no. However, it appears to be reasonable but subject to further consultation. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome the decision by the Minister to lay on Table the National Agricultural Research Policy for consideration. But I have trouble trying to understand how Parliament is going to move to the International Conference Centre and receive the programmes under Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA) in line with a recommendation, which was approved here. 

The Minister should treat that workshop as a process, which will be able to lead to what will be brought to the House. Otherwise, if it is considered as a response to our recommendation, it might be inappropriate. Therefore, the Minister should clarify that straightaway, before we can accept the invitation. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: I think the chairperson and the minister can work together.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I think we have no differences.  This is a consensus-building workshop and it will not remove any discussion arising from the report made thereafter. I have no objection.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:


i)THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FOR THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND  INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/2004

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: Your report will be part of the Hansard. So you can only give us a summary so that we can have a brief debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, following the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech, you may have realized that we need to develop a growth intervention, and we can do that through the tourism, trade and industry sector.  

The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the Financial Year 2003/2004 in accordance with Rule 124 and 154 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, and Article 90(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  

As you have requested, Mr Chairman, I will give a brief synopsis of the report. On page 1 of this report, we give the mode of operation and on page 2 we spell out the mandate of the Ministry. It is necessary to emphasize that this ministry was formed out of a merger of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Ministry of Co-operatives and Marketing, Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Industry and Technology.  

The mandate of the Ministry is, therefore, a consolidation of the respective mandates of the former ministries, which are still relevant. I could summarize the mandate as follows: “to formulate and support strategies, plans and programmes that promote and ensure expansion and diversification of tourism, trade, cooperatives, environmentally sustainable industrialization, appropriate technology, conservation and preservation of other tradable national products to generate wealth for poverty eradication and benefit the country socially and economically.” 

In our observations, we realized that in as much as the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is supposed to be a core ministry, it has not achieved that status and has not been accorded the attention that it deserves. 

There has been continuous under funding of the Ministry. For example, this year the Ministry’s wage to recurrent ratio is 1 to 2.5. That means it has no operational funds. For every shilling, there is an operational fund of 2.5, which is very low compared to other ministries.  

There has been an impending merger of the Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB), Uganda Tourist Board (UTB) and Uganda Investment Authority (UIA). We were informed that the study carried out by the Ministry of Finance estimated the merger to cost US$4 million for the first three years. 

There have been two studies on this merger. One study was by the Ministry of Finance and the report was presented in May 2000. The other one was by SPEED Project, funded by USAID, which was presented in the year 2002 in March.  

Uganda is to host the first Annual Tourism Investment Summit in October 2003. The Ministry requires Shs 300 million to host this investment summit. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not provided the funds.  

Apart from the Tourism Policy, which was recently passed by Cabinet, the other key policies that are required for the Ministry to function effectively are not yet in place. Do not forget we are looking at the policy statement. 

The Industrial Policy is just in the final draft and is due for submission to Cabinet. We are told consultations on the Wildlife Policy are being made with stakeholders. We are told the first draft of the Trade Policy has been prepared and consultations with stakeholders are underway. The Co-operatives Policy was sent to Cabinet and brought back and is now in its final draft.  

The committee noted with concern that the Ministry is taking too long to develop policies for its key sectors. 

The committee visited the Ministry and observed that the resource centre in the Ministry links up with Uganda Bureau of Statistics and corrects, analyses, processes and later disseminates national and international data and information on the various sub-sectors. Such information is very vital for rational decision-making by the different stakeholders. 

The committee noted that the AGOA Secretariat is located in the President’s Office as opposed to being in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.  

We also noted that the mandate of the Protected Areas Management and Sustainable Use (PAMSU) project attached to the Ministry is achieving sustainable and cost effective management of Uganda wildlife and cultural resources. The committee, however, raised the following concern: 

• The need to ensure sustainability of PAMSU work and other projects in the Ministry when the donor funding is eventually phased out. It should be recalled that last year we recommended budget support for this sector as opposed to project support.

The committee noted the importance of the functions of the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry in the bid to develop our economy through involvement of the private sector. However, we noted that there is duplication of roles with those of UEPB and there is no clear operational linkage between the two. 

Honourable members, you may wish to know that this body was set up by an Act of Parliament, but it is being neglected. There was even efforts to put up another body when this one is still there.

Government has not paid enough attention to small-scale industries. As a result, many of them have collapsed or are on the verge of collapsing. You may recall we had the Uganda Small-scale Industries Association, which was serving as an incubator for small-scale industries. 

The committee recommended that the Ministry should forward its case by expeditiously formulating clear policies for its sector with the objectives that relate to their output/outcomes. 

The Ministry should make an investment plan with a target of uplifting its status, and it should raise the profile of tourism, trade and industry in government.

The impending merger of Uganda Export Promotion Board, Uganda Tourist Board and Uganda Investment Authority should be executed in a cost effective manner as soon as possible. The three organisations should be informed of any development as they arise, to enable them plan for the future.

The committee recommends that the money required to host the First Annual Tourism Investment Summit in October 2003 be got from the strategic intervention fund.

The Ministry should also allocate resources to areas that will revitalize the private sector. We emphasized the merger because of the consequences the delay is causing.

The committee also recommended that a comprehensive functional analysis of the Ministry and the statutory institutions under it be expeditiously carried out in order to review its mandate and structure, focusing on its institutional and human resource capacity.  

The committee realized that under the present state, the sector cannot deliver the required outcomes because it has got very low staffing, for example. This ministry has failed to attract high calibre staff because of under funding and misplaced manpower. We thought unless there is a functional analysis, the situation will not improve. 

Last year we pointed out that the Ministry does not have a planning department. Now the Ministry is trying to recruit, but the committee recommends that we should stop recruiting or confirming the present members until a proper functional analysis has been carried out. 

We also requested the Ministry to carry out a cost benefit analysis on international obligations so that subscriptions are made to those organisations that are highly beneficial to our country. In most cases, the contributions we make are far less than the benefits we get from these organisations. However, because of lack of a cost benefit analysis, the contributions are not forthcoming.  

We also recommended that the projects meant to be based in the Ministry of Tourism Trade and Industry but are located in other ministries, especially Ministry of Finance, should revert to their mother ministry.

The Ministry should expand its resource centre in order to develop it into a one-stop centre for information on tourism, trade and industry. 

In other ministries they have got funding for other activities. We thought this ministry, among other activities, should support the Uganda Co-operative Alliance. 

There should be a plan to reinvigorate the small-scale industries. 

The committee went on to look at sector by sector: 

Tourism Sector:

The tourism sector embraces diverse services – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, shouldn’t we go to recommendations and observations because members have this report and they are supposed to have read it. However, you can put stress points, which you want to emphasize. 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under the tourism sector, we made the following observations:

1. Tourism is now a leading foreign exchange earner for the country. Despite that, the sector has not received adequate funding from government.
 
2. Accommodation facilities all over Uganda are not classified. The committee was informed that a criterion had been made to standardize facilities of the entire East African Community (EAC) and is awaiting approval by the Governing Council of the EAC.

Recommendations:

1. The Ministry should re-package Uganda’s image abroad in order to boost tourism.

2. Tourism should be classified as an export.

3.The criteria for classification of accommodation facilities should be done as soon as possible to enable Uganda to compete internationally.

4. The professional tourism school in Jinja should be managed by the stakeholders in the sector and supported by government in a bid to improve its output. 

Mr Chairman, on this issue we know there is a course in Makerere University on tourism, but we noted that this course is under the Geography Department and it covers mostly botany and zoology whereas 60 percent of tourism has to do with hotels. 

This hospitality industry is missing and most of the graduates do not get jobs because of the wrong orientation. They have to go back and cover other courses. So, they are doing a simple thing in a complicated way; they spend three years very busy doing nothing and then they go back and cover another course. We thought this was very unfortunate. 

In most countries, tourism schools are actually under business institutions. Because this is a service industry, it should be under business schools. But in Makerere University, it is under geography and people are teaching only what they know and the graduates do not benefit from the course. 

We suggest that trade schools should be under the respective trades, because we have seen that these schools are under-utilised and the products are not useful to the sector. So, the sector is suffering from all corners, from the under-funding and from the academic side.

5. The Ministry should capitalise on and promote Uganda’s unique tourism features where it has higher comparative advantage, for example, the mountain gorillas in Bwindi and Mgahinga. 

6. The Ministry should be clear on how it intends to promote private sector investment in tourism. You need a strong team to promote this one. In modern methods of management, you need people who can interpret models, not only reading a few paragraphs but also interpreting models and developing proposals.

The Trade Sector:	

The committee made several observations under the trade sector. We commended the Ministry for its achievements in light of the numerous limitations faced in terms of budget allocation vis-à-vis its broad mandate. Nevertheless, we observed that the following priority issues are not sufficiently addressed and they are crucial to the successful implementation of the ministry’s mandate:

(a) Mainstreaming trade in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP).

(b) Inter-Institutional Trade Committee (IITC).

(c) Developing a negotiating agenda for all agreements.

(d) Coordination with foreign missions and districts.

Mainstreaming Trade Under PEAP:

We know PEAP is a long-term development framework for Uganda. While PEAP recognises the role of economic growth and structural transformation in eradicating poverty in Uganda, it hardly addresses trade concerns. 

Furthermore, a trade policy is essential in providing a framework to define Uganda’s priorities in both trade policy and promotion. With support from the European Union and the Department for International Development (DFID), the Ministry has received preliminary inputs to the policy process.

The Inter-Institutional Trade Committee (IITC):

This is a forum, which brings together the major actors in trade policy from both the public and private sector. This body was initially established to cover World Trade Organisation issues only. But now it has been recognised that the terms of reference for IITC need to be expanded to cover all trade concerns and not just those related to the World Trade Organisation.

The problem is that the IITC has no legal footing and as a result has no budget allocation and hence its deliberations and decisions do not carry official authority. The committee noted that in the attempt to formalise the IITC, the Ministry has, as part of the WTO implementation bill, proposals to establish the IITC as a statutory body with a mission to implement the WTO agreement.

Developing a Negotiating Agenda:

As Uganda works towards integration into a global economy, it is a signatory to several regional and multilateral agreements. The ministry is responsible for this activity especially because of the increasing number of agreements that Uganda has to implement.

Co-ordinating with Foreign Missions and Districts:

There is still a co-ordination gap between the Ministry and foreign missions and districts with regard to trade. This limits awareness on the trade policy and de-emphasizes export promotion. For that matter, we recommended that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should foster improvement of the profile of trade in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan.

Recommendations:

The IITC should be formalised through an executive circular with clear guidelines. It should be divided into two levels: the ministerial, which constitutes various ministries and is chaired by the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, and the technical level, which constitutes the technical staff of different ministries.  

The Ministry should indicate: 

a) A negotiating agenda for each of the agreements that Uganda is a signatory to. Honourable members, you may realise that these negotiations have cost implications. So, if they negotiate without a clear agenda, the country might end up incurring costs where we have failed to meet the requirements of the agreements. So, we have to be careful about this issue. It is very crucial, and we can easily over commit ourselves.

b) Indicate deliberate efforts to foster acquisition of negotiation skills. For example, they need to introduce in our curricular a component of negotiation at both institutions and tertiary levels. We noted that when people go out for international negotiations, they end up being tricked. Some of them, at the crucial time of taking a decision and consensus, are invited for parties and they end up missing out and getting a raw deal just because of lack of skills.  

The other teams are very tricky; when they go to negotiate, they negotiate up to 3.00 a.m. and when our people are asleep, they make a decision. So, with all these tricks, people have to be a bit trained. Not all our people necessarily, but some people. They have tricks –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then I think we should give them a cup of coffee so that they do not sleep.

MR MUGAMBE: Those people have trained themselves to sleep for four hours a day because they have been trained in negotiations. For us, we need to sleep for about eight to twelve hours a day.

c) The ministry should indicate a framework of involving key stakeholders in formulating the negotiating agenda for each of the agreements that Uganda is a signatory to.  

d) There is need to build a core team of consistent negotiators, and the process should be facilitated. Instead of having one person in Geneva or New York for two years and then he is withdrawn, we should have consistency. The two areas are Geneva and Brussels, but of course, the negotiations might be in New York, for example. But if you keep on changing them, definitely you are not building capacity there, let alone here in the Ministry.  

e) The Ministry should also indicate a high level consultative mechanism that links with Parliament and Cabinet. Honourable members, you realise that in as much as there are going to be negotiations in Cancun, most of us do not know what the position for Uganda is. We do not know what is going to be agreed upon. Maybe we are not even interested. So, a high level consultative mechanism that links Parliament and Cabinet should be put in place so that we work as a corporate team.

f) The Ministry should also have a programme to sensitise the public including MPs, the private sector, civil society and other arms of government, on key aspects of agreements. It is very important that we do this.  

The Ministry needs to develop a more effective linkage with trade related staff in overseas missions and at district level. This should entail:

(a) A detailed review of trade policy and export promotion work for overseas missions.

(b) Exploration of how district trade officers can be integrated into the wider system. 

(c) Developing momentum, drawing all other elements together and consulting widely to develop a comprehensive trade policy for Uganda.

The Ministry should present proposals on critical issues that need to be supported in the trade sector, and a plan on how the Ministry is to be fully engaged in the current review process. Examples of critical areas to be addressed in the short-term include: 

• Linking trade and poverty. Maybe honourable members know that 70 percent of our GDP is related to trade. 

• How to meaningfully engage the private sector. We are told that the economy should be private sector driven.  

• Internal restructuring within the Ministry to help it deliver its mandate. That is a recommendation we underlined. There should be internal restructuring so that we have people who can deliver, who can interpret models. When there is a functional analysis, they will know where it is necessary.

• Co-ordination throughout all arms of government. We realise that there is lack of co-ordination in some areas. Some activities are carried out in one area, others in another and yet we should have one co-ordinating centre for these trade issues.  

• Priorities in the various regional and multilateral trade agreements to which Uganda is a signatory.

The Ministry should revisit the draft bill on the implementation of WTO and come up with a consolidated law on all trade matters. Instead of providing a bill on WTO, please come up with a law that embraces all trade matters. That is the recommendation of the committee.

The Wildlife Sector:

The committee observed that the diversity of this sector is a strength and an opportunity, which should be enforced by the Ministry in identifying new products on the market that can be exploited. Such products include medicinal plants, wildlife ranches and restocking of wild animals in some areas.

The Ministry should also consider giving concessions of some parts of the parks to the private sector. This is a very important area. We realised that there are some parks where the animals have reduced and they need restocking, like in Kidepo National Park. Those who have been there have counted say only six lions, and they spend money to maintain those lions. We need more and so many other animals.

The Co-operatives Sector:

You may realise that this is a productive sector, which falls under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

Observations:

1. The committee observed that the problems of understaffing and under-funding of the Cooperative Development Department in the Ministry still hinders activities of the co-operatives sector.  Maybe here we should report that the staff increased from two to five this year. So, at least there is some improvement. That is, staff to manage the whole country.

Mr Chairman, maybe I should point out that when they were restructuring this ministry, there was a wrong assumption that since it is going to be private sector driven, we should have very thin staff. They forgot that government has the role to organise the private sector, and you need a more technical team to organise it. This is why we are recommending the restructuring and functional analysis in this ministry.  

2. Kigumba Cooperative College, which is run by the Ministry of Education and Sports, is poorly managed and under-utilised yet it has a lot of capacity and potential to provide training to the masses.

3. The Uganda Co-operative Alliance (UCA) is in the process of formulating a paper on the factors that led to the decline of co-operatives from the 1970s to 2000.

Recommendations:

1. More staff should be recruited into the Cooperative Development Department of the Ministry and its funding should be increased. But that is after the functional analysis.

2. The Government should ensure that Kigumba Cooperative College is upgraded to cater for the success of this sector and cooperatives should be empowered to manage it. We are recommending that trade schools be managed under their respective trade areas.

3. Government, with the help of the Uganda Co-operative Alliance, should identify the issues that led to the failure of the co-operatives so that the same mistakes are not repeated in the new co-operatives initiative.

4. The process of designing the master plan on cooperatives should be expedited so that it is passed into law.

Manufacturing and Processing:

We made the following observations:

1. In the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2003/04, the Minister of Finance announced a 50 percent tax on polythene bags with an aim of decreasing environmental degradation. While this improves on the environment, the committee notes that nothing has been done about polythene bags imported into the country in large numbers. 

The Uganda Investment Authority and the Uganda Manufacturing Association informed the committee that local manufacturers have been severely affected and rendered incompetent because of the high tax on the widely used packaging material. Items from outside are coming with polythene bags, but for us here we are not allowed to use them. We are using them, but at high cost. So, the packaging of our materials makes our products uncompetitive. Maybe we shall come up with recommendations.

2. Despite efforts made to curb smuggling by the Anti-Smuggling Unit of the Uganda Revenue Authority, so many products, especially cigarettes, are still smuggled into the country. These are hurting our local industries.

3. Electricity tariffs are too high, at least for the industries. While load shedding has declined, volatility in power supply is destructive. It damages machines in many industries and affects production. Here we were given the example of a steel industry in Jinja. They say they cannot even smelt whatever they have to smelt because of the cost of the power.

4. Sixty percent of the industries in Uganda are located in Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe.  

5. The cost of finance for manufacturers is too high due to the fact that they acquire loans at commercial rates.

6. Railway transport in Uganda is not well developed. This increases transport expenses for the manufacturers of products.

Recommendations:

1. The issue of the 50 percent tax on polythene bags should be revisited. Government should instead provide more environmental education to the public and provide subsidies to industries that carry out recycling. We realise there are some areas where they can recycle and people really take efforts to make sure they deposit their polythene bags. 

2. The Ministry should always set standards for processing for the whole economy. 

3. The Ministry should develop a legal framework for Export Processing Zones (EPZ). You may realise we have EPZs in the budget speech but there is no policy; there are no guidelines on how these Export Processing Zones should operate. In any case, Export Processing Zones are very good for developed economies. For us, we should revisit the small-scale industries because that is where we are as of now.

4. Anti-smuggling bodies should be strengthened to effectively stamp out smuggling.  

5. Government should further revise electricity tariffs downwards where it is used as a raw material. That is, where electricity cost has a multiplier effect.  

6. More emphasis should be put on developing the railway system to ease transport costs for manufacturers.  

PERFORMANCE OF STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS

Uganda National Bureau of Standards:

Observations:

1. At present, Uganda National Bureau of Standards has no Board and none has been appointed since 2002 when the previous Board expired. As a result, the Minister acts on its behalf.

2. Staff capacity in the bureau is grossly inadequate thus it operates at 60 percent of its technical capacity to meet the required standards. The committee sited the examples of Standards Development Department, which has only six technical staff who are supposed to check standards in the entire country.

3. The bureau is very poorly funded. For instance, ever since it was set up in 1983, almost 20 years down the road the bureau has never got a development budget. Worse still, its recurrent expenditure approved by government reduces every year. 

4. Uganda National Bureau of Standards still does not have a home of its own. This makes its operations very expensive.

5. The Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act was passed in 1993 but with globalisation, the business climate has changed a great deal and the penalties set at the time are no longer deterrent.

The committee commends the bureau for its effort to curb counterfeits through its programme code named “Operation Q”. It is however noted that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is financially constrained and as a result cannot effectively carry out its mandate. 

I would have wished the Ministry of Finance had committed itself to extending Shs 40m per month to help facilitate the bureau’s activities all over the country. But so far, this money has not been forthcoming. In the latest release, instead of Shs 40 million the bureau received only Shs 6 million from the Ministry of Finance, and that is for the whole country. 

At the moment, Uganda National Bureau of Standards is operating at the level of one third of what they are ordinarily supposed to do. This creates ground for unscrupulous importers and traders to take advantage of these loopholes.

6. The committee was concerned about the public outcry on the mode of inspection of weights and measures by Uganda National Bureau of Standards.  Additionally, the committee observed that in many instances, members of the public are overcharged and in other cases traders are not cooperative with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. 

Here, you may realise that the inspection is supposed to be carried out by an official from Uganda National Bureau of Standards and there should be a mechanic to accompany him. But in most cases, it is a two-in-one issue; the inspector is the mechanic and the whole process becomes a bit tricky.

Recommendations:

The committee recommended as follows:

1. Two years is a very long time for a critical body to function without a Board. The Minister should urgently appoint a new Board for Uganda National Bureau of Standards.  

2. Uganda National Bureau of Standards should re-examine its policy environment and its stakeholders. Nevertheless, government should avail more funds to Uganda National Bureau of Standards to enable it smoothly carry out its day-to-day operations. 

You know, once Uganda National Bureau of Standards fails to operate, our industries can collapse. It can affect our industries and can even affect the traders. So, it is very important that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is well financed.

3. The number of staff of Uganda National Bureau of Standards should be increased. 

4. The Ministry should step up efforts to locate a permanent home for Uganda National Bureau of Standards. This is very difficult, but maybe the Ministry should lobby to ensure that Ministry of Finance provides money for that. 

5. The Ministry should expedite the process of amending the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act, 1993.  

6. The population should be sensitised on what counterfeits are, and how to guard against them.  This will entail: 

• Forming strong consumer groups. 

• Highlighting areas where the law is weak and drafting a requisite to the legislation.

• Facilitating a rapid action team. 

• Linking with anti-counterfeit policies and measures taken at the regional and international level. 

• In partnership with the private sector, sensitise manufacturers, traders and consumers on the dangers of counterfeits and how to mitigate against them.  

7. The Ministry should also provide a strategy to deal with counterfeits at political and inter-ministerial level and indicate the resource requirement for this. 

Honourable members, you may not know how serious this is. In many cases, houses have burnt down because people have used the wrong type of wire. There are so many accidents that have occurred because of these counterfeits. It is not a simple thing. It is a cost to the economy; it is more expensive than the money that we are putting in.

Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI):

There are two observations we made about this institute: 

1. The Executive Director of Uganda Industry Research Institute (UIRI) has been acting for a very long time. To-date, there is no substantive Executive Director and therefore, no security of tenure. 

The honourable Minister informed us that he appointed one, yet that person appeared on another committee for AGOA Secretariat. When we asked him, he said he does not know about it and it seems he is not interested. So, he is just hoodwinking us or playing tricks. We think that place is still vacant. 

2. The technologies being developed in UIRI at the moment are not known. Honourable members, people may not know the importance of Uganda Industrial Research Institute, but this should be the incubator to power industries here. We should be able to take off and go into industrialisation through the Uganda Industrial Research Institute.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends as follows:

1. The substantive Executive Director should be appointed to run the institute. 

2. The manpower in Uganda Industrial Research Institute should be directed towards developing market-oriented products.  

3. Uganda Industrial Research Institute should be strengthened to deal with industrial production and value addition especially in agro-processing.  

4. Under the industrial development policy, the importance of Uganda Industrial Research Institute should be well emphasised. This is under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Industry and technology are here, but you find that technology is being handled elsewhere and the people do not know the importance of the Uganda Industrial Research Institute. We say its importance should be well emphasised in our economy.

Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC):

Observation:

The committee observed that MTAC is doing a good job. However, it needs to work more closely with the private sector, for instance, the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda, and Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

Uganda Wildlife Authority:

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the committee noted that Uganda Wildlife Authority is responsible for the management of 10 national parks, 12 wildlife reserves, seven wildlife sanctuaries, and provides guidance over the management of five community wildlife areas.

Observations:

1. The committee observed that there appears to be a management problem since UWA is not able to generate enough revenue to meet its operating costs and has been unable to develop and diversify the tourism product.

2. The committee further observed that UWA is well positioned, given the international goodwill to contribute to wildlife conservation.

3. Uganda Wildlife Authority continues to receive wage subvention and counterpart funding from government for its projects. However, the commitment for both the wage subvention and counterpart funding has not been fully met the last two years. As a result, UWA has had to scale down the level of its operation and carry out minimum maintenance of the infrastructure investment at Murchison Falls National Park.

Recommendations:

1. Uganda Wildlife Authority should sort out its management contradictions in order to position itself to effectively sort out tourism problems. The activities of UWA have a direct effect on tourism. 

2. Government should fulfil its commitment and counterpart fund the projects in UWA, in order to enable it to smoothly carry out its operations.

3. Uganda Wildlife Authority should work with UIRI to diversify the tourism product and widen the genetic base, which will be a basis for developing industrial products in future.

4. Donor funds should be aimed at budget support so that all areas that affect development of the sector are catered for. 

The members came to this conclusion because they know what the project implementation unit did to ministries. They had one side, which was well funded, and the main ministry was starved. Sincerely, people lost morale and when retrenchment came, those people who had lost morale were the first victims. And those in the projects, who were enjoying, had to take up their jobs. So, we thought budget support would address such issues.

Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB):

The following observations were made:

1. The committee strongly observed that UEPB has got a dysfunctional structure as a result of the long drawn and lingering uncertainty about its status in the institutional framework to support export promotion and development in the country. 

As the implementation of the merger of UEPB with UIA and UTB stalls, the budget provisions for UEPB have remained inadequate to achieve any meaningful and sustainable impact.

2. More so, as a result of the failed merger, donor funding to UEPB is not forthcoming. For instance, the committee learnt that UEPB risks losing a grant of US$5 million because in addition to a commitment of counterpart funding from government, the donors need to be sure of the exact status of UEPB before they release the money.

3. For the last three years, UEPB has received only 31 percent of its budget request. Under the circumstances, UEPB has not been able to operate a rational structure nor has it been able to attract and retain the level of quality personnel critical for its task. 

4. As a result of the above, there is no clearly defined job description for the staff. There are serious job overlaps and duplication. The salary structure is inconsistent and there is no staff motivation. Thus, many of the qualified staff have to look for greener pastures elsewhere. 
 
Mr Chairman, this Board does not export each and everything. It only exports the non-traditional items. It does not even export; it is a catalyst for non-traditional exports. Those items exclude coffee, cotton, fish, tobacco; all the 3 Ts and Cs are not there. Even vanilla, you might be surprised, is not here. So, this board only promotes one eighth of our exports.

Recommendations:

The committee therefore recommends that:
1. Government expeditiously implements the merger of UIA, UEPB and UTB.

2. Government should adequately resource export promotion, wherever it will be.

Uganda Tourist Board (UTB):

The Uganda Tourist Board has not been officially informed about the progress of the merger. Due to uncertainty, the delayed merger has affected the performance of UTB as it has affected the other board.
  
Recommendation:

1. The merger should be expedited and the Ministry of Finance should officially communicate the current position on the merger to the Uganda Tourist Board.

We realised that investment follows tourism and trade exports. That means if we want any intervention, we should merge these bodies. Once these three bodies are merged, we will reduce on the management costs because the donors do not support bodies, they support activities.  

What we want is a well-coordinated, well-managed body so that people can function. Under the present situation, they cannot deliver. A person earning Shs 200,000 per month cannot market Uganda. He has no strength to market Uganda because he is lowest paid and he is not certain of his job. No wonder some of these people who are serving on these boards are retired people, not because they are tired but we need to reinvigorate the sector. 

Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC):

The committee took note and commended UWEC for the following: 

• UWEC has featured prominently in international media and is rapidly taking a place as a sanctuary worth visiting in Africa.

·	UWEC receives about two and half times more visitors than all the national parks put together. Over the years, UWEC has evolved into the most frequented wildlife destination in Uganda. The combined body, from the other studies, was called the investment promotion division of the Ministry of Trade.

Recommendations:

• Replicas of the centre should be set up in other parts of the country. 

• The centre should explore working partnerships with traditional clans.

Budgetary proposals:

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the committee recommended the following amount for approval for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the Financial Year 2003/04. These figures are obtained from the Budget Estimates page R109 to R113: 

• For the recurrent expenditure, and this figure includes the addendum from the Ministry of Finance, Shs 3,501,043,000.

• Development expenditure for Vote 105, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry (between page D122 and D129 of the Budget Estimates) Shs 40,918,291,000.  

Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much chairperson and members of the committee for the report. 

MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the chairman and his team for this very good report. I have just few observations to make. 

My first observation is on the merger of Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Tourist Board and Uganda Export Promotion Board. I think we need the minister responsible for this to come out openly and tell us whether there is any conviction from government to have these bodies merged. Because the way it looks, there is not conviction.  

On my own part, I do not support this merger. I would support a merger of regulatory bodies. For instance, I was happy when the chairman of the Committee on Works said there should be a body to regulate surface transport. Like we have got Civil Aviation Authority, which regulates air transport, we need a body to regulate land, water and other surface transport matters and railways. But to merge implementing bodies is very difficult; they lack focus.  

Uganda Investment Authority is charged with the responsibility of investment promotion and facilitation. Very soon, I understand, we may have Uganda Investment Authority also regulating export-processing zones. Now, if you put this and that together, it becomes a nightmare. It cannot work.

Two, Mr Chairman, I was happy about the observations of the committee on negotiation of agreements. However, I wish the committee had come out to say how many agreements Uganda has entered into, bilateral or multilateral agreements, to promote investments and trade. 

We also have a shortfall in this area because when some agreements are entered into, they are not incorporated in our national laws as required under our constitutional provisions. A good example is the Cotonou Partnership Agreement, which was signed in 2002 in Benin. Where is it? That agreement is supposed to regulate trade between Europe and us. When we talk about Everything But Arms, how are you going to achieve that if we do not even know what the agreement is talking about?

Finally, Mr Chairman, I would also want to know to what extent we have complied with WTO. When you look at the Trade-Related Investments Measures (TRIM) Agreement within WTO, we are supposed to have complied with certain provisions. I would have been happier if the committee came out with the extent to which we have complied. 

Can we, for instance, apply the provisions in WTO that allow Uganda to derogate from certain provisions of the WTO simply because developing countries are given a chance to do that if they can only prove that they are doing so in the interest of economic development? But just to be told that this is a difficult agreement and we need a bill to come out with a law to implement it, I do not understand. Because we are party to it, we are members of the WTO and we are supposed to comply. So, to what extent have we complied?  Thank you.

MR AMON KABAREEBE MUZOORA  (Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee that has come out with this very good report. But it is painful on the other hand because of the revelations we are getting from them. Some may not be directly a consequence of this committee and performance of the Ministry, but a general trend that has affected our development in general.

For example, on page 17 he mentions something about strengthening the anti-smuggling unit so that they can curb smuggling. They should have instead said that a study should be commissioned by Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to find out the general reasons why smuggling has become paramount. 

There could be several other reasons why there is smuggling. For example, in Uganda you find that there are high transport costs, which are as a result of high prices in fuel. So, you will find that smuggling of fuel is taking place on Lake Victoria because fuel is actually cheaper in Kenya and Tanzania than in Uganda. 

Sometime back we were convinced by government that at least the price of fuel in Uganda is less than that of Kenya. But the information we have is that actually, our fuel price is exorbitant. So, unless you harmonize the prices of fuel in Kenya and Uganda, smuggling – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for yielding the Floor. As a person who comes from the constituency on the border, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the difference in fuel prices between the Kenyan and Ugandan sides is only Shs 300 per litre. Obviously, all of us on the Ugandan side buy fuel on the Kenyan side. (Laughter)

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Thank you very much for that information. I think, Mr Chairman and honourable members, you can see that even an honourable member has revealed that he can also smuggle because the price is high. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: When you go to a foreign country using your own vehicle or system of transport, and you comply with all the regulations, and you consume fuel on the other side and then you come back, you have not smuggled! (Laughter)

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Thank you very much for that information again. 

In Rwanda, for example, when you enter with your personal vehicle, you indicate how much fuel you have and they take note of that. When you are coming back, you make sure the fuel, which brings you back, takes you to the nearest petrol station in Uganda. You cannot bring more than 100 litres from Rwanda. I am trying to say bring this out in order to help my colleague to know that smuggling really takes place politely.  

Mr Chairman, another problem could be caused by high electricity tariffs. We also have a poor community, generally, which looks for cheap goods. Where there are cheap goods, this poor man will definitely go for them. 

We need the Ministry to intervene and liase with the Ministry of Finance to see how the community can be improved in terms of wealth, and where the ministry can assist us in poverty eradication schemes.  

I am also looking at high taxes at customs. You will note that people are obliged to smuggle because of the high taxes that are charged.  

Recently, a gentleman was arrested having smuggled 500 mobile phones through the airport. He had connived with the officials there. But when you look at the type of phones he had, each phone had a tax on it of about Shs 150,000. These are some of the expensive phones and they are expensive because of such taxes. So, somebody can easily smuggle so that he can come and compete with other traders in Kampala.  

I want also to comment on the high interest rates in the commercial banks. I do not know what Ministry of Finance can do to intervene and make sure that our people down on the ground can receive money at a cheaper interest rate. Otherwise, they will definitely increase their prices. 

I do not know how the ministries of Trade and of Finance can intervene to see that the interest rates are curbed. Why does the Ministry of Finance not also assist us in controlling the high interest rates the way Bank of Uganda is assisting us in controlling the dollar? 

I want also to look at lack of government intervention on all the above. They keep a deaf ear. We talked about this in the last financial year; we talked about fuel, and I gave an example where a bunch of Matooke in Kakigani costs Shs 100 but it costs Shs 5000 in Kampala. We looked at who is taking how much and we found out that fuel alone was taking 70 percent.  

Since that time, if anything, the Minister attempted actually to increase the price of fuel. Well, since tax avoidance and tax evasion are different, tax evasion is criminal but if somebody can avoid the tax, then you will not say that person is a criminal.

Concerning the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, in order to avoid the unscrupulous traders I think the Uganda National Bureau of Standards should be assisted, as the report already mentions. But then they should work hand in hand with Uganda Revenue Authority. The way Uganda Revenue Authority came in to put seals on cigarettes, for example, has assisted the country and now we know that there is cigarette smuggling. When there is no seal on that cigarette, you definitely know that it is from somewhere else. 

I had some experience in Kampala here when I got lost in a certain building, I think I was misdirected, and I found people packing tea using their own hands. They were packing it in containers of these yellow packets with green words; I have forgotten the label but I think it could have been Brooke Bond Tea. People were very busy packing with their own hands, and using ordinary glue. I do not know what we can do -(Interruption)

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Mr Chairman, the House would understand the honourable member better if he could let us know, as a responsible citizen, the steps he took after finding out people were doing something illegal.

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: I did not stop there; it is just that I did not elaborate what I did, Mr Chairman, but I did not stop there. 

Eventually, I noticed that I was not doing my work. When I came down, I asked the people who were around whether there were any security personnel. They did not know who I was and I did not want them to know, for God’s sake! They showed me a gentleman who was said to be working with Operation Wembley. I thought this was the right person. I walked with the fellow to the very place where these people were packing tea. Instead, he looked at them and they started conversing and laughing. Definitely, he knew them. 

I told the gentleman that he was supposed to apprehend these people and then let me know. I gave him my business card and told him to keep it as a secret. He never wanted me to look at his identity card, but he gave me a phone number. When I rang him after one hour, I got a response from a different person. So, you can see what type of Ugandans we are operating with. 

I think I tried my best, but I was also interested in my security. I do not think the Minister of Trade would have given me some security. You know those people are very rough, they can easily land on you. 

I want to conclude, Mr Chairman, with a comment on wildlife. I do not know whether you call wildlife a department in the ministry, but this is where we could get a lot of money. Unfortunately, foreigners have come here and taken pictures and filmed very important places and very nice animals, and they are selling like hotcakes in foreign countries. But here, I do not see much of it. All the wildlife films we have here are not from Uganda.  

I was surprised to see a film, when I was in Jerusalem in Israel, about Kazinga Channel and the other bird sanctuary behind Mweya Hotel with that bridge and those animals there. The commentator was not ashamed to say that that was Tsavo National Park. 

I asked myself, “Now, what is this?” I had a team of people and I alerted them. I said, “You see what is happening. This is our national park and it is being sold here as Tsavo National Park.” I think Tsavo is in Kenya. That means a tourist will not come to Uganda, he will definitely go to Tsavo. Although he may fail to locate the place, at least he will have gone there. I request that at least a lot of energy should be put in on wildlife trade. 

Recently, I heard that His Excellency the President of Uganda was taking people from abroad around, showing them what we have. But they made their film and they will make their money. We should have our team from Uganda cover all those areas, making the films, so that we buy them. I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also thank the committee for their report. In the seven years I have been in this Parliament, I have realised that there is consistent behaviour by government not to attend to sectors, which are strategic. For example, we say we want to fight poverty but much of the money is put into ministries, which are service ministries.

Mr Chairman, the other day I did not catch your eye when we were debating the report of the Social Services Committee. A lot more money is put into health, which is good, but very little is put into agriculture and yet we all know that with improved nutrition, the body is more resistant to diseases. The more we suffocate agriculture, the more money we shall put in health. 

Trade is another strategic ministry but it is financially malnourished. What is happening? Is it because we have a problem of planning? Now that we have the National Planning Authority, are we expecting a change of attitude or what?

Mr Chairman, the President of this country has all along been advocating for trade, but his wishes are not translated into financial allocation. What is the problem? We have been talking about agriculture, but there is nothing; trade, nothing; and now industry, nothing. What is the problem? I think that after these debates on the budget, we may request you to give us more time to debate in this Parliament about where we want to go from here. Maybe then somebody somewhere might listen. 

Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR YIGA: When I looked at the report of the committee, they were lamenting that there are no enabling policies that could guide investments in the sector. There is no policy for tourism, no policy for industry and no policy on trade. With such a background, I would not blame the Government for not giving adequate funding to this sector.

Secondly, the committee also recommended that the Ministry should be restructured. So, there is still a lot to be done. We should not blame the Government. Instead, we should blame the Ministry itself. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY (Mrs Jennifer Namuyangu): Mr Chairman, I appreciate the concern from my colleague but in the report, which we have just presented, it is stated clearly that the policy statement for tourism was passed and other policies are in the process. These include the policy on industrialization, which is to be presented to Cabinet. Is he in order, therefore, to say that the Ministry has no policies at all?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the member is simply expressing concern because the report is showing what is in some departments; the main body has not been exposed.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the members for the information. As for me, whether it is trade, agriculture, or finance, it is the same government and it is supposed to be co-ordinated. If one part of the body is not co-ordinated with the other, that is a malfunctioning body. The body should be co-ordinated, and the Government should be co-ordinated.

Let me now talk about the Executive, for that matter. And, Mr Chairman, protect me from my Professor of veterinary medicine. I am happy with the committee’s recommendation that the Government should form a core team of consistent negotiators. I think we are short of negotiators, or we have no negotiators at all because many of the agreements the Government has entered into are found to be fishy here and there.  

You are aware of the AES power purchase agreement. It was about to be signed before Parliament jumped in to stop it. And when we jumped in, at that time I was on the Committee of National Economy, we found so many things that were unpalatable. The Uganda Government was going to guarantee the water level of Lake Victoria! How? It said that the Government would mortgage government installations, including Parliament. How? But somebody was going to sign on behalf of Government. (Laughter). 

We really need a core team of negotiators for government. Not necessarily for the Ministry of Trade, but for government so that any agreement that –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that Uganda has one of the best negotiators on the continent, in the name of Ambassador Irumba. He is in Geneva, and I am sorry to tell you that at one time he took a very strong position in favour of the African members of WTO, but that position was empirical in American interest and he was almost removed from this position.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: So, you see! Mr Chairman, the other issues –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But, honourable members, we have very limited time because we have another report to deal with. This debate should not be very long because of clarifications. This is the Committee of Supply, but we are going into details now. I think we should just restrict ourselves to a few points, proceed and supply the money, and then move on to another ministry.

DR KASIRIVU: Finally, the issue of cooperatives. I think cooperatives are good, but I also want to thank the committee for saying that government should study why cooperatives had a problem. We had a good cooperative system but it had problems. And although some cooperatives are still limping, like Nyakatoonza and so forth, the Government should study why these cooperatives had a problem so that we do not have a repeat of the same problems. 

As we talk now, the Government still owes money to Kakumiro Cooperative Growers Union, which is in my constituency. It collapsed, but the Government still owes it money. Actually, it was the Government that led to its collapse because it took away its assets and coffee and never paid.

If you are coming to Bugangaizi to convince people about cooperatives before meeting this debt, you may find a problem. So, this is information to the Government. They should meet their obligation so that I can effectively go to Bugangaizi and tell people about cooperatives. Otherwise, I will find it a bit difficult. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, use three minutes to seek clarification only, not a fully-fledged debate.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for the opportunity. 

I will first of all make the general observation that the committee has strongly recommended that this ministry should be a core one. I do not know, as an ordinary Member of Parliament, who makes ministries core or not? The Leader of Government Business, or someone from the Office of the Prime Minister might have to clarify to us who makes the ministries core or otherwise. 

Is it the functions of the ministries that make them core? We always have lamentations, like the ones this committee has, about the woes of this ministry without knowing who the hidden “core maker” is, then we do not make any sense.

Mr Chairman, I would also like to comment on the issue of policies as regards to us, Members of Parliament. We are often presented in our committees with observations from the Executive that policies are at Cabinet level, they are being worked on and they are in the pipeline. We do not know how our Cabinet works, so indirectly, when they tell us they are in the pipeline, the Executive is saying, “this is not going to work”. 

Otherwise, give us a timeframe. If the policies on cooperatives, the policies on trade, the policies on a sector or sub-sector are in the pipeline, tell us that they have gone – if the pipeline is 20 metres - 10 meters ahead and they are about to reach Parliament. Otherwise, I think this does not convince anybody.

I would like to move on to page 5. I am trying to emphasize what the committee talked about, the policies that are at different levels. Some are at consultation level, others are with stakeholders, but you do not define which stakeholders they are talking about. 

The Executive may be hoodwinking us by saying the policies are with stakeholders. Let the stakeholders be defined and we know who is holding what back. Then we shall tell Ugandans that it is the stakeholders - the Parliament, the peasants, or such a sector - and then we clarify these issues to our people.  

I would like to thank the Ministry for at least trying to work on my plea about the atrocities being committed by the Uganda Wildlife Authority. For your information, honourable members, one of the chief wardens was interdicted when people were killed in Mt Elgon National Park. I think that is a step forward. We are acting, and now the people are living in a relatively calm manner. 

However, we hope you come up quickly with a policy on the boundary demarcation and defining the particulars of public land and the national park. That way, the park will exist harmoniously with the communities within the areas that are surrounding it.  

I would like to finally say that if the committee has said the Uganda Wildlife Authority has a management problem in handling its issues, I believe we should identify the problem and discuss it later. 

I am a member of the Social Services Committee, Mr Chairman. We used to lament about the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because it was under-funded. But then we sat with the technical people of that ministry as a committee, and we discussed this. We had a kind of seminar and we gave in our input on ways and means of how the ministry could be properly funded. As I talk now, that ministry has woken up from the confusion it used to have. 

This confusion in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should also be addressed. The Professor in charge of this ministry, call for stakeholders, especially the sector committee, and discuss the problems. Probably you would be assisted and you would not come here with tribulations, lamentations and cries about your funding. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Chairman. My contribution is very short. I just want to emphasize the need to upgrade this ministry to a core ministry. His Excellency often talks of transformation from peasantry to industrialization yet the ministry, which is charged with that is, neither facilitated nor considered a core ministry. I fail to really understand why this ministry is not considered a core ministry. 

Recently, when we went to meet His Excellency, he actually had no problem with the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry being a core ministry. But it seems our policy makers are now working hard to make it a core ministry.

Another area I want to address, which did not appear in this report, is antiquities. In 2001 we discussed and even identified historical sites. In my constituency, there is a place called Kibuuka Omumbaale. That is a very historical site, a very important one. It was included on the list of these sites but nothing has ever been done about it. 

The ministry concerned promised us that they had got money from either the World Bank or European Union to upgrade these historical sites, but up to now there is nothing that has been done. And in this report I have not seen it mentioned anywhere. 

It is not only that historical site, but also others like the Maramagambo and the Bachwezi in Sembabule. All these places are great tourist attractions. So, the Ministry should consider improving them. 

Another area I want to address is the linkage between industry and agriculture. Sometimes I get confused when His Excellency says we have a big market for simsim. We have industries, which can extract oil from simsim but he is talking of exporting it! Then on the other hand he says we should improve coffee. Why don’t we start with simsim, whose industry is here? 

Mukwano Industries is importing crude palm oil. We have all the time asked ourselves why this is happening. Why don’t we improve on this instead? Why don’t we discourage him from importing crude palm oil? 

Lastly, –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I beg you to really wind up.

MR MUTULUUZA: Okay. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, abide by the time limit. We had a general debate on the budget and a lot was said. This is a Committee Stage. We should really restrict ourselves to a few points, because we had a general debate on the Budget and the President’s speech. 

I now recognise hon. Mukama. We also have to balance gender, so we shall take Apac next, then the Member for Kalungu. However, use only three minutes please. I will see how to proceed.

MR FRANCIS MUKAMA (Kigulu North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank the committee for the good and detailed report. 

I wish to concur with hon. Wambi who looked at this report, especially the policy statement, and found that a lot of the policies of the ministries are still in the pipeline. If you look at pages 18 and 19 of the policy statement, there is great evidence of that. 

My interest is, however, drawn to the part about the industry and technology department. Here they talked of major achievements. The first one is the preparation of the strategic framework for industrialization in Uganda for 2003/2008. The draft position of the paper was prepared and submitted to top management in May 2003. 

I am particularly interested in being advised and informed by the Ministry about what is happening to this draft. I am interested in knowing what the arrangement of the ministry is. Are you also looking at certain places, which were industrially viable at a given time? I give Jinja as an example, whereby now it is relegated to being an industrial reserve of Uganda.

Of course, I know the Ministry will come up with the government song on this. The song goes, “In the name of liberalization and this and the other, we cannot do much about that.” But even if that is the song, you need to do something. 

Somebody told me when I was coming here that we should also listen to the song, which is now on CBS, which goes, “Gaetano, Gaetano, amalako”. But Gaetano cannot “kumalako” if we do not support him. So, even this liberalization –(Laughter)- by the way I am a supporter of Gaetano. So, even this industrialization cannot do much in Jinja unless the Government has a deliberate policy and approach to make sure that it revamps some of those areas. 

You talk of liberalization, but then nobody will come to put up industries here when it is not in their interest. But there are some industries, which are for the country, where the Government should come in. For example, in the past we used to have UDC. We would have done that.  

The last one, Mr Chairman, is about the Uganda Wildlife Authority. This is a very good organization doing a very good job for the country. But the Government should put in money to make it move. The contribution of the Government to the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be substantial. I appeal to the Ministry of Finance and others that although these are animals and they eat grass, there are people who look after them. We have to pay those people and put in greater effort. 

Concerning the Uganda Wildlife Authority, we need to urge the management to sort out its discords. There are a number of them. They should sort them out and the organization will move forward. I thank you very much.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity. 

My first question is; may I know where AGOA falls? I sit on the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. When we met those who are promoting AGOA in the President’s Office and we wanted to know how this money is being allocated under the Strategic Investment Fund, they told us the money is fully managed by the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. May I know whether this is the case? And if that is the case and it is under the Strategic Investment Fund, may I know what criteria the Ministry used to allocate these funds?

We realise that one of the companies that has benefited from the AGOA Strategic Investment Fund, Tri-Star, is actually importing garments to make the clothes they are producing. And yet there is another company called Phoenix that wants to get this Strategic Investment Fund money to transform cotton into garments to sell and export. So, could I know how strategic this fund is? 

I come from a constituency where people grow cotton. To me what would be strategic would be to encourage investment by the people who are transforming cotton into garments. That would absorb the cotton that we are growing locally. Now Tri-Star, which is importing garments, is the one benefiting from this Strategic Investment Fund? I seek that clarification.  

Two, may I also know how you give out credit. Do you have a classification for outside investors? What should they engage in and what is your policy on promoting local investors? Sometimes you find people from India who are here selling kabalagala on the streets of Kampala, and yet the local people can make this kabalagala even better. But these people are accessing funds as investors, and our local people cannot access this so called investment fund! 

May I know whether you have a classification of what foreign investors should engage in and what should be left to local investors? If we do not have this benchmark, I think we are not going anywhere. We should encourage local investment.

That brings me to my other point; what are the steps, the interventions that the Ministry has to promote local investment?  

Lastly, there has been this constant cry from the President that people are discouraging investors and that every time he goes out he is the one to sell Uganda. When he is making his State of the National Address he always laments about how he is frustrated with his ministers and some of the technocrats. Could I know whether as people concerned with investment you are one of those frustrating His Excellency in his bid to bring investors to this country? I thank you.

MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu West, Masaka): Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the committee for its informative report. I, however, wish to raise the following observations.  

I am concerned about the cost of the merger. Could we be enlightened about the details of this US $4 million required to carry out this merger. I see it as another way of scaring government from proceeding with the merger.

I also have concerns about AGOA, which is mentioned on Page 5. My colleague has echoed some of the concerns I would have raised. I would have loved to see these funds meant for AGOA injected into cotton production so that our peasants can be stimulated to produce more cotton. In turn, this could be turned into cloth and sold as garments outside Uganda. 

What we hear about what is happening at the Tri-Star Industry is not encouraging. I would like to urge government to ensure that we have forward and backward linkages with the industry that has been set up.

I also wish to react to the concern of the committee on page 5, that government has not paid enough attention to small-scale industries and as a result many of them have collapsed or are on the verge of collapsing. 

Mr Chairman, I have been interacting with some traders who import garments from China. They told me that some of these shirts, which we buy in Kampala, are made by small-scale industries in China and Hong Kong. In these countries, you find a household with about three to four sewing machines making shirts and trousers.  

We also need to have a policy on small-scale industries. Government should consider setting up a small-scale industries promotion centre so that our people appreciate these technologies that are now on the market. We are giving lip service to this component yet we are talking of modernising our economy and adding value to what we have produced.  So, we need to make some deliberate effort so that we revamp the small-scale industries in this country.

Lastly, Mr Chairman, on page 6 the committee lamented that a number of projects which are supposed to be based in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry are located in other ministries. 

I have only been able to understand the location of the AGOA Secretariat. Can the minister enlighten this House about the other projects, which are in other ministries but are supposed to be in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, so that we are able to understand the magnitude of the problem? That is when I will be in a position to ask why it is so? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR EDWARD WESONGA (Bubulo West, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, allow me to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for the report. 

My first observation, for which I will require clarification from the Minister, is about investors; who is an investor? I will ask again, who is an investor in this country? Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you mean a foreign investor? 

MR WESONGA: Yes, a foreign investor. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for that correction. I am asking this because the Ministry has confessed that it is running without any policy. The industry policy is in final draft and consultations are going on. It is a very serious matter for a ministry to continue running without a policy. 

I am getting scared because foreigners who come to this country under the name of “investors” have littered the town back home, and the people of Mbale are getting scared. We do not know what we can do in order to protect the locals because the town has again gone back to where it was before.

Mr Chairman, another clarification I wanted to seek from the minister is why the cooperative policy went to Cabinet and came back. You have not explained to this House why it was brought back. Was it a bad policy?

Mr Chairman, I wish to know from the Minister how many cooperative colleges this country has. Because to the best of my knowledge, and being a product of cooperatives, we used to have one cooperative college with training wings attached to it. But recently, when the Ministry of Education presented their report, they referred to them as “several colleges”. Can I know from the Minister whether Uganda has more than one cooperative college?  

Mr Chairman, the matter of unbalanced industrial distribution in this country has hit Mbale, and Mbale originally had its hinges put on cooperatives. Today, because this ministry has no policy, you find that although cooperatives have principles to follow, one or two people are heavily indebted. And yet one of the principles is that once one is indebted, he cannot be on the management of a cooperative organization. Today it is the qualification, but because the ministry has no policy and people are heavily indebted, they are entrusted with cooperative unions.  

There is this recommendation from the Ministry that the cooperatives should go and borrow from moneylenders. Bugisu Cooperative Union committed its assets to a certain investor – I do not know whether he is an investor – and Shs 600 million was endorsed by the ministry without consulting the farmers. Now the buildings are going, the hotel has already gone and very soon other buildings will follow, and yet that is the only industry in Bugisu. 

What arrangement has this ministry put in place to protect our only industry in the district? We no longer have jobs, our children are on the streets after training, because you people have connived with these so-called “investors” and they are now taking our properties. I am appealing to the Leader of Government Business to get heavily involved and protect our only union in Mbale. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, can you please respond.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Prof. Edward Rugumayo): Thank you Mr Chairman and honourable members. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for the excellent work done. They really drew our attention to many gaps in our programmes and that is why this report has been so ably debated. 

I would like to focus on a few points raised by members. Mr Chairman, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is not working in confusion as alleged by members. We are revising and updating our policies to get in line with the current situation. I hope honourable members will not be confused by the allegations that we do not have policies.  

I will dwell on a few other issues regarding the merger of Uganda Tourist Board, Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda Wildlife Authority. You have seen in the report that this merger costs money. Why? Because you have to retrench people and give them retrenchment packages. You need to restructure the staff, and it is costly. 

This matter has been drawn to the attention of government. We are sending back this information and you will hear what the Executive will decide. If they say it is too expensive to merge, it is okay. If they say go ahead, definitely my ministry and the Ministry of Finance will work together to see the matter concluded amicably. (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I can see that out of the three sectors that are supposed to merge, two are already in your ministry. It is only the Uganda Investment Authority that needs to come to your ministry.  

You could do a two-stage process, whereby you first move the Uganda Investment Authority to your ministry and then you work out the merger later. Supposing you did that, would that not make a lot of sense in terms of co-ordination, since they are in your ministry? You can then merge them later when you get money.
PROF. RUGUMAYO: I thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the honourable member. We will take that into account. (Laughter) 
On the issue of international agreements, we have many agreements, which we are signatories to, COMESA, East African Community and so forth. The question asked was, to what extent have we compiled with these agreements and treaties. 
The answer is, there is a review by the Uganda Law Review Commission, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance to revise all these laws and bring them in conformity with WTO laws and other laws, which have implications on international trade. So, it is a process, and you know Uganda Law Review Commission is a Standing Commission and continues to update all these laws.
The issue of smuggling and the Uganda Bureau of Standards working with URA; all these issues really concern not only my ministry but also the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture. I can assure you, the three ministries are working very closely together to ensure that we harmonize how we deal with smuggling, with counterfeit goods and expired goods. So, we are working together. For example, National Bureau of Standards works very closely with Uganda Revenue Authority when dealing with importers who might violate our laws.  
You also discussed the issue of negotiators. My ministry truly agrees with the honourable members that we have few negotiators. The operative word is “few”, not “weak”. But, of course, if you are few and you are not able to be everywhere, it means that your presence is not felt and therefore you are weak by reason of numbers not by reason of ideas.
We discussed the issue of boundary demarcation in the national parks. I was glad to hear from hon. Wambi Kibaale that my ministry has taken action on those individuals who breach the laws, but this has always been the practice. If our game wardens or game rangers violate any law, they are punished in equal measure.
On the issue of boundary demarcation, we are now selecting surveyors. You know every government action is a process and if we skip a stage, Parliament will be the first one to say, “Why have you skipped this stage?” So, we advertised for surveyors to come and do the final demarcation using the latest technology.
The case of Jinja and other regional towns; you know, government has a policy of encouraging investors to go into the rural areas to invest. They are given a special rate of taxation lower than the one given to those who invest in Kampala.  Why are they not going upcountry? There is a problem of roads, energy and many other factors, which government is now addressing.  

On the issue of government intervention, you should remember there was other Parliaments before this Parliament and policies were passed that government should divest itself from business. Now I hear members beginning to think of bringing government back into business. At this moment, this policy has not been revised.  

Hon. Amongi raised the issue of Tri-Star Industry and the cotton garments and fabric. Let me make this clear; under AGOA, a company, which makes garments, can import fabric from a third country for a limited period of time. This is only for a short period of time. We are actually negotiating to extend it to 2008. We can import fabric, as we are doing now with the Tri-star Industry, and turn it into garment and export to wherever, this time to the United States.

You all know the history of our cotton industry; it collapsed for a number of reasons. We hope Lira Spinning Mill will soon function, and this will encourage cotton growing and we will be able to spin cotton into yarn. This yarn will be brought to industries like Southern Range and Phoenix, which by the way have joint ownership with Ugandans, so that we can now turn the cotton into fabric and into cloth. So, this is a process. Until we have a good spinning mill, our cotton will be exported, and that of course will be a loss of revenue.

We talked about small-scale industry, Mr Chairman.  I would like to say that the Government or my ministry has a policy on small-scale industries.  We have the Uganda Small Scale Industry Association, which brings together all small-scale industries to work out a programme on marketing.  

We also support the “Jua Kali” sector, the Katwe people. Last year we held an East African exhibition of Jua Kalis for Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda at Lugogo. At that exhibition, government undertook to provide facilitation to the Jua Kali sector so that they can really contribute more to our economy.  

We also have Uganda Integrity Programme as well as the Master Crafts Programme, which train many Jua Kali people or small industrialists. Our main constraint, as you know, is loans. The interest rates are still high, but and that is an issue of the market forces. This is a matter, which the Government and Parliament can handle together with the private sector.

Mr Chairman, it seems as if my colleagues had read our minds when it came to cooperatives. Once again –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: There was a question about who a foreign investor is.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr Chairman, there were a number of things I wanted to leave to my colleague, the Minister of Finance, so that he can address some of them –(Laughter)- if the Chairman allows him to do so.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay if you have agreed.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Investment comes under the Ministry of Finance and we work very closely with them.  There are areas, which my ministry is not very competent with. So, I would request my colleague, the Minister of Finance, to handle this matter.

The question of AGOA; this issue was discussed in detail when we brought our statement on the Floor of the House. This matter is still in the Office of the President and we are working very closely with them. My ministry being what it is, we cannot dictate to the Office of the President but we are working very closely so that we get a good kick-start for AGOA.  

Personally, I feel happy because without the intervention of State House, we would not even have moved a step. So, this has enabled my ministry to get a good head start.  

Mr Chairman, I thank you very much and I thank all the colleagues who have contributed to this debate. I would like to thank you even more for the pressure you are putting on government and the Executive to make this ministry a core ministry. I thank you. (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Let me also join my colleagues to thank the committee for the good work they have done. I also thank the members for the pertinent issues they have raised.  

First of all, I want to make it very clear that there is no categorization of ministries as core and non-core. All ministries are the same and equal, what may vary is the allocation of resources to the various ministries. The allocation of resources to ministries depends on the mandate and programmes of the various ministries.  

Secondly, -(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification I want to get from the Minister of Finance is whether in his heart of hearts, trade is not a priority in this country.  

MR RUKUTANA: Trade, as I will explain later, is one of the priorities of this government. So, I can say without fear of contradiction that trade is a core ministry. (Interruption)  
 
MR NABETA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to pose a question to the honourable Minister of Finance. In the committee we met the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry, and also from all that we have seen, it is seems the Ministry of Finance has bulldozed the ministry. Everything we need them to do, they cannot do because they do not have money. 

Uganda Industrial Research Institute and Uganda Tourist Board cannot work because they are not given money. There are no funds in the budget for the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to carry out its functions. They asked for Shs 300 million to hold a tourism summit. 

This is a country that can actually make a lot of money from tourism, but they cannot even take Shs 300,000,000! The Ministry of Finance has Shs 14 billion just for capacity building/training, but they cannot even release Shs 300,000,000 for trade! Where is the priority in what you are saying, that trade is really a core ministry?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I have stated here before that the role of prioritisation and allocation of resources is not entirely for the Ministry of Finance. It is for the entire government. So, it cannot be said that the Ministry of Finance has bulldozed this ministry or department.  

Government sits and there is an elaborate central mechanism through which priorities are determined and resources are allocated. It cannot be blamed on the Ministry of Finance that a particular programme or policy or ministry has not been accorded due attention. In any event, I know that this Budget Act - I have been reading it - is part and parcel of the mechanism that determines priority allocation of resources - (Interjections)- We allocate first, but you have the liberty to comment. 

I want to be emphatic that the Ministry of Finance should never be blamed for the quantum of resources that has been allocated to various ministries. 

This brings me to an issue, which was raised by hon. Amongi. She was asking about the strategic investment fund and I think that is where the concern on the investor arose. First of all, I want to say that I am not aware of any fund called the strategic investment fund. It is not there; what is there is a programme called Programme for Strategic Intervention into the Promotion of Exports. 

The Programme for Strategic Intervention into the Promotion of Exports has both short and long-term activities. It covers quite a wide range of exports, which we handle under the long-term activities. We have intervened in coffee by supplying coffee seedlings. We have intervened in cotton by buying tractors, a number of which are going to the western and northern side of the country and other areas, which produce cotton. We have intervened in other areas by providing water for irrigation, like I explained during the general debate. 

The short-term activities included putting a mechanism to access the benefits under AGOA, and that is where we sourced for an investor who could lead us as quickly as possible to the USA. That is how Tri-star came into play. By the time Tri-star approached us for facilitation, as I said before, they had orders of over one million garments to supply to the USA. We negotiated with them quickly and we facilitated them to access funding so that they can export in order for us not to lose that opportunity. 

As for the allegation or statement that they are importing fabric, yes they are, for the time being. Under AGOA it is acceptable for countries, before they are ready, to use a third country’s fabric, and this programme goes up to 2005. 

America also recognised that countries may not be ready to benefit under AGOA, so they said until 2005 countries can use third party fabric as they prepare their local capacity. That is why Tri-Star is still using imported fabric. But we are putting in place a mechanism to ensure that come 2005, we have capacity to use our own fabric. So Tri-Star benefited from that strategic intervention to promote exports but not from the so-called strategic fund. 

As to who an investor is, there is no discrimination between the local and foreign investor. In our eyes, all investors are the same and they are accorded the same treatment. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is to adopt the committee’s report on the policy statement on the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the Financial Year 2003/2005.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 105:
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,501,043,000 under Vote 105, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 40,918,291,000 under Vote 105, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and passed Vote 105 without amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.


(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for the work done. We shall have the report on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs at 2.30 p.m.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.05 p.m.) 

(The House resumed at 2.59 p.m., the Speaker presiding.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished Visitor’s Gallery we have hon. Amandimirio Webusa who is the Secretary General of FRELIMO (Applause). We also have hon. Sebastiano Dengo, hon. Maidoko Diambo and hon. Machava and another lady Member of Parliament from Mozambique. You are most welcome to Uganda. (Applause)  

In the other gallery, we have Dr Jackson, the Rector of St Luke Church in California.  (Applause). These friends from California have been in Uganda for the last three weeks and they have been engaged in the following activities: launching a 70 million shilling water project funded by St Luke Church and the Rotary Club of California through the Rotary club of Bugolobi. 

They were also involved in the opening of Nyamirama Parents Primary School, which has 450 children. Dr Jackson’s Church has provided resources for building and supporting it. They have planted a foundation stone for the proposed Kinkizi Community College. (Applause). They have seven children of Kirima Parents School and Nyamirama Parents Primary School.  

On the other side, we have students from Kotido Senior Secondary School in Karamoja, Nyamirama Parents Primary School, and Kirima Parents Primary School in Kinkizi East, Kanungu District. (Applause). We also have head teachers from Lira Municipality School. You are all welcome, our guests.

REV. MBABAZI KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and distinguished Members of Parliament. I would like to make an observation especially in appreciation of the various contributions made by our friends who have been introduced, Dr Jackson, and Kato and Kakuru, his two boys who have been in Kinkizi. 

I know that government and the public have always supported and appreciated the contributions that people make to communities. They are such a relief to our government budget, which is always restrained by the challenges of being a poor country. 

I would like to add my voice to the message of the people in Kinkizi and Kanungu District who have appreciated the provision of water in a place that had never had water. This brings in a lot of relief in their health budgets. Where a jerrican of water has been costing 450 shillings, now people will not just be paying 50 shillings to run the diesel engine but they will also have a lot of time for their developmental activities.

I also want to appreciate their support for primary education in Kanungu. Of course, government puts in a lot in Universal Primary Education, but they helped in providing extra classrooms in this school. We have managed to bring the teacher to child ratio from 53 children to one child in government schools, to 35 children to one teacher. This has resulted in our schools yielding about 95 percent in grade one in PLE.  

I also want to appreciate their support for tertiary education, as they have been supporting Kinkizi Community College. 

I would like to send a message with them, that this country is faced with a dilemma where we have seven million children in primary school and government can only afford to support 4000 students in university. So, any people and communities who are giving any support for tertiary education opportunities to our young people deserve the appreciation of this nation. 

I therefore want to request, on all your behalf, that these friends be ambassadors for us and say, tusima bogwerwa. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Dora Byamukama): Mr Chairman, honourable members, permit me to present to this august House the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the budget estimates for the financial year 2003/2004. Mr Chairman, I beg to lay the report on the Table and to present its highlights to the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: The report will be part of the record.

MS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In view of that, I wish to report as follows. 

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is mandated under Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution and rules 123 and 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to examine and comment on policy matters affecting the relevant ministries and bodies, and to discuss government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

In line with this mandate, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs examined budgetary proposals for the following institutions:  

1. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
2. Judiciary 
3. Judicial Service Commission
4. Directorate of Public Prosecutions
5. Uganda Law Reform Commission
6. Uganda Human Rights Commission 
7. The Electoral Commission
8. Inspectorate of Government 
9. The Parliamentary Commission

Mr Chairman, I would like to start off by appreciating the work that was done by the Minister, heads and technical staff of the institutions, members and staff of Parliament who facilitated the compilation of this report.  

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs:

Mr Chairman, I will move on and highlight the achievements during the financial year 2002/2003; this is on page 4. Some of the key achievements for the previous financial year include: 

• Recruitment of staff including nine State Attorneys. Interviews were conducted to recruit 15 state attorneys for the Directorate of Legal Advisory Services and six lawyers for the Administrator General’s Department. Interviews were also conducted to fill all other existing vacancies in the Ministry.

• Mr Chairman, in line with the recommendation of this Parliament, the outstanding bill for utilities was settled.  

• Funds for the Constitutional Review Commission, in the amount Shs 2.42 billion, were also released.  

Observations:

1. The committee observed that a five-year expenditure plan, over and above the medium plan, would facilitate the Ministry in its planning process. It would state the Ministry’s aspiration and would assist it to attain a better bargaining position because it would mean that it is self – driven. 

This five-year development expenditure plan would also convince the development committee to lift the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) ceiling where it is clearly justified. 

The plan would assist the Ministry to assert itself and put into practice Article 155 of the Constitution. 

2. In the Financial Year 2002/2003, all the money approved for then current court awards was released. Out of Shs 5,758,000,000 required for court award arrears, only Shs 3,959,000,000 was released. The committee was informed that Shs 1.0 billion was frozen and transferred to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as supplementary. The Shs 1.8 billion for court awards is still outstanding. 

The committee observed that it was illogical to settle current awards while arrears remain pending and accumulate interest. The committee noted that non-payment of court award arrears leaves an aggrieved person with no other remedy and therefore, frustrates the administration of justice. 

3. The committee observed that the item of legal expenses and compensation was grossly under-funded. The stock of audited compensation arrears as at 30 June 2003 was Shs 4,820,649,829. Out of this, only Shs 14 million was provided for. This left a huge deficit of Shs 4,805,650,829.  

Mr Chairman, this item caters for bad debt claims, compensation and ex-gracia payment arising from action of government and her agencies. There is need to ameliorate the plight of claimants whose claims include loss of lives, property, land by both individuals and co-operative unions. 

This particular item also caters for international organisations. It has been approved by Finance and the Auditor General, and the committee recommends that this money should be released immediately. 

4. The Constitutional Review Commission was unable to meet the deadline of June 2003 due to piecemeal release of funds. The commission was scheduled to end its work in June 2003 but its mandate was extended to August 2003. The committee notes that since its inception, a lot of public funds have been spent on the Constitutional Review Commission. To date, a colossal amount of Shs 4,220,000,000 has been spent on the Commission.

5. The Political Parties and Organisations Act obliges the Registrar General to ascertain the authenticity of signatures of members intending to register a political party or organisation. This will require movement to various districts. It is also highly unpredictable since it is not definite how many parties or organisations will register. The Ministry needs an additional Shs 100 million to acquire vehicles, pay allowances, buy fuel and maintain the vehicles.  

6. There are various constitutional provisions, which have not been implemented. These include the creation of constitutional bodies and enactment of enabling laws. 

Mr Chairman, when you look at our Constitution, you find that under Article 32 we should have established an Equal Opportunities Commission.  Under Article 35, we should have laws for the disabled. These are examples, and there are many more which have not been enacted. 

7. The committee observed that budgetary approvals by Parliament are not taken seriously. For example, in 2002/2003 the budget performance for the Ministry was as follows:  

• For the non-wage bill there was a release of 89 percent. 
• Court awards arrears, 83 percent. 
• Case backlog project, 83 per cent; and 
• Commercial Justice and Reform Programme, 79 percent.

Legal expenses and compensations also suffered a shortfall, and the Justice and Law sector also had a big shortfall of a release of only 79 percent.  

Law Development Centre (LDC):

Mr Chairman, I turn to the Law Development Centre, which falls under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.  

The Law Development Centre was established under the Law Development Act of 1970. It is managed by a board and headed by a director.  

The Law Development Centre registered several achievements and some of these include: 

• 238 bar course students were trained.
• 356 diplomas in law students were trained.
• 145 administrative officers were trained 

• The Law Development Centre prepared and delivered Uganda Law Report cases for the years 1958-1972 to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for printing under the Justice Law and Order Sector funding. 

• The Law Development Centre also prepared case reports for years 1973-1977 for publishing in the Uganda Law Reports.

Observations:

1. It was noted that Shs 120 million, which was meant to cater for the government-sponsored students for the financial year 2001/2002 was never released. Law Development Centre had to reallocate funds meant for other activities to fund the government-sponsored students.

2. The Law Development Centre expects an increase in intake of students following the enactment of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2002. The Act permits admission of Ugandan students with law degrees obtained from common law countries. Law Development Centre activities will therefore expand under the law. This increment will mean that LDC has to cater for approximately 400 government-funded students instead of the 200 it has been catering for on an annual basis.

3. It was observed that it is LDC’s mandate to provide legal aid under the Legal Aid Clinic. That is mandatory. This was not implemented until donors came in to fund it. Funding from USAID ended in December 2001 while that from Ford Foundation ends in December 2004.

4. Section 20 of the Law Development Centre Act states that: “Before the beginning of each financial year, the committee shall forward to the Minister responsible for Finance, for his approval, estimates of its income and expenditure for the next financial year.” 

The Secretary to the Treasury has never appointed the Director, Law Development Centre, as an accounting officer. So, no vote has ever been established for the Centre. The practice, therefore, has been that Law Development Centre submits its budget estimates through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Recommendations:

1. The committee restates its recommendation of 2002/03 that the Ministry should draw up a five-year investment plan.

2. The committee recommends that a status report on all court awards from 2002 to-date be produced. A comprehensive ministerial statement on why government loses many cases should also be produced with proposals for strategies to minimise this.

3. The committee recommended that additional funding be provided for sundry creditor (formerly legal expenses and compensation), which caters for claims relating to loss of lives, loss of land and loss of property.

4. The committee recommends that the Constitutional Review Commission produce its report as per the deadline of August 2003 and urges government to make the report public upon release, to give accountability for public funds.

5. The committee recommends that the Shs 100 million, required to facilitate the registration of parties under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, should be provided.

6. The committee recommends that the government should initiate a policy of building public offices rather than pay exorbitant rental charges in dollars. In line with this, it is recommended that the office of the Registrar General located on Crane Chambers, which do not have access for people with disabilities, should be relocated to a place that is accessible to all people.

7. The committee urges the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to table all obsolete and unconstitutional laws for repeal. It is further recommended that all constitutional provisions for the creation of bodies or enactment of laws should be implemented.

8. The committee restates its recommendation that the Directorate of Civil Litigation and Legal Advisory Services be decentralised to enable adequate provision of services.

9. The committee restates its recommendation that the Department of the Administrator General/ Public Trustee should be restructured and substantive posts filled urgently. It should also be devolved in accordance with Article 247 of the Constitution.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, many widows and orphans suffer when they have to travel, for example from Karamoja, to come to Kampala to access the services of the Administrator General. So, we are proposing devolution and decentralisation.

10. The committee restates its recommendation that the Registrar General’s registry be computerised as a matter of urgency and staff trained to cope up with this trend.

11. It is strongly recommended that all other institutions under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should participate in the budget conference. This participation will give all component institutions a chance to negotiate for their budgets.

12. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is urged to implement its commitment made in the meeting with the Budget Committee to provide Shs 120 million arrears for the Law Development Centre government-sponsored students, which was not released in the Financial Year of 2001/02.

13. The Government should review sponsorship of government-sponsored students in view of the Advocates (Amendment) Act. The funding of Law Development Centre should be proportionately increased. 

Government intervention of Shs 800,000 needs to be increased because with the intake of 200 students, Shs 160 million was required. Now, with an intake of 400 government-sponsored students, the subvention will have to be increased to Shs 320 million. The committee recommends timely release of this government subvention.

14. The committee recommends that the criterion to admission to Law Development Centre be streamlined and made known to all.

15. A vote should be established for the Law Development Centre. The Secretary to the Treasury should appoint an accounting officer for the centre so that a separate vote is established.

16. Government should urgently consider the financial support for the Legal Aid Clinic, which hitherto has been 100 percent funded by donors and yet it is within the mandate of the Law Development Centre.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the committee recommends that the Ministry’s budget be approved as follows: 

• For development expenditure, we propose Shs 23,405,551,000.

• For recurrent expenditure, we propose Shs 8,362,197,000.

• For the statutory expenditure, we propose Shs 4,200,000,000.

Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP):

Mr Chairman, honourable members, I now move to the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. The Directorate of Public Prosecutions’ Office (DPP) was established by Article 120 of the Constitution. It is headed by the Director of Public Prosecutions, who is assisted by two deputies.  

This directorate registered the following major achievements:

• Acquisition of more office space at Workers’ House on the 12th floor and the southern wing on the 11th floor. This was with effect from 1 August 2003.

• Completion of 42 cases in the Supreme Court, 60 cases in the Court of Appeal and 1,200 cases in the High Court.

• Construction of two regional offices in Arua and Mbale under the Netherlands-Uganda Support to Public Prosecutions Project. 

• The DPP is represented in 48 out of 56 districts and a number of offices were opened in 2002/03 bringing the total number of stations to 65.

• The headquarters, Buganda Road Court and Masaka Court were fully computerized; and Jinja, Mbarara, Arua, Gulu, Nakawa and Makindye have been partly computerized.

Observations:

1. There is an urgent need to address the inadequate staffing if efficiency is to be addressed. While funding is available to handle the case backlog, there is no corresponding manpower to do the job. While the ideal situation in the DPP’s office should be that each state attorney handles 20 cases per month, currently each state attorney handles about 59 cases per month.

2. There are 300 state prosecutors provided for in the staff structure. One hundred and twenty five (125) posts were approved for the state prosecutors. In a bid to professionalize, the vacant posts are being converted to state attorney posts.

3. The committee observed that the DPP is currently operating in 46 districts compared to 21 four years ago. However, the DPP depends on the local governments for space or rent of premises. If the DPP was able to construct three offices per year, it would reduce on expenditure on rent. Additional funding is required for non-wage and also to operationalise the new offices.

4. The problem of motivation and treatment of state witnesses subsists. Some witnesses have to travel long distances to go to courts and yet they are not facilitated. Currently, facilitation is only available at High Court level leaving out the lower courts.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommends that staffing should be increased as per approved structure.

2. Funding should be availed for construction of upcountry offices and maintenance of constructed buildings.

3. Additional funding should be provided for non-wage and for operationalisation of new offices.

4. The state should seriously consider improving the treatment and facilitation of state witnesses. Their co-operation is critical in the dispensation of justice.

Budgetary provisions:
 
The committee recommends that the DPP’s budget be approved as follows:

• Development expenditure, Shs 298,960,000
• Recurrent expenditure,	Shs 3,239,952,000.
• Statutory expenditure, Shs	43,238,000.

The Judiciary:

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the Judiciary is provided for under chapter eight of the Constitution of Uganda. Its mission is to provide timely administration and delivering of justice to all the people of Uganda.

The Judiciary registered the following achievements:

• Courts were constructed.

• Staff were trained.

• There was recruitment of 152 staff, comprising of two judges, registrars, grade one magistrates and other support staff.

• Vehicles were procured for judges.

• Land was acquired for construction of courts in Kapchorwa, Nakasongola, Rukungiri and Kanungu.

• Furniture was provided for three lower courts.

• In the Supreme Court, out of 157 appeals brought forward/registered, 79 were disposed off. 

• In the Court of Appeal, out of 941 appeals, 200 were completed. 

• In the High Court, out of 6,782 cases, 3,532 were disposed off. 

• In the magistrates’ courts, out of the 73,350 cases, 23,540 were completed.

The committee made the following observations:

1. As a separate arm of government, and given its nature and mandate, the Judiciary should be facilitated to do its work by implementation of Article 155(2)(3) of the Constitution. It has been observed that the Judiciary is operating its budgetary provisions as an appendage to the Executive. This must be rectified.

2. The committee restates the fact that the Judiciary has land at Plot 2, City Square. This land is to be used for housing the High Court, Court of Appeal and Supreme Court. The building is estimated to cost Shs 6 billion. 

Currently, the sums spent on rent per month are Shs 12,760,000 for the Supreme Court and Shs 44,983,750 for the Court of Appeal. This totals up to Shs 692,925,000 per annum. In a period of nine years, this money would have been enough to construct the required home.

3. The Government undertook to carry out specific maintenance work on courts, which were built by DANIDA, but no financial provision has been made in the Financial Year 2003/04.

4. The Judiciary in its strategic plan had worked out recruitment proposals for the bench. It has, however, been noted that recruitment of all the desired judges and staff will not be feasible given the limited resources. 

It was agreed that for the financial year 2003/04, the Judiciary should be supported to recruit at least five judges. This will help reduce the backlog of cases and reduce on pressure due to the absence of judges who are assigned to commissions. 

The committee, however, noted that the Judiciary’s budget estimates provide for salary of only three out of five judges.

5. The committee noted that judges continue to be assigned to commissions and tribunals thus perpetuating the problem of case backlog.

6. The committee restates that chief magistrates continue to suffer transport problems and as a result fail to effectively supervise their areas of jurisdiction. 

The Judiciary needs to be supported to procure vehicles for registrars and chief magistrates. This is to enable them monitor the performance of lower courts. It was noted that chief magistrates were last provided with vehicles in 1997, these were of the Santana model. The Judiciary requires Shs 2 billion in order to purchase 34 vehicles.

7. Case backlog continues to be a problem partly because of limited jurisdiction of chief magistrates. It was observed that with the possible amendment to the Magistrates Courts Act, the jurisdiction of chief magistrates in respect of certain offences such as defilement would be expanded and thus reducing the case backlog considerably.

8. The committee expressed concern about the manner in which court brokers, who are judicial officers, exercise their power. The committee observed that there seem to be no guidelines on the conduct of court brokers vis-à-vis the public. The need for rules to guide their conduct and training was highlighted.

9. The committee noted that election petitions contribute to the problem of backlog in the Judiciary. It was noted that there are numerous election petitions, which in some instances have as many as 500 to 600 affidavits in one single petition.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommends that an Administration of Justice Act should be enacted to operationalise Article 155 of the Constitution for the Judiciary. It would also facilitate the operations of the Judiciary and give them opportunity to appoint and discipline its staff.

2. The committee restates its recommendation that government should provide for the construction of a home for the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court in the Financial Year 2003/04. This can be phased over a period of time.

3. Funds should be provided for maintenance of court buildings constructed under DANIDA.

4. The committee supports the increment of judges from 20 to 30. Recruitment of judges should be phased such that five judges are recruited this year and the other 15 should be recruited over the next two years. The committee recommends that the salaries and allowances of the five judges to be recruited should be provided for in the budget.

5. The committee recommends that instead of spending huge amounts of money on commissions of inquiry, existing investigative institutions such as the IGG’s department should be strengthened so that setting up commissions of inquiry is no longer necessary.

6. The committee recommends that Shs 2 billion required for the purchase of vehicles for registrars and chief magistrates be provided.

7. The Magistrates Court (Amendment) Bill should be tabled as soon as possible. There is also need to review inadequate laws, harmonise and update all laws with international conventions and the Constitution in order to enable the Judiciary dispense justice with ease. Mr Chairman and honourable members, a case in point is lack of a law on domestic relations.

8. The committee recommends that the Judiciary should expedite implementation of training and guidelines for court brokers.

9. The committee recommends that electoral laws should be reviewed so that disposal of petitions can be expedited.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the committee recommends the Judiciary’s budget to be approved as follows: 

• Development expenditure, Shs 3,058,475,000.

• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 14,966,585,000.

The Judicial Service Commission:

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the Judicial Service Commission registered the following achievements:
 
• A chairperson was appointed to head the Judicial Service Commission in the financial year 2002/03.

• The sector wide approach development funds were used to enable the commission to kick-start professionalisation of the bench through recruitment of 27 grade one magistrates.

• Policy guidelines on areas such as professionalisation of the bench, public complaints system, human resource development, were prepared.

• Civic education workshops were conducted in Jinja, Mbale, Mbarara, Fortportal, Masindi and Arua. These were funded under the commercial justice programme.

• Disciplinary meetings were held whereby 13 disciplinary cases and 21 complaints were handled. 

• In collaboration with the Ministry of Public Service, posts for new departments of education and public affairs and inspectorate, research and planning were carried out.

Observations:

1. The Commission has no secretary. It has a small secretariat and one fulltime commissioner. The commission, therefore, finds problems in performing its mandated functions, given the above. It is proposed that two representatives of the public on the Commission be full time.

2. Recruitment in two departments - research, planning and inspection, and education and public affairs - is underway and yet Shs 804,404,000, which was provided for this purpose in 2002/03 was not released. It is noted that for the last one year, some of the recruited staff have been unable to carry out activities due to this shortfall.

3. The Judicial Service Commission is charged with a duty of preparing and implementing programmes for education as per Article 147(1) (c) of the Constitution. However, no funds were portioned for this function.

4. The Committee restates its observation that the commission’s ceiling has remained the same as it was when it started in 1997 and yet there are increased activities and responsibilities. This situation is aggravated by the fact that all members of the Commission, but one, are part-timers, which seriously affects the level of performance of the Commission. 

For instance, in addition to traditional courts, the Judicial Service Commission controls the following in their judicial and quasi-judicial functions:

- Land tribunals.
- Local council courts.
- Court martial courts.
- Tax Appeals tribunals
- Tribunals established by the Electricity Act and the Uganda Communications Act, 1997.

Recommendations:

1. A secretary to the Judicial Service Commission should be urgently appointed.

2. The committee restates its recommendation made in 2002/03 to provide for at least two more fulltime commissioners, one of whom should be the vice chairperson.

3. In line with Article 147(1) (c), the committee restates the recommendation that funds, which were provided for training under the Judiciary, should be shifted to the Judicial Service Commission, which has a constitutional mandate to conduct training. As noted, a department has been established for this very function.

4. The committee recommends that Shs 804,404,000 be urgently released in this financial year in order for the department of research, planning and inspection, and that of education and public affairs to operate as agreed upon in the Budget Committee meeting of 14 August 2003.

5. Funds for training should be provided to the Judicial Service Commission to enable it execute its constitutional mandate. 

Mr Chairman, honourable members, budgetary provisions for the Judicial Service Commission are as follows:

• Development expenditure, Shs 31,500,000.
• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 1,570,040,000.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission:

Achievements registered by the Uganda Law Reform Commission are as follows:

• The Commission completed revision of the principle laws and 13 volumes have been published. The revision of subsidiary legislation is on going. The statutory instruments will also be consolidated after the publication of both the principle and subsidiary legislation.

• The Uganda Law Reform Commission carried out a study and developed a draft guidelines handbook on making bylaws and ordinances for local government councils. 

• It initiated publication of a bi-annual journal in May 2003 entitled, “The Living Law” - for public education on the law in operation.

• The Commission has drafted a number of laws for revision, as set out on page 20. Most of these laws lie in various ministries and as you note, honourable members, most of them are with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.  

Observations:

1. The committee restates the importance of the Uganda Law Reform Commission in law revision. It should be appreciated that without reviewing and harmonising our laws, the gains already recorded lack a firm foundation.

2. In light of this, the committee notes that judges and magistrates have difficulty in delivering judgments because amendments to repealed laws are not captured in our current statutes and laws. This kills the kind of justice delivered and is costly, dangerous and embarrassing since people’s lives and property are directly involved. 

The Commission needs Shs 631 million to complete the compilation of principle and subsidiary legislation of Uganda covering the years 1964 up to 2000. This was also highlighted in last year’s budget report by the committee.

3. The committee was concerned by the fact that although a lot of money has been spent on law revision, the revised principle laws have not taken into account the dynamism of customary laws, the 1995 constitutional provisions, and regional and international instruments ratified by Uganda. The revised principle laws merely restate the law without highlighting areas that are obsolete, unconstitutional and therefore need to be harmonized. 

In light of this, judges and practitioners will continue to apply the laws without taking into account the substantive changes in the law already attained.

4. The committee noted that the Commission’s work was hampered by failure of the Ministry of Finance to release part of the funds approved by Parliament for their development budget.

5. The committee is grateful to the Uganda Law Reform Commission, which donated a set of 13 volumes worth US $1,000 of the revised principle laws to Parliament. These volumes have been handed over to the library and therefore Members of Parliament can have access to these laws.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommends that funding for immediate revision of subsidiary legislation, amounting to Shs 631 million, should be provided as agreed upon in the Budget Committee meeting with the Ministry of Finance on 14 August 2003.

2. The committee restates its recommendation that the Uganda Law Reform Commission is a self-accounting body. Its budget should be released as approved by Parliament.

3. The committee restates and strongly recommends that the Ministry of Justice urgently lists obsolete and unconstitutional provisions of the law for repeal, in a bid to harmonise all laws and ensure that justice is administered. Relevant ministries, especially the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, should expedite the tabling of laws forwarded to them.

4. The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should, as a ministry in charge of the Constitution, establish all constitutional bodies and initiate enactment of laws provided for under the Constitution.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, the budgetary provisions for the Uganda Law Reform Commission are recommended as follows:

• For development expenditure, we recommend Shs 120 million –(Interjection)- there is a change, which was given to me by the Budget Office. 

• For recurrent expenditure, Shs 1,881,000,000.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission:

The Uganda Human Rights Commission has registered several achievements. Key amongst these is that they hosted the African Human Rights National Institutions Conference in the year 2002/2003. 

In financial year 2002/2003, the Commission, with donor assistance, opened three new regional offices in Jinja, Mbarara and Fort-Portal. They also set up a planning unit to improve their efficiency.  

Observations:	

1. The committee noted with concern the proposed arbitrary shift of the Uganda Human Rights Commission from the Justice, Law and Order sector (JLO), to Public Administration. The Ministry of Finance purports that the Uganda Human Rights Commission is part of JLO and therefore cannot oversee its own operations. The proposal to transfer the Commission from JLO to Public Administration should be reversed. 

The committee notes that: 

• The Commission’s independence is likely to be compromised and weakened if it is put under Public Administration, when its duty is to oversee the ills in administration. The transfer will undermine the work of the Uganda Human Rights Commission in that it will no longer be eligible to the five percent automatic annual increase, which is provided for institutions under JLOs.  

• It was noted that awards granted by the Uganda Human Rights Commission are executed by the High Court. In most cases, these awards are often not respected by government, which appeals against them and thereby makes the aggrieved parties abandon cases for lack of money to hire lawyers.  

3. The committee noted that the Uganda Human Rights Commission has been denied entry into certain places of detention. The committee was concerned that entities such as Military Intelligence and internal security officers arrest civilians, detain them in un-gazetted areas past the legally mandated 48 hours, and yet they do not have powers of arrest.

4. Part of the building occupied by the Uganda Human Rights Commission is to be broken down for re-development by SIDA and the Commission needs to pay rent during this period in this financial year. 

The Commission rents all its upcountry offices at Shs 90 million per annum. No provision has been made for that this financial year. The Commission has secured donor funds for renovating and expanding its office space at the headquarters and the money has been available since last year. The Commission needs Shs 8,400,000 to rent office space to allow for the renovations to be done.

5. By the nature of its functions, the Commission needs sound vehicles to move around the country. The commissioners’ terms of service entitle each of them to a vehicle. Their current vehicles are over seven years old and cost the Commission an average Shs 35 million in repairs per month. 

Out of the requested Shs 757,130,920, the Ministry of Finance proposes to provide only Shs 40 million, which cannot procure even a single vehicle! The Commission urgently needs to be facilitated to gradually acquire new vehicles.

6. The committee notes that the Uganda Human Rights Commission’s budget of 2002/2003 was grossly impaired due to the following expenditures from the non-wage component:

- There were transfers to meet the salary bill, amounting to Shs 110,237,000. 

- The conference of African Human Rights Institutions had to be facilitated and Shs 149,847,000 was used.  

- Gratuity to commissioners had to be paid and Shs 98,340,000 was used. 

No supplementary budget was approved to ensure that the operations are not impaired. 

In view of the above, the committee strongly recommends that the said amount of money be approved so that the Commission can continue to execute its mandated functions.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, there has been some confusion over the issue of donor funding. According to the Ministry of Finance, it indicates that the Uganda Human Rights Commission is to receive US $5,250,000. Contrary to this, the Uganda Human Rights Commission indicated that it is only aware of Shs 1,612,123,453. 

The Commission indicated that the misrepresentation could be responsible for the proposed under-funding. This anomaly should be immediately rectified by the Ministry of Finance, since it is clear that the Human Rights Commission only expects the amount stated and not what was purported. It was observed that although some donor funding is received, the donors have particular areas of interest and their money cannot be re-allocated. 

The committee notes that in 2002/3, as I have already highlighted, the Uganda Human Rights Commission suffered a huge deficit. 

Recommendations:

1. The Uganda Human Rights Commission should remain under the Justice, Law and Order sector.

2. Awards granted by the Uganda Human Rights Commission to victims of human rights abuse should be respected by the Government; taking into account that most persons who approach the Uganda Human Rights Commission do not have the capacity to hire lawyers.

3. It is recommended that the practice of government security agencies, of arresting people and detaining them in un-gazetted areas without powers of arrest, should stop. The committee also urges government to gazette all places of detention.

4. The committee recommends that Shs 98,400,000 be provided to enable the renovation of the Commission’s headquarters to be undertaken, and to enable the Commission to pay rent of the upcountry offices. 

5.  The committee strongly recommends that the Commission be facilitated to acquire new vehicles and therefore the required amount of Shs 757,130,920 should be released for this purpose.

6. The committee is concerned that the Uganda Human Rights Commission expects only UShs 1,612,123,453, and not US $5,250,000 as purported by the Ministry of Finance. The committee strongly recommends that the Commission should be adequately funded to enable it discharge its duties. 

The committee proposes that Parliament approves the Commission’s budget in order to enable it execute its mandate.  

In light of the discrepancy in the figures provided as donor money, the committee proposes that if donor projections are not realized, the Uganda Human Rights Commission will have no alternative but to seek for a supplementary, which this House should support. 

Mr Chairman and honourable members, we note this because these donor projections have been incorporated in the amount, which has been stated by the Ministry of Finance in the budget under the medium-term expenditure framework.

The budgetary provisions for the Human Rights Commission vary and I would like to state them as follows:

• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 3,100,000,000 is selected. I have a problem with the figures. I will seek for some time to verify this information. Mr Chairman, you will give us an opportune moment because what I have here is being disputed by this note. I would like to consult on this.

THE CHAIRMAN: A note from where?

MS BYAMUKAMA: It is the Budget Committee, which gave us the figures, which are stated here. I am going to read these.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: The development expenditure is Shs 11,159,975,000. The recurrent expenditure is Shs 2,580,000,000.  

Electoral Commission:

Mr Chairman, the Electoral Commission has registered several achievements: 

• The Commission is fully constituted except for one post that is still vacant. It was noted that gender should be taken into consideration when appointing people to the Commission. 

• The Commission handled 48 petitions, out of which 35 were won and 13 lost. 

 • The Commission conducted a number of by-elections resulting from mainly court rulings. These included by-elections as follows:

- For Members of Parliament: Rubanda East, Kassanda South, Bukomansimbi, Bubulo East, Busiki and Kinkizi West.

- For district chairpersons: Nebbi, Mukono, Rakai and Lira. 

- Others included women councils/committees and parish executive committees.

- LC II elections were also conducted, and so were youth elections. 

• The Commission used photo-bearing registers, which facilitated its work. 

• The Commission appointed and gazetted its own returning officers in nine districts. This was to replace those implicated in various malpractices. The Commission intends to extend this to other districts. As it expands, more resources will be required to facilitate this exercise.  

I beg to report, Mr Chairman, that youth elections have not yet been conducted. 

• The Commission, in consultation with the Public Service Commission, was able to recruit 85 officers.

Observations:

1. The Committee restates that there are a number of employees in different districts who were implicated in the IGG report. The Commission cannot take action against these since they are not their employees. The districts were also reluctant to take action since presiding over elections was not part of their district mandate.

2.  Government has injected colossal amounts of money in the purchase of the Photographic Voter Register Project (PVRP). The committee expressed concern about the fact that it is not being optimally utilised. 

3. The Commission needs a permanent home. The current premises are vulnerable to floods, and expensive and delicate equipment was at one time damaged.

4. The Commission is faced with a problem of late releases for activities that have statutory deadlines.

5. The committee was informed that the Commission has made proposals on electoral laws, taking into account practical realities and current political trends in the country. These proposals were submitted to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

6. The committee notes with appreciation the work so far accomplished in the few cases that the Electoral Commission has handled.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommends that abuse of office and financial impropriety by returning officers should be addressed by the IGG and Electoral Commission. 

The Commission should fully implement the recommendations of the Inspectorate of Government stated in his report on the Commission. The Commission should also request the DPP to take action against officers implicated in the IGG’s report.

2. The Commission should be facilitated to gradually develop the necessary officers at the district, sub-county and parish levels in order to strengthen the management functions of the Commission. 

The Commission should recruit its own officers who will be impartial and accountable to it. This will require additional resources but will go a long way towards the delivery of free and fair elections.  

3. The committee recommends that the Electoral Commission should contract out and solicit work in order to put the PVRSP equipment to optimum use.

4. The Commission should be facilitated to build their own home. The committee strongly recommends that the Electoral Commission should be in its home.

5. The committee urges the Ministry of Finance to make timely releases for activities, which have statutory deadlines. The committee restates that the Commission should cater for some unforeseen activities such as by-elections.

6. The committee restates that some of the electoral laws should be amended to enable some elections to be carried out concurrently to reduce expenses. The Ministry of Justice is urged to study proposals submitted to it by the Electoral Commission and to present them to Parliament as soon as possible.

7. The committee notes that the work so far done by the Electoral Commission was reasonable. The Commission should build on this for more challenging future elections and to consolidate their independence within the meaning of Article 62 of the Constitution.

8. The vacant post of one commissioner should be filled.

Budgetary Provisions for the Electoral Commission are as follows:

• The development expenditure is Shs 1,811,101,000. 

• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 12,991,265,000.

Inspectorate of Government (IG):

Mr Chairman and honourable members, this is the second last item I have to report on. The achievements registered under the Inspectorate of Government are as follows:

The Inspectorate of Government opened up one additional regional office in Kabale, bringing the total number of regional offices to ten. 

It investigated over 3,800 corruption cases and carried out prosecution of 16 cases out of 44. 

The IG enforced the Leadership Code; carried out enforcement measures such as investigations into corruption and abuse of office allegations. Research was also carried out.

Observations:

1. It should be noted that during consideration of the Leadership Code Bill, the Ministry of Finance provided a Certificate of Financial Implications in which an undertaking was made on the availability of funds for the implementation of the Leadership Code.

2. It was observed that the Inspectorate purchased second-hand vehicles in financial year 2002/2003. This was due to limited funds. The committee recommends that this practice should be discouraged, since it is costly in the long run.

3. The committee restates that according to the Inspectorate of Government Act, 2001, the IG is supposed to give awards to persons who assist the IG during investigations and prosecutions to prevent loss, or recover lost or embezzled funds. In the current budget, the IG proposes Shs 310 million for this purpose. It is imperative that these funds be directly released to the IG in order to protect informers.

4. The committee notes with concern that in spite of proposals to increase salaries of IG staff, their salaries have remained static. The committee notes with grave concern that the work executed by the IG is hazardous and that in order to retain professional staff, this needs to be taken into account.

5. The committee notes that the IG’s office is under-funded and yet commissions of inquiry, which perform the same function, are heavily funded. It was noted that in most circumstances, persons on commissions of inquiry are judges and yet the law also provides that the IGG or his deputies shall be persons qualified to be appointed Judges of the High Court.

6. The committee noted that the IGG attended meetings of the Movement National Executive Committee and National Conference. This act may be misconstrued by the public who expect the IGG to be independent and non-partisan.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommended that for certificates of financial implications to be taken seriously, funds stated as available should be made available. Funds for implementation of the Leadership Code should accordingly be released without further delay.

2. The committee recommended that the practice of purchasing second hand vehicles should be discouraged since their maintenance is costly.

3. The Shs 310 million to cater for the award of informers should be released to the IG as agreed upon by the Minister of Finance in a meeting with the Budget Committee of 14 August 2003.

4. The committee restates and supports that the IG should implement its salary in accordance with the IG Act, and uses these powers to implement the structure. 

It is noted that the Public Service issued a circular streamlining and harmonizing the salary structure of government entities. This should be implemented and the hazards associated with the work of the IG office taken into account. In light of this and other instances mentioned, the Ministry of Finance is urged to respect the budget of the IG in line with Article 155 of the Constitution.  

5. The committee recommends that the institution of the IG should be strengthened to avoid duplicity of its activities through ad hoc institutions of inquiry. The huge amounts of money spent on commissions should be used to strengthen the IG to perform its investigative role in any field.

6. The committee recommends that the IGG in his roles should not only be independent but should also be seen to be independent.

The committee recommends budgetary provisions for the Inspectorate of Government as follows:

• Development expenditure, Shs 234,800,000 
• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 7,673,719,000.

The Parliamentary Commission:

Observations were made on the work of the Parliamentary Commission as follows:

1. It was not possible for the Parliamentary Commission to produce a comprehensive policy statement because the process of deriving work plans and activities from the Parliamentary Strategic Investment Development Plan by the consultant delayed. 

The Parliamentary Strategic Investment Development Plan is supposed to be a blueprint to which all activities of Parliament should be linked. This plan is a ten-year strategic plan, which will guide investment and development of the Parliament in Uganda. Its implementation is to start in financial year 2003/2004.  

The Parliamentary Strategic Investment Development Plan provides a vision statement for the institution of Parliament and all its organs including the Parliamentary Commission, the Parliamentary Service, the committees and the House. It has four strategic goals, which are expected to underpin Parliament’s role in national development and these are: democracy, development, accountability and institutional relations.

2. Due to the shortfall of Shs 640,364,758 in the development budget for financial year 2002/2003, there are urgent activities, which, unless funds are provided, will not be carried out in this financial year. These include: Purchase of desks and chairs for Members of Parliament, computer equipment, security equipment, air conditioning equipment and a ceremonial car for the Speaker. 

So, if we could get Shs 640,364,758, it would cover these items. 

I would like to note that there are other registered achievements, which are within the knowledge of Members of Parliament. The Parliamentary Commission will report exhaustively on this point.

Recommendations:

The shortfall in the financial year 2002/2003 of Shs 640,364,758 should be provided to enable the affected activities under the development budget to be under taken. These are crucial areas that need to be urgently provided for. 

The committee was informed that the bill for a members’ pension scheme was awaiting tabling before Parliament. The committee requests that the bill be expeditiously tabled because issues it is supposed to address remain outstanding.

The budget of the Parliamentary Commission should be approved as presented by the Commission in accordance with Section 19 of the Administration of Parliament Act.

Mr Chairman, honourable members, budgetary provisions for the Parliamentary Commission are recommended as follows:

• Development expenditure, Shs 2,390,446,000
• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 37,130,408,000 

I would like to conclude with the general observations and recommendations: 

• Ministries to which proposed legislation for review has been forwarded should expedite tabling it to Parliament.  

• The Ministry of Finance is urged to take parliamentary approvals on budgets seriously.

• Budget ceilings need to take into account prevailing circumstances rather than recycling previous ceilings.

I would like to summarize what has been stated. The committee recommends for the approval of the budget for the financial year 2003/2004 as follows:

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs:

Development expenditure, Shs 23,405,551,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 8,362,197,000
Statutory, Shs 4,200,000,000

Directorate of Public Prosecutions:	   

Development expenditure, Shs 298,960,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 3,239,952,000
Statutory expenditure, Shs 43,238,000

Judiciary:

Development expenditure, Shs 3,058,475,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 14,966,585,000

Judicial Service Commission:
Development expenditure, Shs 31,500,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 1,570,040,000

Electoral Commission:

Development expenditure, Shs 1,811,101,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 12,991,265,000

Uganda Human Rights Commission:

Development expenditure, Shs 11,159,975,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 2,580,000,000

Uganda Law Reform Commission:

Development expenditure, Shs	112,000,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 1,881,000,000

Inspectorate of Government:

Development expenditure, Shs 234,800,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 7,673,719,000

Parliamentary Commission:

Development expenditure, Shs 2,390,446,000
Recurrent expenditure, Shs 37,130,408,000

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to thank you for this very clear presentation, and I thank the committee for the report. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of procedure. I would like to know how to handle the report if I feel there is an omission. Would that constitute an amendment to the report or would that just be like a contribution or addendum?

THE CHAIRMAN: The report has already has been read and signed. We cannot now start correcting a report here; we are not in the committee meeting.

MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good work done. 

I also note that in four months, the release of funds for the ministry has been very commendable. If you take an average, its performance has been 83 percent across the board, which I think makes it one of those well-facilitated ministries. If you look around, there are some ministries, which hardly attain 40 percent of budget performance. So, I think the ministry has really performed very well. 

I have one or two things that I would like to observe in as far as the report that has been presented is concerned. One is about the conditions of service relating to state briefs. I think when state briefs are given, many times the legal personnel who handle such cases do not have the morale, let alone the interest in pursuing and defending cases because they are poorly facilitated. 

When I look through this report, there is no mention anywhere as to how the Ministry intends to improve the conditions the conditions of lawyers who are given state briefs.

I also do appreciate the comments, which have been raised by the committee in as far as the large outstanding sums of money owed to this ministry by various district authorities is concerned. Arua District has many times written to this ministry because it houses the chief magistrate’s court in that district. The amount of money the district is demanding from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is so colossal. 

As custodian of the law, the Ministry many times sets aside letters that have been given because they know it is the Judiciary which has to authorize the eviction. It sends a wrong signal. You are the person who owes us money, and we know that you are the one who is the custodian of justice, and you know very well that without you no other person can evict your ministry or your department, but you drag your feet! I think the Ministry should expedite settling debts that it owes to a number of districts.

I would like also to make an observation about the recommendation that the Electoral Commission recruit its own personnel so that there can be impartiality in the performance of their duties. The talk now is very rife in Kampala and in the countryside that of late, 30 ISO operatives who were recruited for that particular service have been deployed in the Electoral Commission and they are due to be posted as Assistant Registrars. That makes the independence of that body very questionable. 

I hope the Ministry responsible will seriously take note of the cry from the public and be able to respond to it. Because if we begin having such personnel manning a very sensitive office of that nature, where impartiality is supposed to prevail, then you can be rest assured that all future elections will be contested because there will be that question of lack of impartiality.  

I would also like to add my voice to the issue of facilitation for chief magistrates. In this report, there is a high backlog of cases that have not been expeditiously pronounced on, and this comes down to facilitation. As I talk now, there is no chief magistrate or magisterial area or vehicle to facilitate a chief magistrate to supervise subordinate courts. I think that contributes greatly to the inefficiency in the performance of his or her duties, which I hope the Ministry will be able to address in this financial year. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have to thank the committee – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we agreed that you make your contribution in three minutes.

MR SEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Chairman. My first revelation is that to-date, government has released a colossal amount of money, to the tune of Shs 4,220,000,000, to facilitate the Constitutional Review Commission. This is reported on page 5. 

However, if you follow the recent press statements, you will find that this money is for consultancy. This is unfortunate, because if this colossal sum was for consultancy then there should have been a tendering process. I would have been an interested party to do such kind of work, but for it to pass like this is really a matter of deep concern.

On page 8, the committee recommends that a status report on all court awards from 2002 to-date be produced with a view to establish why government loses cases. I do not know what the committee was going on about, I thought cases are judged according to merits and demerits. I think before government takes up a case, they know whether it is futile or not. I do not think Parliament should be subjected to coming up with a status report on all court awards.

Mr Chairman, on the Judiciary, no mention was made about grade II magistrates and yet they are in every area of this country. There was a statement last financial year that grade II magistrates would be phased out, but nothing has been mentioned about it. They are continuing to practice and administer justice, and in most cases they handle grave cases like defilement. So, I wonder whether the Ministry has its eyes on such a lacuna, and what is it doing to ensure that it harmonizes our judicial system?

On page 26, the committee recommends that the practice of government security agencies arresting people and detaining them in un-gazetted areas without powers should stop. I must add that this must stop, because “should stop” has been sang over and over again. The un-gazetted places have been here and we have always mentioned them in our parliamentary debates. I think emphasis should now be put on “must stop” rather than “should stop”.  

Lastly, on page 29, the committee recommends that the abuse of office and financial impropriety by returning officers should be addressed by the IGG and the Electoral Commission. They go on to say that the commission should fully implement the recommendations of the IGG stated in his report on the commission. I think that will be going abit ahead because we still have a pending report on election violence. I think that will give us an entire picture of the Electoral Commission. We shall then see how to proceed on grievances pointed out. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to also to thank the committee for the report well presented. 

I have just a few observations, mostly on the part of the Inspector General of Government. If you read their recommendations, it hurts to note that these people lack transport and they buy old vehicles. When you see the work they have to do, for example to investigate and arrest, they have to be given more vehicles. Sometimes they even have to use choppers when the going gets difficult. They may need to fly to Karamoja or elsewhere.  

Look at the salaries they are getting, compared to some of the cases they have to handle. If you are investigating a corrupt officer and he is able to employ one of the best lawyers in the country and the prosecutor is paid Shs 250,000 or less, I do not think they can compete favourably. So, they need to be assisted in this area. 

We are also talking about an era of a global village where there is need to use modern equipment. The Inspector General’s office needs modern equipment and computers that can help them to carry out investigations and even collect data and information. They also need pin-recorders and sophisticated cameras that can be used when they go to the field. They also need training for the equipment. I think what they have is not enough and they need to be facilitated in that area. 

These officers also need to be protected, because most of the cases they handle involve big people. I would like to recommend that the office of the Inspector General of Government be provided with a special court to handle cases related to corruption and abuse of office. I thank you very much.
 
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO KABONESA (Youth Representative, Female): I thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the committee for the very good work done. 

When there was a change in the Electoral Commission, the youth of this country thought that the elections would now be well conducted. On the contrary, there is completely no change and they are disappointed.  

I remember we passed the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill. It is now two months down the road and the elections have not been carried out. Mr Chairman, without the National Youth Council elections, the district youth councils and all the lower councils can do nothing. The budget was cut from about Shs 770 million to Shs 148 million, which can do nothing. 

I also remember one time hon. Namayanja said the youth of this country are losing their revolutionary patience. Indeed they are losing it. And I must state categorically that the youth are so disappointed with this budget cut.  

Let me take this opportunity, therefore, to ask the Minister probably to tell this country why the elections have not been carried out. We are remaining with about two and half years; our tenure is running out. So, we wonder whether the elections will ever take place. I thank you so much.

MR PATAKI AMASI (Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have few observations on the Judiciary. Increasing the number of judges does not solve any problem with the backlog of cases. The only way forward is to amend the Magistrate Courts Act, which has not been amended since 1970, to give more criminal jurisdictions to chief magistrates. 

A chief magistrate could try cases like defilement and rape, for example. What is difficult in proving defilement? When you come to rape, is it difficult to prove that carnal knowledge was obtained forcefully? I think these are the cases, which could be given to chief magistrates so that people do not languish in jails for a long time. 

They should be left to handle cases like murder, treason, armed robbery, etcetera. For instance, in areas where there are no chief magistrates or high court judges, you have to travel very far, say to Gulu. How does a very poor person from Obongi travel for over 200 kilometres to attend a civil suit? The subject matter of the case is less than Shs 100,000, and you are going to spend over Shs 200,000! Where is the sense? 

A chief magistrate tries cases where the value of the subject matter is about Shs 10,000. How do you again travel over 100 kilometres to obtain a letter of administration to administer estates of the deceased person? 

Justice has become very, very expensive to be accessed by the lowest people. This is why you find cases like defilement, rape and murder being tried in the villages by the LCs or the local chiefs. They try these cases because to access the high court is very expensive. The local people must access justice so easily. Mr Chairman, I could have gone further, but let me stop here.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for the good presentation. I have a few clarifications to seek. 

My colleague, hon. Kabonesa, has already pointed out one issue, but I wish to emphasize it. The Committee of Social Services handled three important bills on this Floor. We handled the National Women Council (Amendment) Bill, the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, and the Disability Council Bill. We passed the last one on 15th May. We expected the elections of these three councils to be conducted. 

I wonder whether the committee took time to ask the Ministry why these elections have delayed. I also what to know whether this budget we are passing has money allocated for these councils. 

In connection to that, I would also like to make an observation on about page 29, No. 6. The committee recommends harmonization of laws, which should be amended to enable elections to be carried out concurrently to reduce expenses. 

I wish to add that, as we were making and passing these bills, we made certain recommendations in connection to these councils. One very important thing we noted was that the elections of Members of Parliament for people with disabilities have been handled by the Electoral Commission with the support of the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU), an NGO.

However, having passed the Disability Council Bill, we recommended that the work that has been carried out by NUDIPU be taken over by the Disability Council. We presuppose that the concerned ministry will amend the parliamentary elections procedure to address that. 

Also, when we were making the National Youth Council (Amendment) Statute, we recommended the merger of the National Delegates Conference with the National Youth Council. The elections of the national female youth representative have always been handled by the National Delegates Conference. But with the merger, we expect harmonization of the parliamentary elections law to address this.

Mr Chairman, I want to quickly comment on the Law Development Centre (LDC), which is mentioned on pages 5, 6 and 9. My concern is particularly on page 9, where the committee is recommending the criterion of admission to the Law Development Centre to be streamlined. 

In the National Resistance Council (NRC), a restructuring policy was made and I have been wondering how the Law Development Centre was not transferred to the Minister of Education and Sports. This transfer should have happened, given that the restructuring policy recommended the transfer of all training institutions to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

My concern is that recently we passed the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, whereby the Law Development Centre falls under tertiary institutions. Therefore, we are concerned about the policy of admission and about the policy of training. I need clarification on this, Mr Chairman.

Lastly, could we be told why the Secretary to the Treasury has never appointed an accounting officer for the Law Development Centre? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for this elaborate report, but I want to make some comments.

The first comment is for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. For compensation to the people from war-ravaged areas, the audited stock came to Shs 4,820,000,000, but the Government only provided for Shs 14 million. This is actually a very disappointing thing because people from Eastern Uganda suffered and lost a lot of property. Their claims are with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and every now and then, these fellows are referred to Bombo or wherever, as they chase these claims. I feel the Minister should assess the situation so that the Government looks for money to compensate these people.

About this semi-autonomous department under the Ministry - the Administrator General’s office - it should be restructured and taken to district level. This is a department that handles the claims of the people who have lost their relatives, the people who really need support. But you find people from upcountry travelling to Kampala and even spending beyond what they are expecting to get from the Administrator General’s Office. 

I request this august House to see to it that the Administrator General’s Office is either restructured or abolished, because it does not offer help to some of us.

I go to the comments about the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, on page 10 of this report. The report says, “the Directorate of Public Prosecutions is mandated to handle and prosecute criminal cases in the country, delegate power where necessary, having regard to public interests, fair administration of justice, and need to prevent abuse of the legal process”. 

Mr Chairman, I have an example of a case in Pallisa. This criminal case has been politicised and it is taking over two years. They keep on adjourning the case in order to punish the people who are involved.

Mr Chairman, the Electoral Commission is mandated to organize and conduct regular, fair and free elections but in most of the districts, like Pallisa, we have vacant posts from local councils up to district levels. A member of the district council died two years ago, the Electoral Commission was informed, the vacancy was declared, but two years down the road no elections have taken place in Pallisa. 

I also support the committee for suggesting that the Electoral Commission should appoint their returning officers in the districts. These returning officers are the cause of election violence and rigging in the districts. I think that if they were independent it would be different because these Chief Administrative Officers have been the cause of problems in elections. Thank you very much.

MS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wish to thank the committee for the good report presented to the House. I have a few observations to make, and one of them is on the Electoral Commission.  

The elections of the Local Council II and Women Councils did not take place in my district. The explanation we got from Parliament was that there were no funds to organize such elections. In the report, I expected a remark that, “although the Electoral Commission performed very well in this kind of elections, in Pader District the Local Council II and Women Council elections were not held because of these reasons”. 

I have not seen the reasons in this report. That shows that Pader as a district has been neglected in these two very important elections, yet we cannot run certain activities when this system is not in place. So, I seek clarification on whether these elections will be held or not. 

What prevented the elections from taking place? I know that during the time when we were mobilizing people to go to the camps, we told people that they should move from their villages to their sub-county headquarters. Therefore, I believe that the people from a certain sub-county are within the camp area where these elections can take place.  

My second comment is on the recruitment of officials in the Electoral Commission’s office.  Here, I would like to give an example. When the committee on local government went to the southwestern districts, we heard some complaints from many of the Chief Administrative Officers. They were requesting to be relieved of the work of being returning officers because this has brought a lot of conflict between them and the chairmen. 

Mr Chairman, where we found that the chairman does not rhyme very well with the CAO, it meant that during the elections something might have happened. This mostly occurs when the candidate in favour of the CAO has lost the election. So, I wish to propose that during the election period, people should be posted to the different districts as returning officers, other than leaving this work to the CAOs.

My last comment is on compensation issues. We have really complained about this over and over again. In the budget of last year, the arrears were about Shs 4,000,000,820 and yet they have only paid Shs 14 million. So, I see that even the budget we are passing today is going to be spent on the arrears instead of new compensations, which have been tabled in the Ministry of Justice. 

I would also wish to know the criteria, which is always used for giving this compensation. Because you find that some compensation requests were put in by 1990, but those put in 2000 have already been handled. These are the few issues I would like to understand. 

Some compensation requests, which were collected in Pader District, are lying in Bombo. They were not even forwarded to the Ministry of Justice. Those in the Ministry of Justice are also left lying in the offices; no one is attending to them. I think they have their own criteria of selecting the people to be paid and the ones to be thrown around. Thank you.

MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the members of this committee for their report and their observations and recommendations. 

I want to talk about how the Electoral Commission handles petitions. Kayunga has been one of the districts, other than Mukono, which has suffered from election petitions by the chairpersons. When justice is delayed, it is denied. So, my plea is that election petitions should be handled expeditiously to avoid misunderstandings and work lagging behind in the district.  

I want to also talk about the youth. They are languishing in prisons because their cases are not heard as quickly as possible. So, I would like the Ministry of Justice to see to it that cases of rape, defilement, incest and acid are handled expeditiously and the culprits are punished or released as quickly as possible. 

In Kayunga District, there are so many acid cases. Surely we do not know the source, but someone disfigures her co-wife or her colleague for life, they are taken in for two or three months, the next time they are back in society. So, I do not know how cases concerning rape, defilement, incest and acid should be handled. 

Sometimes these cases are handled by local councils and sometimes by magistrates, and yet they are criminal cases! Sometimes these culprits are kept in police cells for more than the legally mandated 48 hours. The police cells are over-crowded and they are too small to handle so many people. 

I would like to end by saying that the prison cells for women are very small, so the crimes committed by women should also be handled urgently. I thank you.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I believe that a lot has to be done by the Law Reform Commission.  It is good that they have realised that there are so many laws that need to be repealed so that justice can be administered effectively and fairly. 

There is the adultery law, for example, whereby someone falls in love with your wife and then he is fined Shs 600. I think that is really a way of encouraging mob justice. That is why many people are now taking the law in their own hands. Because when you take someone to court, when you use a lawyer he is going to charge more than Shs 500,000 or Shs 200,000 and yet the fine is going to be Shs 600.

One of my constituents told me that when he caught his neighbour who was in love with wife, the neighbour told him, “I will not only pay you Shs 600 but I will pay you Shs 600 for every hour I will be with your wife.” So, I think, Mr Chairman, these laws need to be repealed so that they can meet the demands of the day.  Secondly, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: The information I would like to give him and the House is that the law is so bad that when somebody goes with your husband, you get nothing. (Laughter). So, the sooner it is amended to equalise it, the better.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, I think the Law Reform Commission has a lot of work. Thank you hon. Matembe for that information. It is so relevant to what I have been trying to put across. I think this will be under the sexual offences bill, when the Uganda Law Reform Commission has completed their work.

Secondly, there is the issue regarding the Property Rate Act of 1972. This cannot meet the demands of today. So many people in Kampala and other areas are being told to pay more money than they can afford. They give you a form to fill; even if those in that house are orphans but are still using that house, they have to pay 20 percent of the total value. I think that is unfair. Uganda Law Reform Commission needs to do a lot of work on that. Even some of the traffic laws need to be reviewed.

Lastly, we have spent over Shs 4 billion on the Ssempebwa Commission, but the National Political Commissar came out with news that the Cabinet had its own commission. He said that Cabinet had addressed the important issues, that is, third term and federo. Is there a need for the Government to spend more money on this commission yet it already has its findings and it has already decided? Is there any need to spend more money on this commission? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for the report. I think it is a very good report. I think the standard of reporting from committees is excellent. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to appeal to the Constitutional Review Commission to issue their report as soon as possible. This is very important because some characters are beginning to get ideas, which are going to run this country into political chaos again. So, the earlier we get the report out the better.  

On court awards, the Government loses case after case, and we have to spend so much money on court awards. I think we need the committee to investigate these particularly, so that we get a report on this one.

With regard to offices of government at the Crane Chambers, I am glad that the committee pointed out that these offices are totally inaccessible to people with disabilities. The building rules require that a building with more than four storeys must have a lift. But this building has seven storeys and there is no lift! 

Mr Chairman, the Population Secretariat is on the fifth floor of that same building. I wanted to consult them on population matters regarding disabled people, but I could not go there. The Registrar of Companies is also on the same building. I would like to appeal to the Government to remove all government offices from the Crane Chambers.  

On the Law Reform Commission, I would like to agree that they should have the money so that they finish the work that they have been doing. But I am so disappointed that they have reformed so many laws and these laws are being kept in ministries of government. These laws should be brought so that people can now be judged properly in courts of law.  

I agree with the committee that the budget of the Judiciary should not be part of the Executive’s budget. I think, in order to keep its independence, the Judiciary must have its budget separated from the budget of the Executive.  

Mr Chairman, I want to agree that the Uganda Human Rights Commission should not remain under the Law and Order Sector. It would be wrong to take it to the administration.

Finally, what we heard from the Electoral Commission with regard to the photographic voters register is that the equipment has capacity to do much more than a voters register. They can, for instance, work on identity cards and UNEB can also use it for examinations. I think government should look into the possibility of using this equipment optimally. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and colleagues. I want also to thank the committee and the chairperson for a very good report. 

Many of the issues raised here are a repetition of what the committee raised. Therefore, I have only two issues to comment on. 

One, hon. Wadri - I do not know what word to use but I think I should use “alleged” because I do not have the facts; he alleged that 30 ISO operatives were recruited to be deployed as deputy registrars. 

Mr Chairman and colleagues, I want to submit that when the Electoral Commission wanted to recruit, it used the same body that Parliament used. This is ISS, who are consultants. I do not think that anybody who went there to apply had terms. I need to investigate that. I will work with hon. Wadri to find out how he could identify the ISO people because for me, all young people are young.  

Also, Mr Chairman, I think there is no law that prohibits somebody from moving from one job to another. If I am an ISO operative and I want to be a member of the Electoral Commission, what stops me from applying to be so? Anyway, I will try to follow this one up as I work with him.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I must say that I cannot own a colleague’s press interview because I was not there. But I want to tell this House that the Constitutional Review Commission is a commission of inquiry and has government respect, and you are looking forward to getting its report. 

I want also to say that we have had colleagues here in Parliament who talk authoritatively on behalf of Parliament, but we have never held them responsible because we think that these are individuals. So, we should separate an individual from the Executive. 

If a minister talks on behalf of the Executive – (Interjection)- please I have little time given to me by the Chair, so we can debate outside. I am saying I was not at the press conference so I cannot comment on somebody’s press conference. That is what I am saying. (Mr Ekanya rose_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, let us finish this business.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, matter that is being discussed is a matter that can turn this country violent if not well handled. We know very well that Cabinet operates on the principle of collective responsibility. Therefore, is the Minister in order to deny the collective position that was presented to the public during a press conference by none other than the National Political Commissar? Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: In the first place, since I sat here I have not heard that the Cabinet made this statement. The Minister did not even reveal the name of the person who addressed the press conference. Now, how can I rule on such a point of order? (Laughter)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for that wise ruling. I want to end this debate by saying that in order to do a good job, the Ssempebwa Commission will give us a working document that we can rely on to guide this country.  I have taken note of the rest of the issues and shall address them as recommended. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have instructions from the people I represent in Lubaga South to seek the following clarification before I can approve the proposal of the Ministry of Justice.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the honourable minister first of all refused to allow information and clarification. Now, is this clarification directed to the Chairman or to the chairperson?

MR LUKYAMUZI: To the Minister. I am a spokesman of the taxpayers - (Laughter)- and I believe I have a right to seek clarification. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I know you are a very fair Chairman.  

I have instructions from the people of Lubaga South seeking the following clarification before I can go ahead to approve the ministerial budget: One, the people I represent would like to have a very convincing reason why the report on electoral violence, which greatly impacts on the regular elections in this country, cannot be discussed.  

The second question, Mr Chairman, is about the constitutional dilemma we are in today. The constitutional court overwhelmingly ruled on the Political Organisations Act, namely, sections 18 and 19, which also greatly impact on the Movement (Amendment) Bill now before Parliament. 

There is no reason why the Minister cannot wait for the Constitutional Court to finally give a ruling on issues before it, concerning the petition. Until we have got a clear explanation from the Minister, and I do not see any explanation, I am reluctant to approve the proposal. That is the voice of the people of Lubaga. (Laughter)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Chairman, hon. Lukyamuzi represents a very dynamic constituency, but I think they also want the budget for other things. I do not see how a constitutional petition relates to this budget.  It is in court, court will fix the day and the respondent will take their time to file their case. So, how is that related to me, a mere minister who cannot direct the court?  

Hon. Lukyamuzi, I am submitting that you go and pressurise court to fix the day for hearing and we shall defend ourselves. It has nothing to do with the budget.

The second question was to do with the Movement (Amendment) Bill. The Business Committee informed me that after the 1st of September, when we are through with this important activity of the budget, I will come here with the Movement (Amendment) Bill. I think, hon. Lukyamuzi will be entitled to give his views and I will respond accordingly.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question on the report.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for the elaborate report and the members for their presentation. I must say that I have considerable difficulty accepting the figures as contained in the report. There is a very wide discrepancy between the figures as proposed by the committee and the figures contained in the draft estimates. (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA:  Mr Chairman, is the honourable minister in order to start questioning the figures, which you have ably put to vote and this august House has approved? Is he in order? If he had any complaint or disagreement, he would have raised those issues before.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, in the first place, I do not know why this did not come before. But I think there is another stage, which I will move to, and this is to do with the actual Committee of Supply. I suggest we get the information he is giving and see whether it is related to what I am going to do.  You see, merely passing the report does not mean that the process is concluded.

MR RUZINDANA:  Mr Chairman, we also know that the bottom line is that the figures we pass are not very useful. They never release the whole amount, whether we pass a huge figure or a small one. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, while in the Committee of Supply we go through figure by figure. This is when the Minister can attempt to amend the figures by giving his excuses. It is totally premature to give them now.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, if you are uncomfortable with the figure, then you tell us.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, on a matter of procedure, I find the move by the Minister disturbing. Since we passed the Budget Act, the process of our budgeting has changed considerably. The Minister of Finance has access to the Budget Committee, which deals with these figures. 

The chairperson has told us that the Budget Committee, in the presence of the Minister of Finance, approved the figures that the honourable minister is questioning. I think it is not fair for a minister to attend committee meetings and then come to the House and turn around and start disputing matters, which have been handled by the committee. I find this unpleasant, and it should be rejected.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, after hon. Ruzindana’s comment, I think I saw the Minister accepting to proceed. (Laughter)  

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I was not accepting. I want to say that we take the recommendation contained on Page 36 of this report seriously. On Page 36, bullet number 2, you are urging us to take Parliamentary approvals on budgets very seriously. It is in light of this recommendation that I did not want this Parliament to pass any figure, which we may not honour, for reasons that I am going to explain.  

Regarding hon. Ben Wacha’s submission, yes, there was an interaction between the Ministry and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. This is why I have stood here to say that I have considerable difficulty with the figures, because the figures that were agreed upon between the committee and the Ministry are not the figures that are reflected in this report.

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you attend the meeting of 14th August, which the chairperson has mentioned?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I did not personally attend that meeting.

THE CHAIRMAN: Was there somebody from the Ministry of Finance who attended?

MR RUKUTANA: I know my senior colleague, the Minister of Finance, was there. The information I have, Mr Chairman and honourable members, is that these matters were raised and proposals were made as to how to make reallocations and cover them, and no consensus was reached. I have not, throughout the entire process, stood here to protest any figures. What I am doing –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think, honourable member, I will proceed by reading the figures. If you have any objection, then you raise it and we see how we entertain it. 

However, if the Minister of Finance attended the meeting and you did not attend it and the Minister of Finance who attended it is not here, what do you want us to do? Should we be bogged down because the Minister of Finance who attended the meeting and approved these figures is not here? 

You are waiting for the Minister to check with him; for how long are we going to deal with this process? We have been sitting since Monday, morning and afternoon, simply because we want to comply with the Act. Now, if you say you are not sure what agreement was made, for how long are we going to hold on?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the fact that the minister who attended the committee meeting is not here is not of great importance, because I have a sufficient brief.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then just say which figure is not correct.

MR RUKUTANA: This is exactly what I am saying.  
  
THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR RUKUTANA: I am saying, Mr Chairman, that the figures that are proposed are not what we have in our draft estimates. It is true these proposals were made, but they are not affordable by Ministry of Finance.  

MS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I have information on this. In the first instance, when the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs invited the Ministry of Finance, they did not come. They sent us a letter that very morning responding to our invitation of August, and it was dated April. I have evidence and I can lay that on the Table.  

That showed very clearly that they did not take our invitation very seriously. I had Justices in the corridors, Electoral Commission officers, DPP staff all waiting and I was embarrassed beyond measure.  

Secondly, the Budget Committee has come up with some innovative way of dealing with this ministry.  We had a budget conference, and at that conference there were three key people from that ministry. There was the substantive minister, the Secretary to the Treasury and the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury. Hon. Mwandha attended that meeting plus other members whom I cannot name.  

Mr Chairman, it may not be the norm in this House to swear, but I want to confirm, in God’s name, that an agreement was reached and the figures, which we have stated, are not new to the Minister.  Most of them are in form of arrears. Secondly, they touch on statutory institutions, which are protected by Article 155 of the Constitution. Mr Chairman, the Ministry of Finance should take this House very seriously. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On the day in question, I was chairing the committee. The honourable member, who is the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, was the last person to make a presentation to the Budget Committee about the budget for her sector, and she made a passionate appeal.  

After we had gone through and discussed the figures, the Minister said, “Yes, we shall look into those figures.” It is evident that the Minister was committed to make appropriate adjustments. After all, they have other areas where they can make appropriate adjustments in order to meet this budgetary requirement.

Mr Chairman, incidentally, this is not the only case where the Minister accepted figures in meetings with the Budget Committee. We had the budget for the National Planning Authority where the Minister came with Shs 500 million. We said, “No way, we are not going to accept Shs 500 million. We are going to accept the figure as submitted to us by the National Planning Authority”. He talked to the National Planning Authority and came with a revised figure of Shs 1.9 billion. So, really, when the Minister said, “yes” in the meeting, we took his word seriously. 

The Law Reform Commission has got to get the work done. Mr Chairman, if the Minister is to be believed in future, he has on this occasion to accept that he is committed. Thank you.

Vote 007:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,362,197,000 under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 23,405,551,000 under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,239,552,000 under Vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecutions, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 298,960,000 under Vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecution, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to)

Vote 101:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,966,585,000 under Vote 101, Judiciary, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,058,475,000 under Vote 101, Judiciary, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148:
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,570,040,000 under Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the figure for recurrent expenditure for the Judicial Service Commission should be Shs 764,040,000. 

Since we have this discrepancy, and an allegation that the figure as proposed was agreed upon, I want to make a modest proposal that this figure be stood over until tomorrow morning when we have made the necessary consultation, so that we come up with an agreed position. Otherwise, it may not assist the purposes of this Parliament to pass a figure that we cannot accommodate.  

As honourable members know, we have already passed more than three quarters of the budget provision.  If we pass a figure, which we cannot afford, where shall we get the money? So, my proposal, Mr Chairman, is that for this figure, you give me until tomorrow morning to make the necessary consultations and then we can harmonize our positions. I beg to move.

MS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, the Judicial Service Commission has clearly stated that it has consistently got the same amount of money ever since it came into being. If you remember correctly, this medium-term expenditure framework where the Ministry of Finance recycles figures without taking into account reality, is very erroneous and does not take into account prevailing circumstances. 

I have stated one point; the Judicial Service Commission has created two departments, one for training and another for research and development. They have already recruited staff but these staff do not have money to enable them operationalise what they are supposed to do. Therefore, it becomes difficult for me to concede this, because it is clearly justified.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, all those are very good arguments and they were made at the committee stage when these figures were being considered. But as I have continuously told this House, we can only provide what we have. Otherwise, I may keep quite and pass the figures but when we cannot disburse them, what shall we have achieved as Parliament?

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, to err is human. The Minister of Finance might have erred. What the Minister of State is requesting is that, let us stand over this matter and harmonize our positions because there are implications. For example, when we pass these figures we might have to cut elsewhere. So, these matters have to be harmonized. It is really a professional approach to a very difficult matter.  

I want to ask hon. Members of Parliament to stand over this matter. Let us harmonize it and we come to a sustainable position. I thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, mine is a serious problem. The Minister is not only saying that somebody erred, but he is questioning the authenticity of two Parliamentary committees. Two chairpersons have said before this House that the Budget Committee agreed with the Minister of Finance on these figures. Now the Minister is saying, “look, those two chairpersons are lying, I want to go and check again”. Is that how we are going to proceed in this House?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, the Minister should actually be serious. The Judicial Service Commission recruited staff who are already being paid salary but doing no work because there is no money. That is why the Budget Committee convinced the Minister to agree on this funding. I do not know why we are being taken back.  

THE CHAIRMAN: As hon. Ruzindana said, many times we pass figures and they are not released. Well, let us pass this figure and see if they will not release it.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1, 570,040,000 under Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148: 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 31,500,000 under Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 102:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 12, 991,265,000 under Vote 102, Electoral Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,811,101,000 under Vote 102, Electoral Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 106:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,580,000,000 under Vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,159,975,000 under Vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission, be provided for development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 105:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,881,000,000 under Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I wish to put it on record that the provision we have in the draft estimates for recurrent expenditure for Uganda Law Reform Commission is Shs 1,250,000,000. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, when I do my arithmetic, this is explained by the fact that we are proposing that we get Shs 631 million so that subsidiary legislation can also be published. As a lawyer, the Minister knows that if you have principle legislation without subsidiary legislation, then you are wasting public funds.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,881,000,000 under Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 120,000,000 under Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission, be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 103:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,673,719,000 under Vote 103, Inspectorate of Government, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 234,800,000 under Vote 103, Inspectorate of Government, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 104:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 37,130,408,000 under Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, be provided as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,390,446,000 under Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I want to put it on record that the provision existing in the draft estimates is Shs 2,157,048,000, for the development expenditure of the Parliamentary Commission.

MS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I think this is becoming very difficult. First of all, we have the constitutional provision of Article 155, which protects institutions such as Parliament. 

Secondly, we are currently dealing with issues of arrears. If the Ministry of Finance had responded in time and given 100 percent of the budget before, we would not be going through this exercise.  

Finally, I have explained that this Shs 640,365,000, which was supposed to be for development expenditure of 2002/2003, was never released to Parliament. 

The honourable minister sits in this House; he knows how uncomfortable it is because we do not have air conditioning. His security may be at stake if we do not install the equipment necessary. And, God forbid, but if he came back to the back bench, he may even fail to get an office or even furniture in terms of a chair to sit on. 

Mr Chairman, need I go any further? I think I have made my point, and I want to assert that the Minister was not at that meeting. Next time he should endeavour to get minutes or a brief on this. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,390,446,000 under Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report there to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and unanimously passed these votes: Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecutions; Vote 101, Judiciary; Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission; Vote 102, Electoral Commission; Vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission; Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform; Vote 103, Inspectorate of Government, and Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE 
COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence and I want to be advised. In light of my request that these items on which I needed further reconciliation -(Interjections)- yes, I am supposed to move. I am supposed to move a motion and I can speak to the motion the way I want. Before I move that the committee’s report be adopted, I beg to be allowed to get an opportunity to revisit the figures with which I had problems.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that we revisit the figures.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I therefore, beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and greed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I thank the Minister of Finance very much, and I thank the committee.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LUWERO (Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. Today, hon. Kiwanda and I, under the mediation of the Rt hon. Prime Minister, came together and we reached the following agreement:

That hon. Kiwanda and I belong to the same family, the Movement, and that it is important to come to an amicable understanding. Because I was unaware of the circular, which was passed by the Prime Minister last year, -(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Order, order, please be calm and sober.

PROF. KIWANUKA: I went to Mityana North and inadvertently made the member feel that I had intruded upon his constituency. I did inform the Rt hon. Prime Minister and I would like to inform you that in view of that I regret that I did not know of the existence of the circular. I also regret any inconvenience, which has been brought to hon. Kiwanda. It is these regrets that I make before this House. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I would like to be clarified, Mr Speaker. Is the issue between hon. Kiwanda and the hon. Minister holding the portfolio for Luwero Triangle, or is it about his conduct and Parliament?

MRS ZZIWA: I want to find out, Mr Speaker; in view of your ruling that this matter be forwarded to the Committee on Rules, what would the fate of the Minister be?

THE SPEAKER: Let us get the details then I shall decide.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to refer hon. Members of Parliament to Matthew 5:9. It says; “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons and daughters of God.” 

Our role as elites of this country is to sort out our differences. That is why when Lt Gen. Tumwine and hon. Oulanyah had a problem, they settled it amicably amongst themselves, and Parliament accepted it. I want to confirm that for some time we have been trying to find durable solutions to this problem. Indeed, you must have noted that even today I was not available in Parliament. I was here for a short time, then I went back and we had to handle this matter diplomatically. 

I want to confirm to you that even the lawyers, I refer to Luzige, Kamya, Nakayi and Co. Advocates, have written to you the following letter:

“To the Speaker:

Pursuant to our communication to you dated 22nd August 2003, we wish to inform you that hon. Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka and hon. Godfrey Kiwanda have reached an amicable settlement. The Rt hon. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, the Prime Minister of Uganda, has facilitated the reconciliation. 

Having consulted our client, we have to withdraw the civil suit No. 267/2003.”

If Members of Parliament want to take some other action, that is their matter -(Laughter)- but it will be contrary to the spirit of reconciliation, which we want to support, promote and nurture in this country.

I want to thank hon. Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka for having realized that on 27 November 2002 I passed a circular to all ministers, and it read as follows:

“Yesterday, 26 November 2002, the hon. Member of Parliament for Burahya, Capt. Stephen Basaaliza Mwesigye, complained about visits to various constituencies by ministers without the knowledge of area Members of Parliament. Other members of the House raised the same concern.  

Hon. Prof. Kagonyera, Minister for General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister, on behalf of the Premier promised the House that in future, as far as possible, ministers would inform the Members of Parliament of their intended visits.

“The purpose of this circular is to request you -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have made a ruling before in this House that if a matter is pending before a relevant committee, we cannot discuss it. You already referred this matter to the Rules Committee -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no discussion here. People have just come to make a statement. Nobody, other than the people who have been involved in it, are reporting to us. What debate is going on here? Let me listen to what they say then I will decide.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

“The purpose of this circular is to request you to inform the Members of Parliament regarding visits to their constituencies. The attendance of Members of Parliament during the visits to their constituencies promotes collaborative effort in developing our country.”

The honourable minister has said he was not aware of this circular. It is dated 27 November 2002 and at that time he was not even in this country. So, what will happen? Whenever a problem occurs, you have to cure it. We shall cure the problem of enabling new ministers to read all the circulars so that they are aware of what is obtaining as a process of handling public affairs. I want to thank -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, Prof. Nsibambi, where is the hon. Kiwanda?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, we were with hon. Kiwanda until around 4.00 p.m., and he did pledge that he would come here. I do not know what has happened to him. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think I need to debate this matter, and they have even reached that far. I had referred this matter to the appropriate committee. This can also be channelled through the same committee. There is nothing wrong with people reconciling after they have strayed. It has happened before. If they have reconciled, the committee will report back.

With this we come to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned. Please, tomorrow we are dealing with the Natural Resources Committee report first, then in the afternoon we shall deal with the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee report, so be here on time. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 August 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)


