Monday, 23 August 2004

(Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am delighted to be with you again. I think I have not been in this Chair for the last month or so. (Applause)

I have been doing a bit of administrative work, but I also want to inform you that last Friday I graduated with a Masters Degree, on merit, in the University of Zimbabwe, which was conferred by the President of Zimbabwe, Comrade Gabriel Mugabe. All the Ugandans actually passed on merit. So, there must be something good that we learn in this country. (Applause)

Secondly, I would just like to remind you that last week we did not transact as much business as we wanted to, mainly because of the breakdown of the facilities for photocopying. I now want to report that the Committee on Social Services is ready and the reports have been available at the reception since Friday. A couple of other reports are ready for circulation and members should be able to get and read them. I hope that you have picked them and that you are ready to work.  

I would also like to remind ourselves that we do have a very serious deadline. As you know, by the 31st of August, Parliament should have received the committee reports, the reports should have been debated and everything that is required for the Budget should be concluded. So we have a problem of time but I think in our usual way we shall begin so that our colleagues find us working. I propose that the chairperson presents the report, followed by the debate. Members will be given three minutes each. 

As you recall, we had general debate on the Budget and the State of the Nation Address. We also had the committee meetings. So generally I would expect that a lot of work has been done in the committees. Since we have been busy with the ministerial policy statements, I do not expect re-opening of the debate. After the short debate of three minutes each, the responsible ministers will respond to the issues raised and the chairperson will wind up. Then we should move to the Committee of Supply to consider the Votes for each ministry and department.  

I am really requesting that as much as possible you only seek clarification on matters that are not clear to you, but not to start fresh discussions. I also hope that those who will have made their contributions will continue sitting in the Chamber so that you address one another, instead of making a contribution and running away. And as you know, I need not emphasize that we need a quorum to take decisions. So, I am appealing to you to sit down and do the needful. Thank you very much.

2.39
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again I come back on the Floor to congratulate you upon your completion of an advanced degree course. I am sure it will be of tremendous assistance to our deliberations in the August House. (Applause)

However, I do have two main concerns as a matter of national importance and urgency. In my district of Busia there is a serious shortage of food as a result of continued and persistent drought in the last season. I am calling upon the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to attend to our people in Busia District and the adjoining districts who are suffering from famine.  

Madam Speaker, I also take this opportunity to request the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to take steps and evacuate people from around Mount Elgon. There has been a geological report that any time now Mount Elgon could have a volcanic eruption. At the moment, on the other side of Mount Elgon in the neighboring country, the government is evacuating people because the gases are already coming out of the mountain, which is a clear symptom of a volcanic eruption.  

Madam Speaker, I am raising it for two reasons. Number one, a similar situation developed in the neighboring country, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), near Goma, and nobody took action. I am not blaming the Uganda Government; we have no responsibility for what happens in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) but when a similar situation threatens to take place in this country, I do not want to see people rushing there at the last minute to evacuate people in Mbale District, especially in my honourable colleague’s constituency. Definitely, it is going to happen; geological reports have confirmed it. So, I would like to call upon the Government to take immediate steps to come to the rescue of people in Busia who have no food, and to make arrangements to evacuate people from around Mount Elgon, especially Mbale and Sebei districts.  

I would like to thank the Government for listening, notwithstanding the fact that the relevant ministers and the Leader of Government Business are yet to report to this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is in charge of the Government Business today? 

Honourable members, as you will appreciate, some time back there were very severe volcanic eruptions in Eastern Congo and the lava went on burning people for days after. So, can we expect a response or information and action during the course of this week - Mr Minister of Finance –(Dr Makubuya rose_) from the Minister in charge of volcanic eruptions? (Laughter)

2.44
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for bringing these serious matters to the attention of Government. We will be able to study the matter preliminarily and respond by Thursday. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Both on the food and the volcano?

DR MAKUBUYA: Yes.

2.46
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like all Members of Parliament here present I would like to congratulate you upon your achievement in the academic world. We are all behind you and we will support you.

Madam Speaker, I am standing here in search of advice on a matter of constitutional nature following what happened to me yesterday, and I would like to quote Article 271(2) of the Constitution. I will read it verbatim before I inter-relate it with the problem. 

“Two years before the expiry of the term of the first Parliament elected under this Constitution, any person shall be free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her own choice for purposes of a referendum.” 

Madam Speaker, yesterday I was a guest in Kinoni. Residents of Kinoni made arrangements to invite me, because I was born in Masaka, to articulate the concerns of a federal system. They went through proper procedure, through the authorities and arranged for me to go and deliver a lecture. 

I was well received but when I reached the venue I spotted about 40 policemen and policewomen scattered in various places; some were Anti-riot Police. I was very obedient, I parked on the side where I was going to make the address and I talked to the Officer in Charge of Police, Kinoni. He said, “Hon. Lukyamuzi, we were expecting you, but we have got advance instructions from the top that you will not lecture here.” So, I was very obedient. I set off for Kampala.

Madam Speaker, noting that this is the ripe time when Ugandans will be canvassing support for political systems of their choice, and noting that Parliament is about to review the Ssempebwa Report, what advice are you giving me? (Laughter). Should I, in accordance with this constitutional provision, defy Police and go ahead to articulate matters? 

First of all, I would like to get an explanation from the Leader of Government Business; why I am being hunted from time to time? Am I not a Ugandan? Am I not a Member of Parliament? Is it a crime to be an advocate of federalism? Am I a criminal? When I was summoned to CID recently, did I not report? Did I have any case to answer? When I reported to the CID headquarters I realized that those people are very apologetic to me and I wished I had a prison to detain them in also –(Laughter)- because they had been suffocating me for no reason. I ended up lecturing to them about the science of federalism. What do you have to say, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, my jurisdiction ends in the precincts of this House. So, the person who takes charge of your security once you leave the precincts of Parliament should answer those questions. Where is the Leader of Government Business again?  

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. By his own confession, hon. Lukyamuzi went to articulate issues on federo. The Article of the Constitution he is quoting, Article 271 (2), does not refer to federo; it refers to political systems. Indeed when you read Article 271 (1) –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I have very high respect for the Minister of State for Finance in charge of General Duties. Maybe it is because he is underlining “general duties” that he is not taking things seriously. Otherwise, noting that among the globally known systems of government in the world is federalism, unitarism, communism, socialism; is it in order for the honourable minister, well respected as he is, to distort the notion of federo to be meaning something other than federalism? 

Federalism is a system globally known and scientifically articulated. Is he in order to make such remarks, which are not in consonance with his reputation, esteem and dignity?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I have not seen those definitions you are talking about in this Constitution. They are unknown to this Constitution. Please explain.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for that very wise ruling. I was continuing to say that Article 271 cited by my honourable colleague refers us to another one, Article 69. Article 69 is the one that defines the political systems envisaged under Article 271. It says: 

“The political systems referred to in clause (1) of this article shall include –

(a) the Movement Political System,
(b) the Multiparty Political System and 
(c) any other democratic and representative political system.”

Of the three above, federalism is nowhere because as Ugandans know, it has not been categorized by any authority to lie under any of these three. So, if my colleague was stopped from articulating his points on federo, it is because federo was not anticipated by this Constitution.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, VICE-PRESIDENT’S OFFICE (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give additional information to hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. A close scrutiny of Article 271(2) says; 

“Two years before the expiry of the term of the first Parliament elected under this Constitution, any person shall be free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her choice for purposes of a referendum.”  

Madam Speaker, the first Parliament elected under this Constitution was the Sixth Parliament. That Parliament expired, and this Article lapsed with the expiry of that Parliament. So, this Article is not available to hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and others who would want to canvas for support for any political system, including the federo system.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed, I have received information that one of the most talented, Ugandan musicians, Mr Elly Wamala, died. His body is lying in state at the National Theatre presently. Because of the special talents he had and for the time he served on the music scene in this country, we should stand up and observe a minute of silence in his honour.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Section 17 of the Budget Act requires the minister responsible for any Vote on Appropriation-in-Aid to make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from that Vote have been expended. Section 17(2) says: “The report made under sub-section (1) shall reflect specific data on value for money on the involved expenditures.”  
Madam Speaker, in compliance with this provision I wish to report and lay on the Table a report on Appropriation-in-Aid for financial year 2003/04 for the quarter July to March 2004 for the following institutions:

1. Makerere University,
2. Mbarara University of Science and Technology and,
3. Gulu University. 

The reports for Kyambogo University, Uganda Management Institute and Makerere Unviversity Business School shall be laid in due course. I wish to lay the report on the Table, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will be sent to the appropriate committee.  

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, the Committee on Budget together with the Committee on Social Services will examine the figures that have been laid on the Table. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If so decided.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/05

2.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Madam Speaker, honourable members, let me hope that now everybody has received the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the Ministerial Policy Statements for the Financial Year 2004/05 for the following Ministries:

1. Ministry of Education and Sports
2. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
3. Ministry of Health.

Madam Speaker, given the size of this report, I may not read everything, but I request that the report be recorded in the Hansard as if I have read everything. I am going to make an executive summary.

MR OKUPA: Sorry to interrupt. I was just looking at the Budget Act, Article 17. Hon. Beatrice Kiraso, Chairperson of Budget Committee was laying papers on the Table. According to Article 17(1), “The Minister responsible for any vote on the Appropriation-in-Aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from the vote have been expended.” But now, what do we see? We are seeing the Chairperson of the Budget Committee laying this on the Table, yet we had expected the Minister of Finance to do this. Can we get some clarification in regard to this Article and what has just happened?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a technical problem in that the Minister responsible actually made a report to the Speaker and since the Speaker has no capacity to lay these things on the Table, he assigned the chair of the Budget Committee to lay it on his behalf. But I think in future, please, observe our rules so that you do not cause lugubriousness to my office.

MRS HYUHA: Can I proceed, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I am presenting a report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2004/05 for the three ministries of Education and Sports, Gender, Labour and Social Development and that of Health.  

I was saying that this report is quite sizeable - it has 62 pages - and therefore, I may not read it word by word. I intend to summarize and emphasize a few areas here and there in the interest of time, so that members can be given ample time to debate. I only want to emphasize here that pages 3 to 28 are about the Ministry of Education and Sports, pages 29 to 36 are about the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and pages 37 to 61 are about the Ministry of Health. On page 62 are the budgetary provisions of each Vote under Social Services. 

I was requesting that our report be recorded in the Hansard as if I read it word for word. So, Madam Speaker, if you have permitted me on that, then I can proceed. 

I request you honourable members that we begin from page 5. Page 5 is about budget allocations for the Ministry of Education and Sports and I want to emphasize that given the meetings we had with the Ministry of Finance and under the Budget Committee, the figures here have had some slight changes. Therefore, I want to make that correction immediately.  

The overall budget allocations for the Ministry of Education and Sports in this financial year 2004/05 is Shs 602.8 billion. So, it changes from Uganda Shs 621.3 billion, of which Shs 474.7 billion is recurrent, which has also changed, and the development expenditure will be Shs 127.5 billion. I suggest that the honourable members make that adjustment.  

This financial year, the overall budget allocation for the Ministry of Education and Sports will be Shs 602.8 billion.  So, it changes from Shs 621.3 billion, of which the recurrent expenditure will be Shs 474.7 billion –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would appear Members have not quite got which page you are addressing.

MRS HYUHA: Page 5, honourable members, first paragraph, bullet 2.0 - Budget allocations. I am giving the preamble and drawing your attention to those figures, which have changed, given the meeting we had. I know the Ministry of Finance will give an explanation, but changes have come about given the discount of the donor development budget to 75 per cent, Madam Speaker. So, certain components of the donor budget within the Ministry of Education were adjusted.  

Having made those changes, I know when it comes to the Ministry of Gender, there will also be some changes I will make. 

I want to emphasize here that we went ahead to scrutinize the budget allocations within the Ministry of Education. The percentages have remained as they were; Primary education still takes the top priority with 61.6 percent of the budget share of the Ministry of Education. Secondary education has remained at 18.7 respectively as you can see in that table.

Can we go to page 6? The committee scrutinized Primary education as a top priority of expenditure in the Ministry of Education. We appreciated these achievements as listed down, hon. Members. But I want to go to point 3.1, the primary sub-sector allocations. The overall expenditure allocations on Primary education this financial year is going to be Shs 382.7 billion net direct project support that represents 61.6 percent.

When you go to page 7, you will note what this money is going to be spent on and within this primary education, the top priority expenditures will be on teachers’ wage bill, which will consume on average Shs 230 billion. It will be for UPE grants, PLE fees, construction, and textbook procurement. The amount for child friendly basic education changes because it is a donor project. It was reduced to Shs 5.86 billion from Shs 8.0 billion. So, you can change that figure.

On procurement of textbooks, the allocation will be shs 13.1 billion this financial year to procure instructional materials. But our concern as a committee is usually the delay to procure the materials as you can read in 3.2.

On UPE capitation, Government intends to spend Shs 33.4 billion as you can see on page 7. But when you turn to page 8, hon. Members, I want you to understand that the criteria of distribution of UPE capitation grant is that every school is given a fixed grant, a threshold of at least Shs 100,000 per month, which means that in a year, a school is given money for nine months because for three months, the school is on holiday. So, every school receives a threshold of a fixed grant of Shs 900,000. On top of that it is given a unit cost of Shs 5,786 per child in that school. Our concern here, as you can read, 3.3.1 is about some ghost primary pupils, and it is related to money. 

The committee expressed concern about conflicting figures for the enrolment in primary schools. Although the Ministry of Education acknowledged the existence of ghost pupils, the committee was not satisfied with the measures to curb the inflated figures. The ministry was changing the mode of capitation grant provision, whereby grants would be arbitrarily reduced. They were proposing that every school could be reduced, then whoever has the rightful number of pupils would claim, which the committee was not in agreement with. Instead we recommended that the allocation of the capitation grants should be based on the actual existing number of pupils in schools, and that the Ministry should avoid arbitrary reductions since it may affect some innocent schools. The committee also strongly recommended that disciplinary actions should be taken against all those involved in perpetuating the ghost pupils, ghost schools and ghost teachers.  

Hon. Members, when you come to page 9, you have noted that teacher recruitment is going to be a priority under primary education and the first paragraph is telling us that last year, Government recruited 9,610 primary teachers. This financial year, Government is providing an additional Shs 10 billion, which was announced during the Budget Speech, and a total of 6,000 teachers will be recruited to make overall total of primary teachers to 132,435.
 
The committee recommended that the process should be speeded up to avoid non-utilization and non-recruitment as it has happened in some districts in the past. We had received some reports that some districts returned some money when they had not recruited.

3.4.1 is on wage increment. The President had pledged to increase primary teachers’ salary to Shs 200,000, but this is not reflected in the budget allocation of the Ministry of Education. However, the committee was informed that there is an Inter-ministerial Committee, which includes Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Public Service to study the implication of a minimum of Shs 200,000 per month for a primary school teacher, and that the report will be presented to Cabinet. The committee recommends that this should be speeded up since it was a presidential directive.

3.5 is about a new policy of school feeding programme.  Government will implement a new programme of school-feeding to be rolled out in 19 districts. The districts to be included in the first phase are: Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Bundibugyo, Masindi, Moyo, Adjumani, Mbarara, Soroti, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Lira, Apac, Moroto, Kotido, Nakapiripirit, Yumbe, Nebbi and Pader.

The committee was informed that the beneficiaries are exclusively UPE primary school going children in day schools and teachers. The primary beneficiaries were identified against the following criteria: You can see, on page 10, the criteria they used to arrive at those districts. If you are not there it means that maybe it did not score.

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports should have a master plan to address the school feeding programme throughout the primary schools in the whole country.

3.6 is about high dropout for the girl child. The committee noted with concern the high dropout rates of the girl child due to lack of separate toilets for girls and lack of sanitary towels and early pregnancies.  

Honourable Members, we therefore, recommended for a study to be undertaken to determine the financial implications involved in provision of sanitary towels for the girl child so that we get a report next financial year.

On page 11, honourable Members, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, as we agreed in the beginning, the Hansard is actually going to pick up all these things. I do not know whether you could not just highlight a few of the important things.

MRS HYUHA: That is what I requested, Madam Speaker.  
On the new curriculum, I want you to note that although it expanded from four to 10 subjects, Kiswahili and mother tongue are not yet taken into consideration. We are recommending that teachers for Kiswahili and mother tongue be given top priority this financial year during recruitment.

On construction, you can note the provision given this financial year, but our concern here is about shoddy works and therefore, budget waste.

Another concern is lack of suitable facilities for persons with disability in the constructed structures within schools. 

What we are emphasizing, on page 12, honourable Members, [Mr Awori: “Father tongue”] your mother tongue, hon Aggrey Awori. Can I proceed Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I am sure hon. Aggrey Awori has a mother tongue and is satisfied.

MR AWORI AGGREY: Madam Speaker, for record purposes, it is not gender sensitive vocabulary when you say “mother tongue”. Generally we know that in a home kids normally go by their fathers. So when you say - I think it should be gender neutral by saying “vernacular”. You are leaving us out fathers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, do you have any objection to children speaking the tongue of your wife?  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I did not capture your –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay, hon. Awori. Please proceed, Chairperson.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, in 3.9, our concern was on supervision and monitoring of UPE programmes. We noted that there is inadequate supervision and monitoring of SFG construction and utilization of UPE grants and quality teaching.  

The committee strongly recommended that District Inspectorates or Inspectors should be adequately facilitated and strengthened through proper financing.

On page 13, on secondary education sub sector, the policy is one secondary school per sub-county, which is supposed to increase access and equity within the secondary education sub-sector. When you read further down you see the strategies, which have been put in place to address the above. 

This financial year, Government will emphasize grant aiding of community and private schools, bursary scheme for bright students and the needy students, construction of Seed secondary schools and rehabilitation of some existing facilities.  

But I want to emphasize 4.2 – Grant aiding of community and private secondary schools. The Ministry of Education started the implementation of this policy in the financial year 2000/2001 by grant aiding 104 schools. Last year, Government grant aided 34 schools. This financial year, Government intends to grant aid 76 secondary schools, which are private or community.  

Last financial year we voted Shs 4.6 billion and 1.1 billion for the grant aiding and I wish to report here that the Ministry of Education has so far recruited teachers for secondary schools who are to be deployed soon for these sections. 34 headteachers for the schools which were grant aided in 2003/2004, 51 deputies for 34 for grant-aided schools, 238 for the 17 seed secondary schools, 340 teachers for the 34 newly grant aided schools, 493 graduate teachers for those schools which were grant aided in 2000-2001 and then 244 for non-teaching staff.

Honourable Members, the committee was very happy with this move and appreciated and commended efforts of Government in grant aiding community and private schools since this was the only immediate way of absorbing the UPE bulk. 

4.3 is about teacher recruitment in secondary. After a series of meetings held between Social Services, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance to harmonize the recruitment of teachers using an additional of Shs 9.9 billion, honourable members, if you read the Budget speech by the Minister of Finance, there is a provision of Shs 9.9 billion. The outcome of the meetings, which are mentioned below, is how that money is going to be spent on recruitment of teachers.

Firstly, the Ministry of Education and Sports will recruit teachers for secondary schools with less than 12 teachers whose expenditure would be Shs.4.5 billion on average and a total of 1274 teachers will be recruited.

Secondly, the Ministry of Education will upgrade 105 schools to “A” level status. Those schools, which have been purely “O” level, will now be uplifted to “A” level status, and Shs 2.5 billion on average will be spent to recruit a total of 1,038 graduate teachers to be absorbed in these schools.  

Thirdly, the Ministry of Education and Sports will grant-aid 76 schools, which are private or community. During the recruitment of teachers, we expect a total of Shs 1.9 billion to be spent. Therefore, 76 headteachers, 76 deputy headteachers and 760 teachers will be recruited to be absorbed in the 76 newly grant-aided schools. 

There are also some schools, which do not have administrators, and we expect Ministry of Education to recruit 168 deputies, 50 head teachers out of 686 vacant posts for deputies and a total of Shs 808 million will be spent on this.  

The Committee recommended, on this idea, that those sectors involved, like Education, Public Service, Finance should speed up the process so that funds are properly spent within this financial year.  

Honourable members, I wish to draw your attention to 4.4 on bursary scheme. This scheme started last year, and I want to emphasise it because after thorough discussion, what was said by the Ministry of Finance here is a little bit different. Honourable members, last year the Ministry of Education implemented a bursary scheme for the bright but needy in secondary schools. Currently, the total number of beneficiaries by 2003 was 1891 and by 2003/2004 beneficiaries are 1764. 

This financial year Government will spend Shs 1.5 billion for the bursary scheme, but two more will be taken on. It is not six science students as reported here; the total of six comes as a result of the two-two who have been taken on and another two, who will be taken on this financial year.  I want that correction to be made.  

The committee recommended that the process should be a little bit more transparent and proposed that probably UNEB identifies the best student per sub-county other than relying on district officials. The ministry should also submit the lists of beneficiaries annually to Members of Parliament to enable them follow up. We noted with concern that some districts are not actually being transparent in the exercise.  

On Seed Secondary Schools, we wish to note that so far only 17 have been completed and coded by the Ministry of Public Service. The speed of releasing money is also too slow, and we recommend that it will be much better if Government grant-aids private or community schools.  

On page 17, our concern is on the fires and strikes in schools and we wish to condemn it. We are also concerned about exorbitant school fees mainly in Government schools.  

The committee is recommending that strong steps should be taken by Ministry of Education to regulate and rationalize school fees in Government secondary schools.

Honourable members, on assistance to private schools, the committee noted with concern – I am on 4.8 – that whereas Government supports private hospitals by providing them with funds since they offer social services, private schools do not receive any assistance from Government yet they offer available services to the country to complement Government efforts. Instead, Government, through the Revenue Authority, levies prohibitive taxes on schools. 

Honourable members, I want to emphasize this point. You have Government school (A) charging Shs 300,000, school (B), which is private charges Shs 300,000. You are paying for teachers in School (A) yet you are not paying for teachers in (B). But you go ahead to send Uganda Revenue Authority to tax the private schools, and yet all of them are offering services, how fair are you? You say this Government school is not making profit whereas the private school is making profit.  

So, we are therefore recommending strongly, Madam Speaker, that private schools should be exempted from taxes and also Government should assist them with scholastic materials, especially science equipment, text books and grants where it can.  Honourable members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, can you listen to the serious proposals from the Social Services Committee?  She is recommending that you leave the private schools alone as far as taxes are concerned. 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Madam Speaker, I was listening but I was consulting with my colleague here explaining that we only tax profits.

MRS HYUHA: Hon. Members will debate because they have the experience, they represent their people. But we were wondering how school (A), which is Government does not make profit and school (B) makes a profit yet all of them charge the same amount of fees.

Hon. Members, on 5.1 - Multi-grade teaching, one Member asked that, and we have clearly explained. 

5.2 - National Teachers Colleges: The committee was informed that four out of ten National Teachers Colleges (NTCs) will gradually be phased out, but the students currently enrolled will be allowed to complete their courses, and those to be phased out will be returned to their foundation Bodies.  The proposed NTCs to remain are Muni, Nagongera, Kabale, Unyama, Kaliro and Mubende, whereas those to be phased out and turned into secondary schools are Masindi, Kakoba, Ngetta and Nkozi. 

Hon. Members, the explanation by Ministry of Education and Government is that currently we are having so many graduate teachers given the number of increased Universities and therefore the market of Grade V has reduced. They feel that if they left six, they can continue producing the required number. The committee recommended that the phasing out should be carried out in a systematic way acceptable to all stakeholders, including the staff.

On page 19 on BTVET, 6.2, I want to emphasize here that the Minister of Education is going to reduce the number of Community Polytechnic Instructors Colleges (CPICs) from 11 to one, and rationalize the use of the rest as secondary schools.  The only college to remain is Abilonino in Apac District, which is Government aided. There are 11 CPICs with different foundation bodies, as indicated below.

when you turn to page 20, you will see those affected, but our recommendation on page 19 is that these colleges instead of turning them into secondary Schools, they should be returned to their foundation bodies and the stakeholders should be the ones to decide on how to utilize them like they are doing with the NTCs.  

On Higher Education, 7.1, Public University in eastern Uganda:  Government will set up a public university in eastern Uganda.  The committee was happy to note that a task force to carry out a study about the establishment of a public university in eastern Uganda has been set up. I wish to put it on record that the chairperson is going to be none but the Vice Chancellor of Kyambogo University, Prof. Lutalo, and their terms of reference, hon. members are: 

• Carry out feasibility study on the establishment of a University. 

• Assess the available options and come out with a location of the proposed university. 

• Come up with justifiable proposals on disciplines to be offered by the university. 

• Carry out wide consultations with key stakeholders.

• We expect this committee to present the draft to the top management of Ministry of Education by October 2004. 

The committee strongly recommended that the study should be completed on time so that a budget line is created next financial year of 2005/6 to kick-start off this new university. (Applause)

on special audit for MUBS, our concern here - I want the Minister of Finance to listen- is that when we recommended this, it was for all the four public universities. We recommended that the report be submitted as soon as possible to Parliament.  

7.4 On minimum requirement into Higher Education, the committee wanted to know whether there are any established standards of minimum entry requirements into universities, both public and private.  On page 22, those minimum requirements are indicated.  Our recommendation is that both public and private universities should ensure that students before admission, to avoid admitting unqualified students, should meet minimum entry requirements.  

On Makerere University, we appreciated the appointment of a Chancellor and Vice Chancellor.  our concern here is that other specified officers should be appointed as soon as possible.  However, we noted with concern on the delay to release examination transcripts for university graduates in Makerere.  

7.6 Mbarara university, the committee was happy that a memorandum of understanding was signed between Mbarara University and Ministry of Health to return Mbarara Hospital to Ministry of Health to supervise, but it remains a teaching hospital as the case is with Mulago.  I wanted to emphasize here, that Mbarara University has been under the supervision of Ministry of Education.  After this memorandum, it will now go back to Ministry of Health, the way Mulago is.  Mulago is a teaching hospital, it is under Ministry of Health but Makerere uses it for its medical students.  

7.7 On Kyambogo, page 23, we note with concern the delay to restructure the structures so that the welfare of staff is considered.  

7.8 Uganda Management Institute, we are concerned about the legal status, which is not yet clear.  UMI is offering masters degree and yet for any university to offer such qualification it must be established by a resolution of Parliament, but we have never passed a resolution, unless it is affiliated to an established University.  

Gulu University; the committee was happy that a Gulu Medical School would take off.  However, the committee was greatly concerned about development of infrastructures of Gulu University at a temporally home of DFI, instead of its allocated land. 

We therefore recommend that Government should speed up the compensation of the bona fide occupants so that infrastructure of Gulu University is constructed at a permanent home.

7.10 Makerere University Business School; the committee noted with concern the delay of the Ministry of Education to resolve the outstanding legal crisis of MUBS despite Parliament’s resolution and deadline.  Whereas Ministry of Education argues that consultations are on-going between Ministry of Education and Attorney General, the committee feels that the decision has over-delayed.  

The committee, therefore, recommended, that it will table a Private Member’s Bill to effect the amendment of the Universities and Oher Tertiary Institutions Act 2001 to resolve once for all the existing crisis.

7.11 Challenges of Higher Education; the immediate challenges. Harmonization of wages and salaries: the President pledged to increase salaries for Makerere University staff, however, only 5 billion was distributed among the 4 public universities as follows- You can see the distribution of the UShs5.5 billion.  However, our recommendation, is that the salary enhancement should be for all the teaching staffs, both Arts and Sciences, and their support staff in all the public universities.  

It is further noted, that the allocation of 5 billion is still inadequate; therefore, Government should add more funds to enhance the salaries.  

On page 25, Education Service Commission, we acknowledge those achievements.  Our concern, is the under-funding of Education Service Commission especially their development budget and we are recommending that Education Service Commission be given an adequate development fund to enable it carry out its activities.

On page 26, Education Standards Agency, which was established after being restructured from the former Inspectorate Department of Ministry of Education, our concern here, is the lack of legal status and the gross under-funding. We are strongly recommending- Madam Speaker, we want to hear from Public Service on this matter because we are told that it is Public Service, which is meant to move this motion. We have waited for years but it has not come.  So, we shall expect a response from Public Service.

On page 27, UNEB.  We noted with concern the abrupt adoption by UNEB of the policy requiring PLE certificates at “O” Level registration. We were told that before you sit for “O” Level, you are supposed to produce your Primary Leaving Certificate, which sounded quite a new policy and we are recommending that UNEB should stop implementing the policy for those students who were already enrolled before the guidelines were issued.  

On Sports, we are disappointed by the delay in formulating a sports policy.  The allocation of one billion for this activity has left the sub-sector with almost no resources for its operations and retarded the development of Sports.

The Minister of Education gave a detailed response to the effect that the Minister of Finance gave clearance for the draft policy, which is to be forwarded to the Cabinet in June 2004 and we are told that it is now before Cabinet for consideration.

I now turn to Gender on page 29 – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. chairperson, just give me an opportunity to introduce the children who are up there.  They are from Namataba Primary School in Nakifuma, Mukono District. You are welcome to Parliament! (Applause)

MRS HYUHA: As Chairperson, Social Services Committee, I welcome them.  On page 29, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development- I am drawing your attention, on page 29, second last paragraph from the bottom. The overall resource envelope of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development this financial year will be UShs. 19,989,323,500 billion of which recurrent is UShs 4,795,792,500 billion. When you look at that lower figure down even this one is recurrent, development will be Ushs.4.962 billion; and a total of Ushs.10.23 billion will be donor project funds.  

On page 30, (2.0), the committee appreciated efforts of the Ministry of Gender to strengthen community development functions in local governments through the recruitment of community development assistants and community development workers, and you can see the expenditure they made.  

We recommended that the Ministry of Gender should develop a master plan of building new community centres in sub-counties without, and also rehabilitate the existing ones.  

On culture, 3.0, the committee was concerned about the delay to develop the national cultural policy and action plan that would guide the development and presentation of Uganda’s diverse cultural heritage.  The committee observed that Ministry of Gender has delayed to operationalize Article 246 of the Constitution, which provides for benefits and privileges for traditional or cultural leaders.  The ministry, therefore, has no budget line to support cultural leaders, hon. members.  So, do not ask Ministry of Gender.  

The committee, therefore, recommended that Government should speed up the process of addressing the issue of cultural leaders given the current constitutional amendment.

4.0. The elderly and disability. The committee appreciated Government’s efforts to purchase a vehicle for the Minister of State for Elderly using the UShs 70 million for supplementary fund we provided.

On 5.0, functional adult literacy, popularly known as FAL, although it started in 1992 within only eight districts, it is now in all the 56 districts and it is covering now 740 sub-counties.  20,000 instructors have been recruited to conduct literacy classes in various villages, and it is intended to equip adults with functional literacy skills. 

 The committee recommended that Government should earmark funds to purchase bicycles for those instructors who have not yet received.  

The committee also noted with concern the lack of financial motivation to the instructors, which makes them perform reluctantly.  We, therefore, recommended that a financial gap of Shs 4.8 billion be allocated next financial year so that each instructor is given UShs 20,000 monthly to improve their performance.  

On page 32, hon. members, the committee is concerned about the lack of elderly policy in the Ministry of Gender. We do not know who is an elder, the one who is 60 or the one who is above 30 or the one who has grey hair.  We, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Gender should bring out the law immediately.
  
On public library, we are concerned that all the same autonomous institutions that fall under Ministry of Gender have various mandates to realize yet they receive inadequate resources.  They are established by law and supposed to be financed from the consolidated fund.  But surprisingly, they depend mainly on the subventions provided within Ministry of Gender ceiling, which is very unfortunate. I wish the hon. Minister of Finance is listening.  The committee was particularly concerned that Government did not allocate UShs 127 million within the budget of the Ministry of Gender to pay the accumulated rent arrears for the national public library, yet they were evicted from office accommodation.  

The committee was informed that Ministry of Gender has now acquired land in KCC near Parliament for the construction of a permanent home for the national library.  that space where we usually have people from Luwero camping, it is the one which is earmarked for a national library.  We strongly recommended and we are recommending to you, that a supplementary of UShs 127 million be allocated to clear arrears of office accommodation for the national library.  

On page 33, on Industrial Court, we note with concern, that the Industrial Court was evicted out of office but it is being accommodated in a small office by Ministry of Gender without a courtroom.  So, what are they doing?  Their work is hampered.  We are recommending that a supplementary allocation of UShs 36 million be granted to the Industrial Court so that they hire a court urgently.  

Rent charges; we note with concern that 30 per cent of the current budget of Ministry of Gender goes to rent, but we are told that measures to mortgage a facility to purchase an office block by Ministry of Gender are on the way, but we recommend that it should be speeded up.

10.0 Orphans and Vulnerable Children Policy. We noted with concern, Madam Speaker, that Ministry of Gender did not produce the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Policy by 2003 as pledged before.  This will hamper the children to access the global fund this financial year.  The Committee was informed that the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Policy and national strategic programme interventions have been finalized and submitted to Cabinet for approval.  the implementation of this policy and plan will benefit from US$56 million, which is available for care and support for orphans and vulnerable children and their households in the next five years.  We are, therefore, recommending that this should be speeded up.

11.0. National Women Council, National Youth Council and the National Disability Council.  The committee commends Government and His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda for the provision of Ushs 2.5 billion as pledged on 8 March 2004 at Kamuli during International Women’s Day for the activities of women councils, youth councils and disability councils.  this money is within the budget.  Out of UShs one billion allocated to the National Women Council, a total of 60.5 have been earmarked to purchase 11 motorcycles and 11 new district offices will be opened.  Out of UShs500 million allocated to the National Disability Council, UShs293 million will be decentralized to district local governments. Out of 1 billion allocated to National Youth Council, 1,000 bicycles would be purchased for the youth sub-county councils and motorcycles at districts.  

I wish to emphasize here, that conditional grants for women councils, youth councils and disability will be decentralized to lower council units as stipulated in the law.  I want to emphasize here because when we amended the Youth Council Statute and the Women Council Statute, we provided in the law that this money will be decentralized and the Women Council with the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) should open up separate accounts.  But we received some letters from some districts disputing this and indicating that this money should go on the account of culture, which is very unfortunate; the women may not receive their money.  I now want to emphasize here, we are recommending to Government that funds for women councils, youth councils and disability councils also be lined up within the MTEF of MGLSD so as to ensure continuity.  

National Social Security Fund (NSSF) on page 35. this is how the beneficiary contributes 5 percent and the employer 10 percent.  But I want to put it on record, that as per 30 June 2003 the funds’ net worth is UShs 325 million from UShs46 billion in 2001 and the monthly collection, is an average of UShs7 billion. Our only concern, is the delay by the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) to process the benefits to beneficiaries.  We, therefore, recommend reviewing national social security fund (NSSF) laws so that they speed up.  

Can we now turn to Health, page 37, hon. Members?  

Bullet (1.1), the third paragraph. The Ministry of Health resource envelope this financial year stands at UShs431.04 billion for both recurrent and development estimates including donor support projects compared to Shs.429.3 billion, which was received last financial year; this represents 0.4 per cent increase.  Those are the details.  

On page 39, is where we have the priorities of Ministry of Health this financial year.  The priority will be human resource development whereby salary enhancement for medical workers and recruitment of health workers in lower centres.

The second priority will be reproductive health, drugs and then the national disease control, which is for malaria, HIV and Tuberculoses (TB).  Those are statistics for you to study and see the trend.

On page 40, about budget performance under wage performed at 97.9 because of the vacancies in Ministry of Health and Butabika.  we appreciated the good budget performance of Ministry of Health last financial year.  

On page 41, on human resource development, I want to emphasize this point, 3.0. A total of Shs.105.51 billion has been earmarked for the wage bill this financial year, which is 24 per cent of national health budget. The committee commended Government and the President for fulfilling his pledge to enhance salaries of health workers.  We hoped this would improve on delivery of health services in all health facilities. Government provided an extra UShs38.6 billion for enhancement of salaries for medical workers and recruitment of staff in lower health units.  

The committee was informed that Ministry of Health has distributed the funds as follows:

1) On Salary enhancement – UShs.34.1 billion will be spent.
2) On recruitment of health workers – UShs.4.5 billion will be spent. 

Within this extra 32.1 billion, the new salaries are as follows:

We have three samples and we picked up the highest.  The highest medical worker in this country is the Director General of Health Services who has been earning Shs.1, 844,740, will now earn 2,200,000/=.  Then we picked the medical officer who has been earning Shs563,770, will now be earning 700,000/=.  Enrolled nurse has been earning 210,632/=, will now earn 300,000/=, this includes lunch; it is consolidated. Now, about support staff, I suppose that the Ministry of Health will clarify this because at the time of writing the report it had not been fully negotiated.  

On page 44, the committee was informed that due to budgetary constraints, salary arrears for medical workers, which accrued from July 2003 to March 2004, would not be met in this financial year but instead, will be budgeted for next financial year.  Although an extra Shs4.5 billion has been provided for recruitment, the Ministry of public service has not yet approved the established structures to enable the recruitment by Ministry of Health. I suppose that public service is here because, these lower health units at parish level are supposed to be headed by enrolled comprehensive nurse.  Currently, the majority are having nursing assistants and it is this structure that we want to be actually approved by public service so that recruitment down there can take place as we have emphasized in that recommendation.  

Go to page 43, now this is on drugs, hon. members.  This is yet another priority and Shs105.1 billion has been budgeted for drugs.  This represents 24.4 per cent of the national health budget. We were informed that funds for drugs are centralized while others are decentralized to various sub-sectors.  

Funds, which are centralized, which are left at the centre, are usually for essential drugs, which is known as the credit line and this is supported by DANIDA. Drugs for emergency cases when we get outbreaks like Ebola or cholera, those funds remain at the centre.  But those decentralized, when you go to page 44, and I want you to note, every money, which goes to the district, 50 per cent of those funds are for drugs and the distribution is at district level; 30 per cent is for drugs and regional level.  Those funds, which are given to NGO hospitals, which is under primary health care (PHC), 25 per cent of it is actually for drugs.  

When we interfaced with the medical staff from the field, we got reports that the situation has improved.  But despite the increase in supply of drugs, using the credit line strategy some end users or patients may not be receiving the drugs as planned for, but instead drugs are diverted elsewhere.  This is our concern.  

The committee further got concerned about certain sundries that are meant to be free, but are purchased by patients who fall under window one category.  We are getting perpetual reports that syringes and gloves for patients who are meant to be receiving them free are still purchasing them. this makes some poor patients not to complete the dose. When a patient goes back, he is told that he has to buy a syringe at UShs200.  We therefore recommend, that Government should increase budget allocations for the procurement of drugs and sundries.

On page 45, reproductive health remains a priority of the ministry of health for the last two years. The share of reproductive health this financial year is going to be 25.5 per cent of the total national health budget and total expenditure will be UShs.109.7 billion. However, the committee observed that there is still low utilization of maternity and reproductive services.  It was noted that among other factors, certain cultures still bar women from delivering from their centres.  The committee noted that some reproductive indicators have slightly improved while others have stagnated and you can see those details.  Ministry of health should, therefore, continue to focus on reproductive health as top priority funding.

On health infrastructure, 6.0, the committee was informed that expansion of health facilities was going to be halted this financial year to enable a balanced growth of inputs in sector such as recruitment of staff, equipping of lower health units drugs, to permit optimal delivery of services.  Having increased monies for recurrent on the wage bill, the development was affected in one way or the other.  Details of equipment are noted on page 6. 

On page 47, 6.2 is about transport and communication equipment.  In 2002/2003, a total of UShs 2.1 billion was allocated to procure vehicles for health centre IVs and a total of 60 vehicles were procured and distributed to health centre IVs, especially those which were completed and lacked facilities.

The committee was also informed that 19 ambulances were procured under UNFPA and 11 ambulances were procured under the ADB funds and distributed to those districts mentioned.  Last financial year, a total of UShs 3.8 billion was allocated to procure 90 vehicles.  The committee was informed that vehicles were procured and distributed. So, vehicles given this financial year are for the other financial year.  The money is for the vehicles we passed last financial year.  So, those who did not get will get this financial year. This financial year, another UShs 1.1 billion has been earmarked for procurement of another 23 more vehicles. The committee commended Government for this good gesture and we hoped that this would go a long way in improving health service delivery.

On page 48, national disease control.  The three major diseases focused on are mainly malaria, HIV/AIDs and tuberculosis. 

On page 46, it is about malaria control (7.1).  I want you to note that malaria continues to be a major cause of illness and one of the biggest causes of death in this country.  The percentages are given at which we have children dying; it greatly contributes to the high maternal mortality rate.  

Three strategies have been earmarked to eradicate malaria, which are as follows:

1.Government intends to use indoor residual spraying. 

2.It is distributing home parks.  Home packs, is where two tablets are packed for children under 5; those below 2 years receive a red tablet and those between 2 years and 5 years receive a green tablet.  

Community health volunteers were trained to use treated nets.

Details of the monies earmarked for these strategies, mainly HOMAPAKS, are indicated below.  But for emphasis, a total of US$ 2.3 million mainly from the global fund during the second round will be used to purchase and distribute the HOMAPAKS countrywide. We have certain districts where they are now launching and in other districts they are yet to train these mobilisers.  

The committee on page 50 highly supports the strategies undertaken by the Ministry of Health and we say that more studies should be carried out to establish a cost effective strategy without any further delay.

On HIV, we are happy that the prevalence rate is at 6.2 per cent and Government last financial year purchased ARVs worth US$1.3 million.  This financial year under MAP programme, Government is to procure ARVs worth US$1.7 million to treat 3,200 patients; and under the global fund Government will purchase drugs worth US$7.2 million to treat another 21,000 patients.  54 sites have been accredited as centres for ARVs and therapy. These include all the 11 regional referral hospitals, 1 national referral hospital - that is Mulago - and 7 district hospitals and ten private but not for profit.  So, details are there.  

Voluntary counselling and testing centres have been scaled up to 56 districts with each district having a minimum of 2 to 3 testing centres.  Plans are underway to increase the testing centres, hon. members.  On hospitals, I want you to note, that the budget is for the 2 national hospitals, 10 regional hospitals, 43 districts hospitals and the 19 NGO hospitals.  The funds are distributed in percentages as indicated on that page.

Honourable members, as you turn to page 52, the committee recommended that Government should revise and increase budget allocations to key priority areas of hospitals to match the dollar appreciation. The major outcry, before that recommendation, was the outdated, non-functioning equipment and rehabilitations.  

On page 53, hospital policy, we were informed that a draft policy has been prepared after wide consultation with our stakeholders, including private hospitals and the document is waiting or are waiting for final comments for top management.

On Mulago, I want to emphasize the section of Mulago. The committee was concerned about overcongestion of patients at Mulago and one way to de-congest Mulago national hospital is to turn the Old Mulago into a district hospital.  The committee found it necessary to support it to benefit from PAF fund to be able to operate as a district hospital since it sees 700 primarycare patients daily; it has a fully-fledged laboratory x-ray unit, 10 clinics and community health department.  

The second concern was about modalities used to charge vehicles at Mulago.  There is a public outcry that client were charged 500/- whenever they drive in, and the constant loss of vehicle parts for clients.  This is very expensive to attendants of patients who keep driving in and out of Mulago park-yard several times a day.  Imagine your wife is delivering, you run to bring gloves, you run to buy soap, you run to bring food, you run to bring the mother; at the end of the day, how much are you paying? 

We are, therefore, recommending, Madam Speaker, that Mulago hospital management should review the operations and ensure proper security of the clients.  Actually we strongly recommended that the payment should be made once and you keep your receipt throughout the day.  But, above all, it should be reviewed.

About Butabika national referral hospital, you know Butabika is benefiting from ADB fund and the distribution is indicated there.  

The committee was informed that civil works in all the 5 sites started and is progressing well and 55 per cent is complete.  The details of the equipment are given below.  On status of sale of land of Butabika, following the intervention of Parliament on the sell of Butabika land, the following steps have been taken.

On page 55, an inter-ministerial meeting was held on 21st June this year between Ministry of Health, Butabika hospital, Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment and Uganda Land Commission.  The meeting resolved that the whole process be reviewed to take into account the consensus of Ministry of Health and Butabika hospital with formation of a task force team to review and produce an agreeable land use plan for the land.  Hon. members, you remember originally we expressed the concern of health not being involved and we are told it is being involved. We feel that when the report is ready it should be tabled here and we debate it.

The committee recommended that Ministry of Health should report to Parliament the outcomes of the task force.

Infrastructure in hospitals. Many of them as I have indicated are in a sorry state. Most equipment in hospitals is old and these referral hospitals do not have the development budget at all.  

The committee was informed that most of the equipment lacked routine maintenance due to inadequate funding.  

We, therefore, recommended to Government to increase budget for maintenance to enable routine equipment maintenance, as this is easier than the cost of replacing new equipment.

On page 56, 6.3 billion, including taxes, was earmarked for rehabilitation of hospitals in a phased approach. The rehabilitation of Kamuli and Kisoro have been completed. The following hospitals have an ongoing rehabilitation works at various stages: Butabika, Fort Portal, Kiryadongo, Itojo, Kaabong and Busolwe.  

It should be noted, that implementation of plan for renovation of hospitals under HSSP(1) was not fully realized.  The committee was informed that hospitals, which were planned for HSSP, were not done.  

The Ministry of Health plans to rehabilitate all regional hospitals and 70 per cent of district hospitals in the next five years within HSSP(2) period.  You can see how they have phased them out in the first year, second year, third year, fourth year and fifth year. I hope that they took into consideration their worse conditions.

Page 57, the district hospitals are indicated: - first year, second year, third year, fourth year and fifth year.  

Whereas the committee appreciated the plan to rehabilitate the hospital under HSSP, it noted that hospitals along highways with frequent road accidents and traumas were not given first priority.  

Other agencies in the ministry of Health, under Ministry of Health, page 58 - I am about to complete – Health Service Commission.  Our concern here - first of all, we appreciated that despite the meagre funding of the Commission, the committee was happy to learn that recruitment of health workers has been on-going in national and regional hospitals, and we were given those cadres of doctors so far recruited by Health Service Commission.  Now, about these two commissions, it is perpetual under-funding, both Health Service Commission and Education Service Commission. 

On National Drug Authority, page 59, the committee noted with concern that the authorities are constrained by the current statute, which needs fulfillment of its mandate.  The plans to protect the public from mushrooming drug shops requires speeding up.

National Medical Stores, page 60.  National Medical Stores has been re-classified from class 11 to class 1 – corporation - under the PERD Statute.  The committee was concerned that there is a study on National Medical Stores by the Privatisation Unit (PU) funded by World Bank.  Tenders for this study have been evaluated and awarded.  Results of the study are being awaited and will determine the ultimate privatisation status.  We are concerned, because we strongly recommended that national medical stores should not be sold, and therefore when PU begins studying, we get concerned.  The committee still stands by its previous recommendation that National Medical Stores should not be privatised, hon. Members.  

On professional bodies, they are many of them - Uganda nurses and midwives, Allied Health Professional Council, Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council and Pharmacy.  The Committee commended the efforts of these professional councils regulating the quality of health services, but their major concern is the little funding.  We therefore recommended that monitoring of health service delivery should be strengthened and stern measures be applied to non-compliant.

Hon. members, we now turn to the figure, which I am praying that this august House –(Interjections)- I think I will be secure.  I want to move them when the changes have been made. I need to consult the other sectors whether they are in agreement.  But the changes are in the favour of the sectors as far as I can see.

Honourable members, I now beg to present to this august House for approval of the following budgetary provisions, for the sectors under the sessional committee on Social Services.

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education.  I do pray that this august House approves recurrent of UShs 42,540,521,000 for recurrent; and that UShs88,524,866,000 be approved for Ministry of Education Headquarters.

On vote 132 – Education Service Commission, I do request this august House to approve UShs 1,799,627,000 and that for development, UShs 0.0187 billion be approved.

For Makerere University, I do request this august House that Vote 136 - Makerere University, recurrent, UShs 28,874,367,000 and that for development UShs 16,446,825,000 be approved for Makerere University.

Honourable members, I now request you that for Vote 137 - Mbarara University, for recurrent that UShs 8,709,318,000; and that for development UShs 0.4552 billion be approved for Mbarara University.

For Makerere University Business School - vote 136, for recurrent, I do pray that you approve UShs 3,800,966,000 and that for development, no development awarded.

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University.  For recurrent, I do request this august House to approve UShs 9,547,081,000, and that for development you approve UShs 0.3217 billion.

For Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute, I do request this august House to approve UShs 0.3977 billion and for zero development fund.

For Vote 149 - Gulu University, I do pray to this august House to approve for recurrent Uganda Shs 2,650,071,000 and for development UShs 1,348,000,000 for Gulu University.

I now turn to the Ministry of Health.  Honourable. members, I do request this august House that for vote 014 - Ministry of Health Headquarters, for recurrent that you do approve UShs.33,372,453,000 and that for development, you do approve Ushs 177,433,000,000.

For Mulago Hospital, vote 161, I do request this august House to approve recurrent UShs23.365,296,000 and for development you do approve UShs.1,204,000,000.

For Butabika Hospital - Vote 162, I do request this august House that you do approve UShs 3,333,946,000 and that UShs 25,193,900,000 - I am yet to consult Ministry of Health whether it is 25,192,000 or 25,193,000. Hon. Members, by the time we come to Committee of Supply, I will have harmonized the two ministries. By the time we come to committee of supply, we shall have consulted.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members. Hon. Minister of Health, what is the figure?  Can you harmonize with Ministry of Finance there?  The Chairperson is concluding.

MRS HYUHA: Those are the challenges when you are the Chairperson, because you have to harmonize both Ministry of Finance and the sector.  So, Madam Speaker, by the time we come to the committee stage, I know you have 25.193,000 and Ministry of Finance is saying 25.192,000, we shall harmonize at the committee stage.

Vote 107, Uganda AIDS Commission: I am yet to be advised on this one, honourable members, but we usually pass it under Health but there is also some money, which is passed under another Vote. So, Vote 107, I do request this august House that a recurrent of Shs 1.5 billion and Shs 28.826 billion for development be approved for Uganda Aids Commission.

And for Vote 134, I do request this august House that a recurrent budget of Shs 1.276,224 billion and development Shs 0.0513 billion be approved for Health Service Commission.  

Honourable members, I do request that you do approve under Vote 163, Regional Referral Hospitals, that a total sum of Shs 24.4 billion be approved for recurrent and that zero shillings for development is indicated.  

Vote 50 which includes NGO health units and general hospitals and Primary Health Care, I do request this august House that a recurrent budget of Shs 119.2 billion and that Shs 6.095 billion be approved. And I am yet to be advised by education because the vote for 50 is not indicated yet for health it is indicated.

Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development under Vote 018: For recurrent, I do request that this august House do approve Shs 4.796,87 billion and for development Shs 15.1973 billion. Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move and I thank everybody.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services and your team for the job well done. I have not only listened to the report but I have examined it, and I am satisfied that the report was signed by at least one third of the Members of the committee.  Therefore, it satisfies Rule 170 (1) of the Rules of Procedure and, therefore, you may debate it for three minutes each as I indicated earlier.

But maybe before we do that, as I was listening to the report, I was asking myself and I hope the Minister of Finance will be able to advise us before we conclude the process. I was looking for the interface between the National Planning Authority and the recommendations of our committees. I do not know whether you will be able to address that before we finish the process. I do not want an answer now, but the report raised many questions in my mind and I am sure the same questions might arise in the minds of the Members.  

4.30
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. The first issue I want to observe is under education. I am happy that the committee is recommending sanitary towels for secondary school girls. I was wondering whether the committee did not also consider the important aspect of appliances for the disabled children in our schools that are going through UPE. I am conscious of the fact that these children have to crawl to school, they get there and their hands are dirty, sometimes they do not even get to school on time. I am wondering whether the committee did not think that was very important under UPE to ensure the disabled children also benefit, because without those appliances, I bet those children cannot benefit adequately from UPE.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to seek some clarifications and the first one has to do with the criterion for selecting schools for grant aiding. My district is very disadvantaged; I have raised this a number of times. Soroti County does not have a school, Kasilo County has only one school under grant aiding; Serere County has also one school and I keep asking, what is this criterion that Soroti district cannot satisfy? I would be happy if I am told the criterion used to grant aid schools so that we struggle to meet that criterion.

The second issue is to do with the science awards.  I was surprised because I heard the President promised an award to do with science and technology during the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. I have not heard it from the presentation of the Chairperson. What happened? Did it just remain there in the International Conference centre because if we do not see it here, then it means it is hanging up somewhere? So, could the Chairperson advise me on what happened?

The other clarification I am looking for again is to do with the internally displaced children.  School fees have been provided for one term, so what happens for the second, the third term because I have not heard it in the committee’s report?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on health, we are talking about HIV/AIDS. I have heard from this House a number of times that there was a Global Fund for HIV/AIDS that Uganda benefited from, and that the first phase of the utilisation of this fund became operational sometime back. I want to hear from the committee what their findings were? Whether they found out which aspect, which areas, which districts are benefiting from this money? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether that is not hon. Amuriat’s committee but we shall hear from whoever.

4.34
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have thanked the Chairperson for this report and my points are three:

The first one is in respect to reproductive health and this was mentioned on page 45 of the report.  The committee noted that there has been a slight improvement and that maternal mortality rates have slightly improved from 700 out of 100,000 in 1998 to 506 out of 100,000 in the year 2000. Madam Speaker, when we read these figures, we do not appreciate the magnitude of this problem. When you divide 506 by 12, it means that we are losing at least 42 women out of 100,000 per month to maternal mortality, which is about one woman or two women per day. This is very grave and I am glad to know that the ministry has given this particular issue priority. 

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the ministry to work closely with us who are willing to do everything possible to ensure that our mothers, our sisters do not die because they have to give birth to children. Therefore, when you look at issues of Malaria, issues of HIV/AIDS, issues of malnutrition, issues of access to health services, issues of even unsafe abortions - this is an issue which most people do not want to talk about but it is taking a lot of women’s lives in this country and we have not legislated on this particular issue. The laws we have are very restrictive; we imported them from other countries, which have since moved away. We have rampant incest cases, we have rampant defilement in this country and no one wants to address this issue. I would like to urge the ministry to not only put policies in place, but also work with us to put laws in place to ensure that our women do not continue to die.  

When we talk about maternal mortality, it is closely related to infant mortality, it is also closely related to the issue of orphans. When you talk about the issue of orphans and you turn to the fact that the ministry does not have a policy on orphans up to now as mentioned on page 29, and yet this is highlighted as a constraint, it becomes very perturbing because when you look at page 29 it states that: “The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is constrained by the following: - 

• Lack of orphans and vulnerable children’s policy
• Lack of Equal Opportunities Commission
• Lack of employment policy, and
• Outdated labour laws.”

I wonder how these can be constraints, Madam Chairperson of the Committee, whereas they are within the mandate of the ministry. Can the ministry tell us how far it has gone in its efforts to put these policies in place as well as this commission on equal opportunities, which has been long awaited for? Can the Ministry of Health tell us the specific measures it has taken to ensure that women stop dying from maternal causes?  

Finally, Madam Chairperson, I am concerned because when I read page 57 on the listed district hospitals, I do not see Kyenjojo and yet it is one particular area, which does not have a district hospital. We have to transport people over very many kilometres to Buhinga and others to Mubende.  We would like to urge the Ministry of Health to take this particular issue into account. I thank you.

4.38
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Chairperson of the Social Services Committee, for the report. There are, however, a few things which I think we need some clarification on. On page 13, you start with constraints and you list several of them, that is concerning Vote 018. I see one constraint you left, which is very serious in my view and this is concerning the capacity by the Ministry of Education to evaluate qualifications from fields other than those traditionally known to them. For example, if you have got a qualification as an astronaut they would still think you are a primary seven leaver. I call upon the Ministry of Education to seriously set up a committee to match with what is happening in the world today. I do not want to quote examples of what has happened in the recent past, but this is a case whereby you see other countries equating these and then you come home here people still live so many years back.  

On page 5, I was not very happy with the recommendation by the committee that they should scale down on the funds or the budget for Universal Primary Education (UPE). Madam Speaker, the birth rate is still very high and there is no indication that children going to UPE are decreasing. Some of us are still very active and the children in primary schools will still remain what they are.  So, I think the best recommendation should have been that they begin budgeting high for secondary schools but scaling down on UPE should not be done.  

On a recommendation concerning grant aiding, I hear now 75 schools will be taken over. I am only interested to know which schools because as my sister Alaso said, we must know how these schools are distributed, otherwise, we may end up with many heaping in one area and some areas having nothing at all as she has already indicated. 

It appears if the recommendation is that Government should continue grant aiding for purposes of taking over secondary schools, then it means the idea of seed schools is now dropped. There are some sub-counties, which even cannot put up a community secondary school. So, the seed schools should continue.

Lastly and most important, is about this Bududa hospital. This is the worst hospital in this country. It has sank nine inches, it is cracked, it is about to collapse and yet - recently you read that people were going with basins to get sewerage then go and dig a pit somewhere to put it in. It appears in the priority as something of second year. We all went round the country and found out that there were three hospitals, which were in terrible state: Abim, Tororo and Bududa. Now, Madam Chairperson, what happened that you pushed in Nakaseke? We also need good hospitals. It is better to re-examine your report and make sure that these hospitals, which we saw as a group of Members of Parliament, are taken care of. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Procedurally, I would have requested that you give us a little bit more time for this report. I am requesting specifically because this is one report that covers all of us to the core. The others you can talk about Defence specialised, Finance specialised but Social Services, that is how we are going to judge the Government.

However, Madam Speaker, let me address myself to two issues, that is, higher education and health.  Health, in a passing remark, I am still perturbed on the issue of Butabika. We have not come out clearly; this matter came up as a resolution of Parliament that the land, which has been grabbed, must be returned. To-date we have no information, neither from the Ministry of Health nor from the Ministry of Lands whether the land, which had been grabbed has since been returned to Butabika. We need that land back.  

On tertiary institutions, I know they have recommended among other things in the report that, in eastern Uganda it is high time we got a public institution. They have set up a committee to look into the matter. Madam Speaker, that is superfluous; it is necessary; we need it, Busitema is in place.  Do you have to go looking for water and then say, “Let us look for a lake” when Lake Victoria is looking at you in the face?

Madam Speaker, really to me it is diversionary. I know some people somewhere are using this as a bargaining chip. You go to Busoga, you promise people something; you go to Teso you promise people something; you go somewhere else, you promise people something. No! Let us come out clearly and say we have identified an institution, that is Busitema; it has got an infrastructure, it has got all the necessities that you can think of to set up a tertiary institution. Let us go ahead with that one; beating about the bush is not good. 

Madam Speaker, I would have also expected in this report that at least the Ministry of Finance accepts what they call a token vote, one shilling to open a vote for a public institution for eastern Uganda and specifically Busitema. I do not see any difficulty about that at all. 

Talking about tertiary institutions, there is another sensitive element but it is a question of employment and gender sensitivity. I am really perturbed, Madam Speaker, when I see Makerere University deliberately leaving out women applicants for the position of Vice Chancellor and Deputy Vice Chancellor. Why are you discriminating against women? Why do you use a different yardstick? (Laughter and Applause). Why do you leave them out? I can give an example. Last time we were interviewing the Vice Chancellor for Makerere, they were six candidates two of whom were women. Both the women had their PhDs, one of whom has got experience as Deputy Vice Chancellor of an existing institution. They were not given the oral interview. The two women were eliminated, only three men advanced to oral interview. Why is that? Is that gender factor or what? Is it because they are women? Is it because they lack experience? It was not lack of experience per se. It is a question of gender and nothing else – (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I have information that the names are submitted by the Senate and the Senate is 99 per cent men. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You can see the bias starts right from the top. I think we should come up with the regulation to create some kind of balance in management of higher institutions; a certain percentage of positions should be given to qualified women. For instance, if a man is a vice chancellor, automatically a woman should be deputy vice chancellor or vice versa. (Interruption). Madam Speaker, I would like to correct myself; not necessarily so. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order honourable members.
  
MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, now another sensitive matter about tertiary institutions is a matter of the standards. For example, the standards on admissions. We have now come up with variable standards of admissions. I think there should be a regulatory body to determine minimum qualifications for any tertiary institution to apply to students, either at undergraduate or graduate level. This business of giving a Master’s Degree to somebody who does not have experience in that area of specialisation, does not have an undergraduate degree, is really lowering the standards, which we need to protect. (Applause).  

Madam Speaker, I know there is a problem right now with Nkumba University. Let us call a spade a spade. Mr Minister of Education, we want a report on Nkumba University standards of admission. Not only that, we do not want this question of variable levels of admission depending on your position in public. They should depend on the brains capacity – (Applause) - not a question of who you are nor who can bargain. I do not want to go into details because it will become personal but as it is now, we have to look at it. [Hon. Members: “Tell us”] Well, if you want me to tell you I can tell you – (Laughter)- but let us stop at that because we know but we have got enough people who can qualify for positions for admission.

Madam Speaker, another matter where we see bias and discrimination is a question of awarding scholarships. Why is it that somebody who passed just as another person going to Mukono University has no access to public resources for school fees and the one going to Makerere is awarded a scholarship?  Why do we have that kind of contradiction? Once you are going to a tertiary institution in this country, you are qualified, you have got the mandatory qualifications you should have access to public resources for higher education! This favouritism of public universities is unfair. I think we should come up with a law. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, we had set up a Committee on Equal Opportunities in this august House. But now I hear this Committee has been abolished – (Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: No, the Committee on Equal Opportunities is in existence. Madam Speaker, I got a letter from the Speaker saying that subject to amendment of our rules, we still continue to operate as a committee of Parliament, not necessarily as standing committee. I would like to correct that impression and this still will not take away the fact that there should be an equal opportunities commission, which is provided for under the Constitution. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague.  Madam Speaker, I am really concerned by this question of equal accessed opportunities must be granted to all aspects of life. It is not to chase for certain positions per se. I think the people who are now sending children to private tertiary institutions are people who are less privileged, and they really need assistance. And this question of self-sponsorship, we should be very careful. We should not want dilution of standards once again because people can afford to pay and, therefore, you bend the regulations. 

Last but not least on medical, we are getting more and more worried. I mentioned the Butabika problem, the land being grabbed. It is also happening in all districts hospitals. The land previously allocated for hospital development, for health facilities is being given away to some other so-called investors.  So, I am expressing concern.  

Madam Speaker, there is also discrimination in terms of allocating health facilities. I can give an example. My honourable colleague has given her example of Kyenjojo. Busia District is even older but we have never seen a district hospital. We do not have one! In Kyenjojo we do not have one. What discrimination is this about? I know for instance - (Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I think we are being misquoted.  Kyenjojo District does not have one but this will appease hon. Awori’s concerns. The Equal Opportunities Committee has put together a report showing clearly which district has its health centres, which districts have which secondary schools and we have asked him to read this report and maybe give us more information. It seems he is very conversant about the sharing of the national cake. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, please wind up.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague.  Actually I was misquoted. I was simply saying that we are in the same category as your district whereby we have been denied opportunities and for how long; until I become President or what? (Laughter).  I am giving you a chance to do something for this country to show that you care. I now take for instance, Madam Speaker, Bududa Hospital was put up by UPC regime. Now it has been marginalised because of its political origins. Nothing has been done for Bududa. Now for former Bukedi, we had Tororo; but one of the hospitals which was supposed to go to Busia again was allocated to another district.  Madam Speaker, once again I say there should be justice, there should be no marginalization. Thank you.

4.54
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I will just tackle the issue of education sector because I feel this is the most important sector, which if we succeeded in implementing correctly, that could answer the many issues raised in health and so on. So, I will just confine myself to this.  

Madam Speaker, I agree with the recommendation of the committee, which I thank very much for its report, on pages 16 and 17 that bursary for secondary education should be based on UNEB performance criteria and be given to the best students. To me I think this is the best opportunity, which will go round malpractices, which I see today in some districts.  

I have been disappointed that this committee this time round did not go back to the question of Government scholarships. Madam Speaker, I have debated on the Floor of this Parliament, we have asked the Minister of Education to handle this matter, but on page 191 of the minister’s statement they are saying the matter is still with Cabinet.  I want to say that I am very much disappointed, this thing has taken a very long time and I want to say that the minister will have to pardon me if I feel that it is being delayed deliberately. It should be realised that education at the university level is the most important aspect or investment both for an individual and for a community. And indeed, we are saying we cannot develop, as a nation, without having proper education.  

But if you look at the research from Makerere admissions you will see that, for example, for Apac in 1997/98 admissions Government sponsored 40 students. This fell to 28 in 1999/00. Meanwhile in Kampala it was 259 in 1997/98; it jumped to 310, which was 10 per cent of Government scholarship for Kampala alone. Mpigi jumped from 211 to 231 and Kotido jumped from six to 13 and we are talking about district distribution. I want to say that the districts around Kampala and Kampala itself are the richest in this country. Kotido, Apac and others, which are getting the least sponsorship, are the poorest and we are paying taxes for us to be able to pay for children of the richest people in this country. 

I feel this is very unfair and I want the minister to give me a convincing answer as to whether we in Uganda should continue with this state of affairs where those areas, which are poor are being marginalized in education and, therefore, are being left out to lag behind development. This certainly cannot in any way promote equal development in a country you are talking about in our Constitution.

Madam Speaker, only six districts of Bushenyi, Kampala, Masaka, Mbarara, Mpigi and Mukono took 40 per cent of the Government scholarships in 1999, 1997, 1998 and 42.4 in 1998/99 and in 1999/00 43.1. And this worsening trend is continuing and I think it could now be nearly 50 per cent. This is very sad. I think this should be corrected immediately. I propose that we now use the bursary system, that instead of the quota system we are talking about, we give each sub-county in Uganda three scholarships and that will add up to about 3000 scholarships, and that the balance of 1000 be given to the best students nationally. I think this is a bit better and fairer than the system, which we are now talking about.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to add that the loan education money, which is being talked about should be implemented immediately. There is one matter, which is of concern to me - the overcrowding at Makerere University. We cannot talk about quality of education when we have too many people at Makerere, some have their lectures through the windows and so on, which have become now a rally. I think the Ministry of Education should really tell us what is happening because I cannot see you talking about quality of education at this level when now lectures have become rallies. I want to demand a convincing answer from the minister.

Lastly, the committee talked about phasing out of some National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs) and so on.  Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the one of Ngeta and Unyama in Northern Uganda. I think it is fair when Government is thinking about where it is establishing institutions whether of learning or whatever, to also think about a fair distribution even within the regions themselves. I have a feeling that it will be much better, because if you do not do that, you are concentrating the opportunity for development within certain areas even within the region to the disadvantage of others. I would have felt, if I were in the Ministry of Education, that having allocated a university based in Gulu, perhaps it would have been better for these other higher institutions of learning to be allocated in another sub-region within that region. 

To me if you are talking about distributing development nationally, it is better to look at the situation because as it is now if we continue with this type of practice, we shall end up developing only certain areas in this country and leaving others undeveloped. I am saying, if you examine other areas in this country, this situation arises and I think this should be corrected and that will be best and better for all of us. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

5.02
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee for a well-written report that we have received. But I have some clarification that I would want to get from the Ministry of Gender. I want to know why the ministry has taken long to give us a policy for the elderly. There are many of us, and we really need this policy to come up so that we can be served by the ministry, by the Government just like those other categories of people are served.  

I want to go to Ministry of Health. I want to get clarification. How come that development fund was not given to referral hospitals? I want to guess, rightly though, that these hospitals do not have such equipments, which would require money from this development fund. I am not quite sure about Jinja but the time when we were there, the theatre did not have equipment and we were wondering, why build a theatre without equipment. Iganga does not have a working X-Ray, people have got to be referred to Jinja and yet Iganga is a referral hospital. I would like to request that if it cannot be done this time, let referral hospitals get money for development, because I really think that all the time any institution is developing and to develop it must get money to put up new structures and anything that may be required.

The multi-grade teaching: I am a well-seasoned teacher but I have my reservation for this thing.  While we say we want people to access education, there is the relevancy for it and equity. I very much doubt the quality of the teaching and the learning in a multi-grade teaching class. I saw some out of the country but when I was talking to the classroom teacher, she told me it was almost a punishment because how do you have two grades - this is a higher grade, here is a lower grade and among the two grades, you have to have people of different abilities; you have to group them. How is this poor teacher going to teach two grades with very many ability groups? 

If we are crying that UPE, as good as it is, it is not giving us the quality that we want, how much better will this multi-grade teaching do? Will it not give us really poorer materials? I would like to suggest that even if it means spending more and more money, let us have children in their groups.   They can be bigger numbers than we have now for UPE but they should be of one grade so that we can give them the quality that we are looking for. I thank you.

5.06
MR NATHAN NANDALA (Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On page 4, Ministry of Education and Sports could not spend about Shs 20 billion. I see no reason why the committee should say they “should account”. They should give us an explanation why they could not spend the Shs 20 billion given to them.  

On page 9, they say school feeding will be in 19 districts. I do not know if it is only 19 districts, which have hunger or where people can fall hungry. And you can imagine, they are mentioning - I cannot count some, but let me mention a few: Mbarara of all districts, Masindi. This country has 15 districts and our Constitution says on page 5 that: “The State shall adopt an integrated and co-ordinated planning approach.”  Two, it says it should produce balanced development and equitability.

On the issue of shoddy work, all along I have been talking of shoddy work, Ministry of Education is also on construction, Ministry of Health is also constructing. We have a gazetted ministry here, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication, which is in charge of construction and that is the reason why we are having shoddy work. Madam Speaker, I would suggest that all construction work should go back to the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication, not these ministries.  

Madam Speaker, selection of a bright student. A bright student, it is common knowledge, is bright. It is not subjective; so there is not need for you to say that the local council should select. The system should be clear that a bright student is a bright student and that should be the one to benefit.  

On seed schools, we have been in power for 17 years; we have built 17 schools. Now, it is coming to 18 years we have built only 17 schools. We have 56 districts. Do we need another 56 years to build 56 schools? I think there should be a deliberate policy by Government to build secondary schools to accommodate all these kids who are leaving primary schools.  

On tax exemption, I do not agree, it is common knowledge that anybody who trades must submit a return. So, if you submit a return showing a loss, you would not pay taxes. So, anybody who is claiming that people are paying taxes is lying, you pay tax according to profits. I would only request the Ministry of Finance to tell us who does the audit for Government schools. Is the Auditor General doing the audit and where are the excess funds they are collecting going?  

Madam Speaker, you will give me a few minutes because the President talked for long -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have three minutes, please.

MR NANDALA: On standards of higher institution, it is wrong to use selective methods of admission. We should call a spade a spade. Hon. Babu went to Makerere University Business School, he had a license to fly the biggest planes but he was not allowed. Hon. Mukula who flies small planes was allowed in Nkumba. Who licensed Nkumba University?  It is very important that the Ministry of Education and Sports should quickly produce a report on Mukula short of that, we shall lose confidence in the ministry.  

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Gender, we want the Ministry of Gender to give us employment policy.  In fact, they are redundant -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR NANDALA: Without employment policy you cannot fight poverty. It is common knowledge. I do not know what the ministry is doing. For 18 years they have been sitting there, we should not even give them money now unless they produce employment policy and they are the ones in charge. (Applause)

On the issue of health, I want to ask the Committee Chairperson if she looked at the accounts of National Drug Authority; because NDA has 49 employees and their salaries is Shs 3.2 billion.  Now, we want also to budget for them. Did you look at them? 

Secondly, are you aware National Drug Authority had guys who were involved with the inspectors in bad dealings? What did you say about that? I believe National Drug Authority should not be given money now until they account for the rest of the money.  

Madam Speaker, on policy statement of Ministry of Health. On page 24, they are diverting money for Local Government Development Programme (LGDP) II.  You remember we all approved a loan here for LGDP II to go and fund this Nutrition Early Childhood project. It is illegal to begin with because when we approved nutrition project, it had its own set objectives and its mandate; LGDP II has its own objectives and mandate. If you start diverting resources from here and there without even coming to Parliament for approval, I think that is completely illegal. 

I think this project should expire because even the institutions put in place are not really working. They have put up resource centres, which are poorly managed and they are going to waste. To add on that, they are only making announcements on radio that, “Eat a pawpaw, eat a pineapple” without giving it. They should have used these resources to those kids maybe we would have improved early childhood nutrition. We have a report here, Madam Speaker, which is showing that this project has failed in Bangladesh, it has failed in Ethiopia and it has failed in Uganda. This research was carried out by Save the Children Fund, United Kingdom.

Madam Speaker [An. hon. Member: “And Eritria”] yes, and Eritrea. We have built health units without drugs, without staff while people are dying. Why do we not use this money first to provide the drugs to the people dying instead of building a very nice health centre without anything? Yes, you have a good theatre but no treatment. Will people get cured when they look at the building? The President has made a lot of presidential pledges he has not fulfilled. In 1995, he came to our place called Buwalase and he made a pledge but it has never been fulfilled. Who handles these pledges? Is this a bad debt? He should tell us so that we write it off. 

Madam Speaker, we have $150 million from Global Fund to handle AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis but this money is being eaten by people who are not sick. The sick people there are dying. If you hear of the money of CHAI (Community Health AIDs Initiative) it is a disaster. You know very well that this money was meant for orphans and widows but it is being eaten by people who are neither orphans nor widows. So, what is the purpose for us to get money in the name of the people dying and be eaten by the wrong people? I think it is high time we did carry a research on this; especially the money for AIDs Commission, money coming in Ministry of Health must further be investigated.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, to save time, I have requested that those who have been given authority should not live on dead bodies; they should really serve the nation. If the money is for the sick, let it go to the sick but not to be eaten by those who are not sick. Thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you have made extremely serious allegations, and I think that I should ask the minister to say something about it even before we proceed to the next honourable Member.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me. I would like the honourable Member really to explain what he means that, “Money meant for the sick is being eaten by the healthy.” I would like to have the examples because he quoted Global Fund and he gave a figure of $150 million.   We have never received more than 18 million from the Global Fund, which I will be talking about when answering the other questions. So, what is he talking about, $150 million and being eaten by the healthy instead of the sick?

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am going to clarify. You remember the numbers they have just read; they said 2000 and something will get ARVs – I cannot remember the numbers, they are there. And we know in Uganda at least 10 million of us are sick, and we have got money from all these places –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that 10 million of the 22 million Ugandans are sick?
 
MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am going to explain.  Even in this report itself, I have here: “Government gets new Malaria drug. Despite losing $340 million annually to Malaria, cases of pandemic have increased five fold from 2,317,000 in 1997 to 12,343,411 in 2003.”  Is that not over 10 million? I am somehow well informed. 

I want to add on the issue of “Who are sick?” We have money for CHAI. Madam Speaker, this money is remitted every now and then to districts, and it is supposed to help looking after the orphans and the widows.  They have not counted the widowers. But, the people who manage the projects are the district bosses.  They are the ones who have built up their own organisations and they are the ones who take the money while the peasants are dying. If the minister is denying that, I am ready to buy fuel in my small car and take him and show him what I mean.

On the issue of Global Fund - Mr Minister, you wanted to hear about Global Fund. I downloaded this information from the Internet and it was saying that Uganda is going to benefit $150 million for Malaria, for AIDS, for Tuberculosis. So, it does not matter, that is our money. I am giving you information, which is well researched. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, can I know the document, which you have been reading. Speak to it and table it because I do not have it. You have to speak to the document, introduce it and tell us what it is and then lay it because it is not part of my report.  

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, this is a document I downloaded from the Internet where by hon. Brig. Jim Muhwezi, Minister of Health, was working on a conference at Hotel Africana and he gave these figures. That was the New Vision of 22nd 2004 -(Laughter)- and the photo of the minister is here. 

On the issue of transfer of money, I will bring the letters from the Ministry of Finance but in the meantime let me lay on the Table the policy statement about transferring the money from LGDP II to the nutrition project, page 24. So, I will table it because the minister may not have a copy now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. (Brig.Muhwezi rose_). Did you want to say something or you have left it? Maybe you will respond later. Let us have hon. Twarebireho.

5.22
CAPT. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and her team for a job well done. I wish to start by thanking the Government for putting in place the policy of grant aiding Government and vocational schools in every sub-country. However, there is a lot left to be desired in as far as these vocational schools are concerned. We do not see anything much being done on the ground and yet, as we all know, there are a lot of dropouts who need to go to these institutions. So, I urge Government to make sure that their promise is well honoured.

On grant aiding schools, Madam Speaker, it is most unfortunate really that we really do not know the criteria being used. As Parliament we do not know which schools were grant aided last year, and we do not know which schools are on the list this year. I have had occasion to talk to the Minister of Education on this matter and he has always told me that there is difficulty mainly when it comes to schools founded by religious bodies. As has been observed by the hon. Member for Manjiya, there are communities, which cannot even construct half a classroom and religious bodies have gone to serve these communities, but they cannot continue running those schools.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I request honourable members that when you are debating the report, do not ignore the policy statements because we did not quote each and everything. Most of the information you are referring to is given in the policy statement. It was not relevant for us to duplicate that information. We only sorted out some very salient policies for us to highlight to the committee. For example, if you looked in this policy statement of the Ministry of Education, page 204 gives the list of the schools that have been grant aided, the name of the school and the district; you can see it. 

But the one of 76, it is waiting for you to approve this provision. If it is approved then the Ministry can go ahead to identify it. And then also, like what hon. Nandala has been saying about the global fund, it is clearly stated in this policy statement, what the fund is doing and what it has done and so forth. (Laughter). This one is the policy statement of the Ministry of Health, from page 15, point number (b) Global Fund - up to page 17. It is talking about the items to be distributed, Tuberculosis control and so forth. So I am just advising members that please, when you are debating also bear in mind these policy statements. Thank you very much.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as I am concerned, since I am actually in great need of a grant-aided school in my sub-county, I would certainly vote for approving the vote for the 76 schools, so the chairperson need not worry about that.                                

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think it is the principle of what information you actually bring out. The chairperson says that part of the statement is in the policy statements. I think it is the principle of what you air out on the Floor of this House that is bothering her.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. All the same I do not see anything about the criteria, in the policy statement. However, permit me to continue and talk about the interaction I have had with the minister and the difficulties he has been telling me of, especially in schools founded by religious bodies. The minister has always expressed concern in respect of these schools in that at the end of the day when these schools are grant aided, the Government gets problems in administering them and I am wondering why that problem arises. Maybe it would be in order for Government to come up with a policy whereby if a school, which was founded by a religious body is taken over by Government, then a, b, c and d must be fulfilled and there would be no confusion later. I do not see why problems should arise.  

On bursaries for the bright, needy students, there has been a problem. I highlighted a problem last year: all the children who got bursaries from my county never got the cheques. They were all sent to schools where all the students were not. So, I would urge the ministry, when they are dispatching these cheques, to clearly check and find where these students are so that children do not suffer. Some did not continue with school last year because of that anomaly.

On public universities, Madam Speaker, I am also concerned about the university scholarships. A university scholarship is really won on merit. A student sits senior six exams and gets a mark - that is why they say, “Government will take 4,000 students”. And I believe they take the best according to the performance. I do not see why on earth a person gets her scholarship and cannot transfer to another faculty with it and top up, because she has earned it! 

Secondly, I do not see why, if I have been admitted for a course at Makerere but I would want to go to Nkozi, I do not go with my scholarship? I think it is terribly unfair and I would urge Government to come up with a clear-cut policy on that.  

There is also something funny about admissions to Government universities, Madam Speaker. What happens these days is that you find somebody has been admitted to Kyambogo, Makerere, or Mbarara and one person has three places and yet there are other students without places at all in a government university and they end up going to Nkumba where standards are now getting into problems. So, I do not know why that cannot be rectified by the Joint Admissions Board.

Madam Speaker, I am also concerned with the employment policy of this country. The employment policy of this country is non-existent and this has disadvantaged many Ugandans especially those who do not have bargaining power in as far as employment is concerned. People have continued to be employed without any appointment letters, there are no terms and conditions of service, they are dismissed at will and everything is in a mess. Sincerely the ministry concerned, or Government, should come up with a clear employment policy so that our children do not continue suffering. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “National cake”, then hon. Sinabulya.

5.34
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, with due respect, to update you on my name. (Laughter). I am not called “national cake”. With due respect, I am called Mutuluuza Peter, Member of Parliament, Mawokota North. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mutuluuza, you are associated with equity in this country. That is why I call you “national cake”. But I know your name.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I have just a few concerns. One of them is about the bursaries to bright children at sub-counties. I do not agree with the report where they say that, “Due to malpractices by district officials….” I do not think it is true these are district officials who are actually messing up this programme. It is the sub-county leadership, because I have received a lot of complaints from my people. Actually the scholarships are sent to sub-counties and the sub-counties divide them among themselves. In most cases it is the children of councilors, whether bright or not, who benefit from these scholarships.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this report on page 17, 4.6, seems to be complaining about the fires in schools, burning of dormitories and so on. The problem here I think is caused by cheating in these institutions. These students pay a lot of money but in return I think they do not get their money’s worth. Therefore, it is the duty of the Ministry of Education to look into this. They should check whether in most of these private schools, which charge a lot of money, the students get what is worth their parent’s money so that they check the reasons why these fires are there. 

Madam Speaker, on –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, the information available is that these fires are spread in both private and Government schools. In fact there are probably more fires in Government than in private schools, and certain schools are notorious for fires, like Kibuli here. But I was wondering - I know a lot about animals. When you crowd animals they tend to behave in an anti-social way. When you crowd chicken, they tend to peck each other. So, is it possible that these children of ours are being overcrowded and they are beginning to show anti-social behavior? I think we should investigate that.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. As of last week a new dimension of reasons for fires was coming up. Members of some of the schools - I was in the Ministry of Education talking to an official who said Government is only getting reluctant, but the insecurity element is also cropping up in schools. We may be talking of students only, but in some of the schools old people who are not students have been sighted in the compounds of these schools. So, I think Government should not sit down and think it is only students that are burning schools. They better think seriously about some of these matters in a security manner. Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable members, for giving that information but I want to remind hon. Nkuuhe that in Kibuli they also pay a lot of money. So, if they are not satisfied, they can go ahead to cause havoc in those schools.  

Madam Speaker, the issue of polytechnics; I think the founder members of these polytechnics will be happy for these polytechnics to go back to their management. However, the problem is that still Government will tax them. My appeal to Government or to the Ministry of Finance is to stop taxing these institutions. They are rendering a service and I do not see why we should tax them yet we do not have enough facilities as Government to accommodate all these students.

Further on that issue of polytechnics, according to the table here I can see there is one polytechnic in Apac District, which will be retained. But then there is another one in Kayunga, which is for the government. Why is it also not retained? We also need that institution in that part of the country.

About the public universities, we are glad the East is going to get a public university; the North has Gulu, and Mbarara has one too. However, it is high time we also thought of Buganda because in Buganda the universities, which are there are in Kampala, and Kampala is not considered to be in Buganda. Just a simple explanation - I am wondering whether this will cater for the question of quotas at Makerere University because if each region gets a university, then there should be no question of quotas at the university.

Madam Speaker, on page 30, cultural leaders; there is a constitutional requirement that our cultural leaders are given subsistence allowance. But it is absurd to note that even the ministry responsible has no fund for this purpose. The Ministry of Finance should explain, and I think that is why some parts of Uganda prefer federo, because most of the constitutional requirements are not fulfilled.  

Lastly, I want to briefly supplement on the issue of the HIV/AIDS Fund. I want to know why the programme of CHAI is not a privilege of every district. In Mpigi District we do not have this programme of CHAI; I do not know why, yet others have it. As my colleagues have already said, corruption is rampant. In fact we in Mpigi District, we do not have the CHAI programme but we have the World Vision. World Vision is assisting our HIV/AIDS victims and according to the information I get, they are even doing better than where this programme of CHAI is, in Wakiso. I wonder why.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of these are really constituency matters. They could be dealt with between you and the Ministers. At the beginning we said that we should keep contributions short. We should seek clarification only because we had a general debate here on the Budget and on the State of the Nation Address, where you raised all these matters. But now you want us to go full circle, now we are in federo and universities, national cake -(Laughter)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I thank you for allowing me to contribute.

5.44
MRS SYLVIA SINABULYA (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first congratulate the Education Ministry for the achievements in Universal Primary Education .

On the issue of retention mainly of the girl child in primary schools, the committee did make a recommendation of a study to see the implications of providing sanitary towels for girls. I would like to find out more because the President in his 2001 manifesto did promise to remove taxes on sanitary towels and up to now that promise has not been fulfilled. So, I would like to find out from the Minister of Finance: why has that not been so? It was in a bid to ensure that the girl child is retained in school!

Madam Speaker, I would also want to seek clarification from the Minister of Education on how far they have gone with the issue of addressing disparities in primary education. If you look at the results of the primary 7 candidates in upcountry schools, most of these children pass with low grades as compared to their counterparts in urban schools yet the Government continues to send the same amount of money to these schools per child. What measures have been put in place by the Ministry to address those disparities?

The committee did make recommendations on the supervision and monitoring of UPE and it did make observations that there is a lot that is lacking. However, I would have expected a more concrete and specific recommendation. For example, what is lacking? Is it funds to supervise these schools? Rather than talking about increasing the capacity of inspectorates, I think they should have gone ahead to propose a certain percentage of funds to be remitted to school authorities or districts every month to ensure that there is actual supervision, which takes place in schools.

On the Ministry of Gender, there is a recommendation that they should build more community centers at sub-counties. I want to find out from the Minister, what value will these community centers add to community development? Already there are a number of facilities, each sub-county has for example a council hall. Is that not adequate, instead of building more community centers and having so many structures, which are sometimes not being used?

Madam Speaker, under Health I have one serious observation on reproductive health. Whereas it is pleasing to note that reproductive health is a priority in the Ministry of Health, I am surprised that the maternal mortality rate has stagnated for over ten years. This is a very serious issue. My colleague, hon. Dora Byamukama, talked about the 506 women dying per 100,000. If you translate this into a scenario – you could say 42 women are dying every month in Uganda as a result of maternal related causes. This will translate into a full omnibus crashing every month. If it were a road accident, everyone would be startled, but these are women dying every month and we continue to talk about reproductive health being a priority of the Ministry and yet the indicators do not change?

The report talks about strategies identified but when you look at these strategies, they have been there for long. Things like family planning, emergency obstetric care and antenatal care are around but you find that women continue to dodge or to avoid going to hospitals. I think we need to go beyond putting in place facilities but even look at other factors that bar women from going to attend antenatal clinics and going to access family planning services. I think the most important factor is addressing the low, social economic status of women. If that is done then the women would be able to go to facilities, which have been put in place by the Ministry of Health. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already selected who is going to speak but concerning the question of this taxation of the sanitary towels and the President’s pledge and now a task force; can we ask the Women Parliamentary Association to actually examine the Finance Bills since 2001? That Bill accompanies the Budget, Appropriation Act and so on. I think it is our responsibility to examine the Finance Bill. There are very tiny figures, which my friend puts in, which are hardly legible.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and honourable members, to the best of my recollection there are no taxes on sanitary towels because these are treated as medical equipment and like other medical equipment, they are not subjected to tax. But I have sent my officials to check and see if there is any head of tax that they are subjected to. I will report in a few minutes’ time but I think there are no taxes on them.

5.51
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2001, presidential candidate Museveni was very eloquent about a secondary school per sub-county and a technical school per sub-county. If we add these figures in the report, 104 in 2000 and 2001 financial year, and 34 last financial year, I do not know what happened to 2001 and 2002. There are 76 this year; so we come to between 214 and 224. There are more than 600, 900 - I am told – sub-counties in Uganda. We have only one more financial year to go, 2005-2006, and instead of addressing these important matters we are busy diverting the attention of the country to issues like kisanja and what have you. 

It looks like a failed policy but what has caused the failure of this policy? It is a very important policy because with the bulging figure of UPE, how shall we absorb these children? When you take a random sample and ask these boda boda people, most of these cyclists are senior 6 dropouts, or senior 4 dropouts. We have denied them the capacity to employ themselves by building them technical schools. Instead we are loading them with bisanja to go to Entebbe or anywhere, without regard to their welfare. There is no way you are going to improve the welfare of the people of Uganda without enabling them to employ themselves, especially with the poor employment policy from the Ministry of Gender as we have just observed. 

It is important that attention is paid to having technical schools in every sub-county, as it was stressed in the manifesto. Failure to do that, we are heading for disaster. You get a senior 6 dropout, because land has also become short, there is no more land; the fellow moves to town, buys a bicycle and starts the boda boda business. On the basis of that he marries and produces children. Is there any hope for such a family, earning a living from the boda boda?

Madam Speaker, I will not tire in asking the Minister of Health to consider Bugiri Hospital as an urgent matter. It is along the highway, it handles a lot of accident cases. Some time last year due to the accident in Busesa where an oil tanker burnt up people, Bugiri Hospital had more than they could handle. But there is an old ambulance there, a Land Rover, which has ceased to even have tyres. I do not know how it moves - or how it is expected to move. Mr Minister, Bugiri Hospital should be handled as an emergency case especially in as far as the ambulance is concerned. Thank you very much.

5.56
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have about four or five issues to raise. First of all I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. On page 10 the committee reported about a school feeding programme, which is to start in 19 districts. When I looked at the districts named, indeed it was really in tandem with the districts that the Select Committee on Northern Uganda also recently reported on. I was rather dismayed to note that either inadvertently or not, Kumi District was left out and yet it is one of those, which actually suffered like the rest of the districts that have been named in the report. 

In fact it is sad to report here that as we speak now, many families in Kumi District cannot afford even two meals a day. Most of them depend on one meal a day. So, I really pray that the list is reviewed.

Madam Speaker, I also want to join my colleagues in observing the need to at least prioritize those sub-counties, which do not have even a single secondary school, when we are considering allocation of seed schools. I have personally been very common in the corridors of the Ministry of Education, bringing to their attention the lack of secondary schools in two sub-counties in my constituency, that is Kapiri and Kobwin. If the Ministry of Education took up steps to consider – as a priority - those sub-counties that do not have any secondary school, maybe we would be moving in the right direction, in bridging the gap.  

Madam Speaker, on page 23 there is a report that the Ministry of Education has not, up to now, resolved the legal crisis surrounding Makerere University Business School (MUBS). Today we are here appropriating monies to MUBS and although our problem may be the deadline, I want a clarification from the Minister of Education: how much time does he need to come up with reports? We gave a deadline for MUBS, year in year out we have not yet sorted out the matter. In fact this reminds me – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to inform my brother, Dr Epetait. Last week when MUBS had its graduation ceremony, the school was disappointed when the vice-chancellor, who is also the Leader of Government Business in this Parliament, Prof. Nsibambi, turned down the invitation to officiate at the ceremony. That therefore indicates that there is a serious legal battle between the Ministry of Education, Makerere University and Makerere University Business School. I think this is something, which has been running for the last three years. 

When I joined Parliament, I was on the Social Services Committee, and this issue was raised. The Minister responsible for Education and Sports in this country owes us an explanation so that some of these issues can be expedited. Otherwise as of now, Makerere and Nakawa cannot see eye to eye. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for that useful information. That brings me to ask myself: how do we appropriate monies to institutions whose legal status we are not sure of? Are we not going to be party to illegality? I think the Minister of Education should help this House and answer some of these questions that have been pending on his desk. He should resolve them once and for all. In fact this also boils down to the other investigation that the Leader of Government Business reported about, that the Minister of Education is investigating on how a certain questionable Masters Degree was awarded in Nkumba University. We wonder when that report will come to the House.

Madam Speaker, I also want to give –(Interjection)– let me wind up. I think we have a bit of time pressure. I want to find out some more from the Ministry of Education regarding the fate of funding of the primary demonstration schools. I am aware that for some time since some of the primary teacher training colleges were closed, their demonstration schools were just left to nobody. They have not been getting any school facility grant and indeed a case in point is that of the Bishop College Demonstration School, again in Ngora County. It is in such a sorry state, especially following the time when the NRA occupied it as a command post. In fact they established a barracks there. They demolished all the desks and now the children are operating on the floor. When I talk about funding for demonstration schools, that is actually the worst, and I want to know from the Ministry of Education what steps they have taken in as far as primary demonstration schools are concerned.

Madam Speaker, as for the land that has been procured by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for a public library, I was glad that some useful target is being identified now for this fund. The land is in front of Parliamentary buildings and perhaps demonstrators would instead come and read; my observation is that the location of a public library ought to be in a place, which is not rather restrictive. I do not know whether that would be the most suitable place for a public library? The Conference Centre is on the other side, CID headquarters is this side, Parliament is – I am still not very comfortable with the location of the public library to be. I think we need to revisit that idea but it would be good to put that land to some use somehow, to avoid some of those problems. 

Let me turn to page 35, where we are talking about the compensation fund for workers. I was so dismayed that a Shs 818,000,000 bill was computed for compensation of Ebola victims and Shs 400,000,000 was approved, but a mere Shs 66,000,000 was released. Ministry of Finance, please, I do not know how you sometimes identify our priorities! Those families have had the trouble they have gone through for the sake of Uganda. I really think that there is need for the Government to take serious steps towards handling that compensation fund as a matter of priority. 

I now read from page 50 – this allocation of the anti-retroviral drugs. Some of the institutions that have been identified for ARV distribution include private and profit-making medical centers. If we are going to allocate ARVs to private, profit-making medical centers, how sure are we that most of the ARVs will not find their way there? And then we shall have defeated our own purpose.  

Madam Speaker, as for rehabilitation of district hospitals, I beg to report here that at Budhudha Hospital we have big problems. In fact Atutur Hospital needs urgent attention, moreover it is along a major highway. Most of the accident victims that have met their fate there really perish not because of the impact of the accident but because there is delayed support. There is need to reconsider having Atutur Hospital. I did not see it in the five-year work plan for rehabilitation of district hospitals. Atutur Hospital is missing but worse still, Ngora Hospital is not even a hospital to talk about and I think hon. Minister of Health, after here I will still want to make a follow-up on a number of issues that we have raised about Ngora Hospital. I know it is an NGO hospital but I think Government ought to look into support for those NGO hospitals, which have not managed to cope up with the existing demands. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.05
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the report and also to thank them for the work well done. However, I want to address my concern to the Ministry of Labour. First and foremost, it is always under-funded in most of its activities. However much effort the Ministry of Labour is putting in, funding is always at the low side and this is vividly depicted –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the beginning I said that when you finish your contribution, you remain here. Hon. Mwondha, please come back and sit down.  

MR MWONDHA: I am coming back, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you did not indicate to me that you were coming back.

MR MWONDHA: But I cannot come back until I have gone out. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go out then. (Laughter) Thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: However, my great concern is about the Department of Labour, which is vividly depicted in bullet 8.0 on page 33, especially the industrial court. We very well know that this is a court of justice that gets the two sides to understand each others’ problems: that is the employer and the workers. But if you really read this bullet 8.0, you will find that the industrial court is just a squatter. It has no home currently, and it has no court. So its function is sort of being denied. It is not there; it does not exist, in essence. 

In that case I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, I know that the envelope is not big enough but if workers are part and parcel of the development of this country, we need to look at them with a very serious eye. We cannot think of development if workers are not being considered as people who belong to this country.

Secondly, I just want to find out whether workers of this country will ever get their labour laws brought to Parliament for enactment. This has left the workers in the hands of employers to decide on what they should pay, what conditions of work they should undergo and what the other conditions of their welfare should be. This is well depicted in bullet 14 of page 36. A country without an employment policy is not a country by the way, because if you consider the production of any country and its economic status, you always look at the labour, you look at land and capital. But this country is now like you know – you are not explaining anything around. You are not talking of the vivid development that we want because workers are neglected. 

When you say something about the workers, it seems to be immaterial. It is a serious matter! Therefore, I want to find out from the minister on how soon the labour laws are going to be brought here. What is the problem? Now we are just remaining with one year but these revised labour laws have been in existence since the inception of this government, so I just wonder; and workers are very unhappy about this. Laws have been brought to this House and have been passed but the labour laws are never seen and we have been making noise. It is a serious matter and the Ministry of Labour should consider it and tell us if the problem arises from somewhere so that the workers can also go and demonstrate. Definitely, they are not happy about this.  

The third issue on the Ministry of Labour is the distribution of labour officers. I know very well that today we are running an economy based on decentralization but if you look at the Department of Labour at the districts level, those fellows are neglected all through. They are not facilitated, even their salaries come very late. You know sometimes they use their own money to do their job, which money is not refunded. I have evidence that I can always bring about and you see it. It is very unbecoming to consider workers of this country to be immaterial when you talk of development. 

I shudder when the Budget Speech is read here that we have made progress and development is at such and such a percentage. How, when the human resource has never been considered? Workers are not happy, I have to tell you here. It is a serious matter. People take it as a joke but it is true, and we have been pronouncing this on all Labour days, but nothing is forthcoming. We are remaining with one year before the life of this Parliament expires; I do not know how soon our minister is ready to bring these labour laws.

About the Ministry of Health, I am also concerned about the lack of routine maintenance of equipment in hospitals. This is a very bad situation because if we look at Mulago Hospital as our national referral hospital, there are very many incidents of casualties that need X-rays for example, before they are given any kind of treatment. One incident that I can give you is of one gentleman called Ongaba who is the Secretary General of the National Organization of Trade Unions. His son was attacked by thugs at his home, and the boy was badly hit on his head and left for dead. When the father heard about this he took him to the hospital, only to be told that there is no facility for X-ray and he had to take him to commercial dealers in this kind of business. At the end of the day the boy almost passed away. 

Therefore, maintenance of this equipment is very essential. I think we need to consider that as a priority whenever we look at our budget. And I call upon the Minister of Health to be serious on this matter.

I want to address myself to the budgetary provisions, specifically Vote 139 regarding Kyambogo University. I would like to request the Ministry of Finance to increase this university’s development fund to something like maybe Shs 20 billion because this is a very young university, which is at its initial stages and it needs a lot of development. I wonder how they could develop if the development fund is just peanuts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I looked at the length of the section on education and I thought that since it is the biggest empire we should start with one of the smaller ones. Let us start with the Minister of Health. Because the matters raised were extremely serious, I would like us to get some answers before we leave.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Brig. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members for the concerns they have about our sector. I am going to answer questions - although some of the members who asked the questions are not available. I would also like to thank my chairperson who rightly said some of the questions they are asking are actually in the policy statement. But I will clarify on some of the important points. 

On the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS and who has benefited, I probably think we might need a session to really discuss this with the hon. Members of Parliament. They need to know more about the Global Funds to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria because I have a feeling that my honourable friend who was talking about Shs 150 million that was received and has been used by the healthy instead of the sick may be referring to funds coming from all over the globe. I do not know whether he is aware of the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. This fund is confined, it has regulations on how the funds will come in, how they will be spent, and perhaps we need to discuss this with you, because we have not received more than Shs 18 million. 

We have just formed the project management unit, it has I think recruited agencies to control the funds and they have disbursed about four million. Some have received, others have not yet received, and the -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Minister. Is the fund coming in form of cash so that people spend or it is coming in form of drugs to be given to the people?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, this is why I think we need some time to go into the details. Some of it is given as cash; there is what is called a country co-ordinating mechanism in the country. Anybody can apply for these funds, including private NGOs, to the Global Fund through this mechanism in the country, and your application will be considered in Geneva. If they give you the money, there is what is called the recipient agent, who is the Ministry of Finance. Then they have the local fund agent who is, in the case of Uganda, Pricewaterhouse Coopers, who will monitor it on behalf of that Fund. And when it comes in, there is that unit, which I have talked about, which will pass the money to the lead agencies. There are some agencies that have been recruited around the whole country that will manage this money on behalf of that project. 

But really this is just the beginning. Uganda has had some monies approved for five years; it is a lot of money but only about Shs 18 million has been received. That is why I was talking about 150, it is not there definitely. But it is money for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Government can apply, NGOs can apply, and anybody who is doing something about these diseases can apply for this money. But I think we shall organize to give you more information about it so that you can participate in fighting against these disease.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, honourable minister, there were complaints about lack of access to CHAI and all - everything is mixed up in the minds of the members. I do think that we shall create time very quickly so that members can be given an opportunity to internalize how that fund works. I think many of them really do not –(Mrs Hyuha rose_)- yes, chairperson.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, the funds on the operation of HIV in Uganda should not be mixed up. We have the Uganda AIDS Commission, which is accommodated under the President’s Office, and then we have the Global Fund, which is being co-ordinated by the Ministry of Health. The activities of CHAI are co-ordinated by the Uganda AIDS Commission. Whereas we pass the Vote of the Uganda Aids Commission - mainly development - under the Ministry of Health, we have recommended more than twice in this august House that it should be passed by the committee that is responsible for the President’s Office. But that one has not yet been implemented. 

Funds for CHAI are in a specific loan, which was passed and was being operated by the Uganda Aids Commission. The activities of CHAI do not fall under the Ministry of Health. And as far as I am concerned, about the Global Fund I want to supplement the Minister’s input and say that for these funds a secretariat has been formed. It is a grant, an additional fund on the budget ceiling of the Ministry of Health, it is going to be implemented by both the public and private sector. Under the public sector we have funds going to the district local governments and those who submitted their work plans and they were approved. So far Shs 1.3 billion has already gone -

Under the Central Government, nine Ministries will benefit. For example, the Ministry of Education and Sports is scheduled to benefit this financial year, Shs 100 million. So far Shs 50 million has been given. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - I have already indicated in the report that because of the delay of the Orphans and the Vulnerable Children policy, it may not benefit this financial year but it is expected to benefit on the second, and third round, from the US $ 56 million.  

The private sector: Government has already identified lead agencies in various districts, community based organizations where funds would go and those that are supposed to identify, build capacities in various districts. We looked at the list of districts and those, which have already accessed Shs 1.3 billion, and about five, which had not yet submitted the work-plans. So Central Government, districts, private community based will benefit from the fund but there are additions.  Let us not mix CHAI Programme which was the name being operationalised by Uganda AIDS Commission, which does not fall under the portfolio of the Ministry of Health. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, when I sit here, I listen to all these things and I internalize all problems that Members are raising.  So I think there should be no objection to even a half a day meeting, to say this is now private sector, this is Uganda AIDS Commission – for the record because these are public resources.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Yes, thank you very much Madam Speaker.  I think all these NGOs - we really need to explain perhaps, so that Members know where to go when they want their support.  

On reproductive health, I cannot agree with Members more that maternal mortality is a big problem and we need the support of everyone, because it is not only Uganda; most countries have failed to bring down the maternal mortality. We do not know why, because even people who are near health centres with facilities do not deliver in hospitals and health units. It is a big problem but –(Mrs Masiko and Mr Wambuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us start with the Lady who delivers, hon. Princess Masiko Kabakumba, and then hon. Wambuzi.

MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and hon. Minister for giving me this opportunity. Actually, I was reading through and one of the challenges is under utilization of services, but I do not know if you have considered that these health centres are there but the services are not there. You go to a health center, but there is no nurse to attend to you. When the nurse is there, she will maybe prescribe, and not even a Panadol is given; they say, “you go and buy.” So why don’t I go to a drug shop, buy my Panadol and I treat myself? Maybe go to a TBA or my mother-in-law who will help me deliver. That is what is happening in my district. 

I am happy and thankful to the ministry that they have tried to equip some of the health centers with beds, mattresses, bed sheets, and even blankets, but the staff and the drugs are discouraging people to go to the health centres.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, there is something fundamental, which is happening, because originally a human being was supposed to deliver just like a goat or a cow if that human being was properly fed. Madam Speaker, today in Uganda for somebody to deliver naturally is becoming almost impossible. Very many young girls are delivering through caesarean operation. It appears the food we are eating or some of the medicaments or the water is actually interfering with the normal course. In my constituency, I have lost very many young girls because of the bad roads. It is impossible for those girls to be taken to Iganga for a proper caesarean operation. Even here in Kampala, we are now losing mothers. If you go to Rubaga Hospital, young ladies cannot give birth naturally. It is now actually becoming mandatory like in Europe whereby when you go to hospital, you straight away go for caesarian section. That means there is something, which is happening which we beg the Minister to investigate and find out.  

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  What I am telling you is what I have heard, not only in Uganda, but even in countries with facilities, with nurses and everybody. It is a big problem because what causes death? It would appear that many people would like to deliver at home, that is what they would prefer and perhaps they would like to deliver like their mothers, grandmothers did and perhaps they would prefer to be with close friends, not to go and –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI DEUSIDEDIT: The Minister of Health undertook to train a good number of traditional birth attendants. I am wondering whether that training has had any positive impact in this regard. Could it be that people do not go to the health centres simply because they have the trained birth attendants in the homes and that they prefer the services at home?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: If I had been allowed to finish I was going to talk about that one. Maybe you let me finish and then if I do not touch your point. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think, the lady might have relevant information.
 
MRS MUNYIRA WABWIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Gagawala that these days even those cows he is talking about go through caesarean. There are many cows that are undergoing caesarean to deliver; that is a fact.  So the situation is not just applying to human beings; it has extended even to animals.  

Madam Speaker, the Minister, maybe he is contemplating the reason why women do not go to these health centres to deliver. Most of these women are charged a lot of money by these nurses, it was Shs 10,000 or even more in Government health centers, and if you do not produce the money they will abandon you there, and you might even have to die in the process of giving birth. So that is one of the strongest reasons why the women prefer to remain and be attended to by traditional birth attendants. Thank you.

MRS BIIRA BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would not like the hon. Minister to get away with this attitude because, it may deny the women the very resources and services that they need. In my opinion and from the survey I have conducted, and from experience, of course, which is now long overdue; I think it is lack of proper awareness among the women and health workers that they shy away. Although the Minister tends to think it is perhaps traditional attitudes that cause people prefer to deliver at home, I am saying, no, because for about seven years, traditional birth attendants in my constituency have been supported by organizations like Red Cross where they carry on sensitisation and awareness meetings among the women. They inform them about Primary Healthcare and feeding, they encourage them to go for antenatal, that is, going to the health clinic when a woman is pregnant; and also post-natal, that is going again to the health clinic after delivery. We should encourage post-natal attendance because after you have failed to go to the Health Centre for delivery, there are certain physical defects that you may get because you did not go to the Health Centre.  So, we should utilize the Women Local Councils as well so that they can create more and more – let us use the Government institutions in place, this is the point that I am bringing forward.  

Secondly, let us also support the traditional birth attendants with health equipment where they are. It may be possible that women are shunning health centres, because in my constituency it is traditional birth attendants, who refer you to a Health Unit, which means if we have more and more traditional attendants being aware of the benefits of delivering at a health unit or in hospital, there will be more women going to the hospitals. 

Finally, technology: Most women are growing big babies because of healthier feeding and they are not aware that big babies in their wombs lead to a higher maternal mortality. So, if we can introduce at a regional level, let me say Health Center 4, scanners so that during antenatal clinics, the women can have wombs scanned and they know the sizes of the children they bear, I think the problem would be resolved. I would be unhappy just to brush it off because of attitudes. No, let us go into a technical know-how of how the attitudes are now taking over and are likely to deny the women the very service they need.

Finally -(Interjection)- it has just come to my mind that most women die after delivery because of over-bleeding; this is a reality. What have we done to stop over-bleeding? There is an injection called ergometrin, which a woman is supposed to be injected with after delivery to reduce bleeding. But what happens at the health units is that not even a dose is given and they are very expensive and not accessible. I appeal to the Minister therefore to avail ergometrin at these Health Units and you will see many women coming for life. Thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Just one small issue. Madam Speaker, the rudeness of nurses in hospital is the main reason why most women refuse to go there. In my place many women refuse to go because if you go to deliver, the nurses molest you, abuse you and ask you, who you have done the thing with. This is a very serious matter, and unless the Minister can handle this, this matter is more than even the fees. Somebody can pay Shs 10,000, but people will not allow to be abused.   

DR ALEX KAMUGISHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Anang-Odur for his comments.  Obviously what you are saying and what many others have said, like hon. Bwambale, cannot be denied because matters of maternity are social, medical, cultural, and have wide-ranging ramifications.  Therefore, even if we tackled one of the issues you have mentioned, the others will remain. That is why - if you give me time, we cannot tackle it from one angle alone. I could convince you that even in areas where we have got well trained midwives who welcome you very well, sit you properly and talk to you nicely, we still have mortalities there because there are other factors playing. But the biggest issue now, which I want to convince you on, is convincing all our people to come. Hon. Wambuzi said that for a long time people delivered like goats.  

Recently on my own farm - I have a small farm somewhere - an animal was found collapsed because it delivered at night and it failed. If there had been someone, maybe he could have helped.  So, what we need to do, all of us together, and this includes medical people, is to request our mothers to convince them to go and have antenatal examinations. If we can make a breakthrough there, and this is a challenge to all of us, I can assure you, because when you visit, then you are screened early enough. If the baby is too big, even a mother who does not have a traditional birth attendant will palpate a woman and say this baby is very big for your size; and if she is not sure, she will send you to the health centre. 

So, early attendance, forget about even delivering, is the answer to increase the number of mothers who are going to be attending antenatal clinics. That is a challenge to Members of Parliament, health workers, church leaders and everybody in the community to let people convince mothers to go for antenatal.  Once we make a breakthrough there, we shall handle issues of maternal mortality. Right now we are dealing with distance; we are reducing distance travelled. 

Recently we opened very many units in Western Uganda; we are going to open many more in Rakai and Masaka. Overall about more than 200 units, and these are largely maternity. We are going to be reducing distance, but until mothers come and be screened, maternal death will continue to be high. So, it is a challenge to all of us. I could have spoken to each one of these, but that is the biggest challenge. I thank you for allowing me. 

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much. This really shows how important reproductive health is, because everybody wants to say something about it, which is true and the minister is right, all these points you have raised I have heard them. I understand even some of these birth attendants are very useful, others actually convince people to deliver in their places and when the mothers are young, they cannot manage the caesarean you are talking about. When they bleed, they cannot have blood transfusion and the community is not available to take the poor lady and the baby to the hospital.  

I have proposed to my people that when we bring the community mobilisation law in place, one area we should address is to make it a duty first of all, on the husband to be responsible for the pregnant wife. He should be the first person to be asked, “Where were you when this lady died?” The second person, the community itself, the LCs should be responsible. You should have a roster for pregnant women in LCI so that if there is a problem at least you can help, because some of them die helplessly. 

There is a cut off parish I visited, I think it was in Kayunga, and a lady died when she was being carried on a bicycle and the man who was carrying her could not manage alone and this was not the husband. The husband was drunk somewhere in the trading centre.  So really, it is a serious matter. And as I have told you it is not only Uganda, in all countries maternal mortality is the biggest problem to bring down. So, we really need to put our heads together and solve that problem. But, as I said, I agree with you that it is an area we need to address.

There were many points raised, one of them was about lack of district hospitals in some districts.  Of course, mine is one of them; Rukungiri does not have a government district hospital because ours was taken to Kanungu and I think hon. Aggrey Awori’s was taken to Tororo. So, he is not alone.  However, the Government had changed a policy such that instead of each district having a district hospital that, each constituency should have a mini-hospital with a doctor, with a theatre, with everything. So, while there is no big hospital, there are mini-hospitals nearer to the people. 

However, since there is the system of referral system, we are considering upgrading some of the health centre 4s to special status so that they can perform some of the referral responsibilities, and I understand Busia is one of them. (Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I note that the minister recognises there is a fact of the existence of referral hospitals, but I think we should call them referral structures. The term “hospital” does not really mean much because a lot of requirements are not there in those hospitals. (Applause)

Honourable Minister, I would like to make a reference to Masaka Referral Hospital, which caters for about four districts. And as you know, Masaka has got a highway like Johannesburg to Cairo, to Congo Kinshasa, because of that we have a lot of accidents. We have a lot of heavy vehicles, a lot of accidents and in fact Masaka District is being reported all the time in respect of the accidents that are taking place. Like recently, we lost about five people from a family; yesterday we lost eight people in one accident and they are all referred to Masaka Hospital. And as you heard especially last week, people could not even enter the mortuary because there is no refrigeration. I told you last year that we do not have an incinerator where we can drop a lot of those bad things. What referral hospital are you talking about? They are empty structures. 

I note that Masaka Referral Hospital is going to be rehabilitated in the second year of your programme. Have you taken some ad hoc measures with maybe some pertinent ministries to ensure that actually when there are emergency cases, they are treated as need arises? Otherwise, the country is going to – not to the dogs - but we need to be assisted as districts that have got referral hospitals. We need a service so that the term “referral” can make sense. I thank you, honourable Minister.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just on that note of referral hospitals, I was looking at a statement; I got to know that almost all the referral hospitals have got the scanners, with the exception of one or two of which Soroti Hospital was one of them. And the reason given was that we were supposed to have been provided for under the Japanese Aid, but then it did not come under that aid. But what is surprising again is that this financial year, I have not seen a provision for a scanner to be provided to Soroti Referral Hospital, which covers about five districts.  

There is a colleague of mine whom I was with at the university, a doctor, who had been transferred to Soroti Hospital two years ago to operate the scanner. But up-to-date, he is in Kampala because he does not have work in Soroti and yet we know this machine is very important, more so to pregnant women. Women go to the hospitals more often than men. So, can I get assurance from the minister that Soroti would get a scanner this financial year, because my concern is mainly on the women who are frequent users of this machine? 

It has also come to my mind that possibly, it is because we have never had a female minister in the Ministry of Health to really take seriously the issues of women in the hospitals. Because when I looked back, we have never had a woman minister in the Ministry of Health, even now we only have men. (Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from my colleague whether, Dr Beatrice Wabudeya, was not a woman when she was heading the Ministry of Health? She was a Minister for Primary Healthcare and I found her very effective. So, I am trying to find out whether the honourable Member is in order not to have recognised her? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you should really take this matter seriously. Have you actually counted how many senior women are in the Ministry of Health and at what level they are? Who are the senior women in the Ministry of Health in this country? What work are they doing? It is possible that the women of this country need a woman role model minister in that ministry. That is what he is saying.  

MR OKUPA: Finally, that is why we are so happy when this report, which touches the –(Interruption)

MR KAJURA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that last week, an additional amount of Shs 4.5 billion was allocated to the Ministry of Health for the centres in the countryside, and Shs 1.5 million was made available for referral hospitals and the process of recruiting doctors for referral hospitals is going on. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was only wondering how this money is connected to the issue of women ministers in the Ministry of Health I was really raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Public Service, what is the highest level of a woman you are likely to recruit in the Ministry of Health out of that money? Shall we have a senior principal assistant secretary? Are we likely to have a permanent secretary in charge of maternal health? These are the issues that we should be raising in this House.  This is what the people of Uganda want to see.

MR OTTO: I do not know if the minister would help the House to know if Brigadiers and Captains are specialists on health issues. Otherwise, we have very many civilians like me. Thank you.

MR KAJURA: Madam Speaker, what we do, funds are located to the ministry and there is a Health Commission, which interviews people for the appointment at those levels. And with regard to health centres, again I think that one is open to men and women. So, we do not determine which sex is appointed, this is a matter for the Health Commission to determine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Members for the great concern they have on this matter as I said. I just wanted to mention that we have a plan for all the highway hospitals and the health facilities to deal with the problem of accidents, which is claiming a lot of our people, and we shall let you know when this plan matures.

Madam Speaker, I was talking about referral hospitals and one member thinks that they are structures. Indeed, most of the hospitals are in structures, so she is right to call them structures, it depends on her perspective of a hospital. But referral is also to people who are more qualified from a birth attendant to a midwife, from a midwife to an intern, from an intern to a consultant. So, when we are talking about referral that is what we are talking about, and these people I have talked about exist in Uganda. So, there is a referral system.

Madam Speaker, we are rehabilitating many hospitals, which many honourable members talked about and as my Chairperson said, many of these things are in my statement. For example, the hospitals of Bududa, Bugiri we have a programme by the Japanese called JICA, and the team is coming next week to study and all these hospitals are going to be rehabilitated under that programme.

Equipment: we expect to buy some equipment for many hospitals and health centres under the ORET project and when they come, again we shall distribute them according to need. As a matter of fact, someone was asking about Soroti and I got information that there is a scanner from one of the referral hospitals with more than two, which is going to be transferred to Soroti Hospital where they need one –(Interruption)

MS NANTUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker, thank you minister for giving way. Actually, I was forced to seek this clarification. I would like to leave here when I am comfortable after showing a lot of concern with Kawolo Hospital, and I have been promised that there are lots of plans on the way to see that accidents are catered for in these hospitals.  

I was of the view that we have had a lot of interruptions, I would not say bad interruption, but you find that the consignments, which are given to such hospitals, are the ones which are being used to attend to accident victims. At the end of the day, you find that there is nothing left like gloves, not even medicine to cater for the people who go to these district hospitals. So, when you say that you have a lot of plans and I have been going to the Ministry for years, they are saying that plans are on the way to see that trauma centres are constructed in these hospitals. So, I would like to comfortably leave here at least after knowing what the plans are. At least give me a clue otherwise, I feel that it could be a similar thing, which they always tell me that trauma centres are going to be constructed to cater for this problem.  I thank you.

REV. BAKALUBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It seems there is over concentration of thinking that Kawolo Hospital will be handling all the accidents on that highway. Our thinking is that Mukono health centre, which is situated in one of the fast growing towns in Mukono, can be elevated to a hospital status or to a level where we can get some theatres and the like so that we can help in some of the accidents that occur on the highway. It becomes very painful when there is an accident just near Mukono and we have to rush the victim all the way to Kawolo Hospital, which is about 30 or 25 miles away. So, if we can elevate Mukono health centre, it will somehow help to reduce the burden, which is over concentrated in Kawolo Hospital. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us allow the Minister of Health to finish.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. All hospitals along the highways have already received more allocation of funds to equip them properly and also to have all the necessary blood and enough staff to handle such cases. Where there are not enough in the meantime, they will have ambulances so that instead of transporting patients we can ferry more doctors and find the patients where they are and where they are being managed in a special way. This is all we can do in the short term. 

Two days ago I was meeting a group of specialists in accidents. They are building special hospitals in Ghana and we have invited them to come here to discuss with us how we can also bring in such facilities along the main highways in our country. These are the plans. We have also appointed people to make studies and they have almost finished. When these plans are ready - these are the plans I was talking about, which we shall bring here because they will have to be – they will have money involved and Parliament has got to approve that money. 

Madam Speaker, the other problem that was raised was about Butabika Hospital’s land. I would like to assure Members of Parliament that there was no land that was grabbed. After you had passed the resolution, we met with the Ministry of Lands officials and they accepted that it was a mistake not to have made enough consultation with us. We appointed a task force, which went to Butabika as we mandated it; they visited the hospital and they found that they had made mistakes. So, they have given Butabika more land and they have also given Butabika the land that it needs, and it is the extra land elsewhere that they are going to consider for investment. But we had agreed that the Minister of Lands should come and report and he is coming with that report but in a nutshell, there was no land that was given away and we cancelled everything. Of course Parliament had done that and Butabika Hospital is not going to suffer from that allocation. But everything will be made in a report to this House, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is a small matter concerning the utilization of the LGDP, whether it is –(Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Yes, I am informed that we were the first people to complain about that programme because some of that money was used by Government for a survey but the survey was necessary apparently, and as a result the money was not enough.

The other reason was of course I think inflation, which ate into the money and the money was not enough. The biggest problem is that some of the projects are halfway done in the sub-counties. The World Bank proposed, and I think the Ministry of Finance accepted, that districts can use their money to complete those projects and that is possible because it might be difficult to find any other money to complete these projects. But if the districts can use their LGDP money to complete them then this House can consider whether or not to continue with that programme.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that every loan, which comes to Parliament, is approved for a specific purpose and for specific objectives. If there is an amendment, Parliament should be informed. The nutrition project was approved to do something and it was given its money. When it has gone somewhere else, they should notify the source. How do you get money, which was approved for one function to do another one and being implemented with the same project?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister has explained that his ministry took issue with the Government on that matter, so maybe we shall have the Minister of Finance tell us more.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Finance could explain but you see I think LGDP is money for the districts. They are the ones to choose what they want to do with it. If they consider that this project is important - because as most of them say what would stop them from completing if it is a priority?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before the minister sits down, I am seeking clarification. Some time back there was an announcement over the radio about recruitment of nurses for kyeyo. What is the position now? I want some clarification on this. What happened to this programme? It was coming from the President’s Office and yet given the debate here there are still so many hospitals and health centers that lack nurses. If you have now started exporting them yet we lack them here, where shall we get the nurses to fill these hospital or health centers?

MR GAGAWALA: This is on the National Drug Authority. I would like the Minister to clarify to me whether the National Drug Authority actually also caters for food. As you know, Madam Speaker, food is a drug and a drug is food. We have a lot of incidences where expired food is on the shelves of shops and the expiry dates have actually been tampered with. I think in America and other countries it is the same authority, which actually vets and makes sure that food does not become poison at the end of the day.

Finally, Tanzania -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Wambuzi, was it contained anywhere in the report of the committee that NDA was dealing with food? Was there any mention in this report that NDA deals with expired and contaminated food and this and that?

MR GAGAWALA: That is why I am saying that to me, food is actually a drug, so when the drug authority is there – secondly, to complete the clarification, the Tanzanian Government has actually banned drugs from most of the Asian countries. Why is it that Uganda is still actually enjoying the same type of drugs when our neighbours have come out clearly to ban usage of some of the drugs from these countries? I would like the Minister to clarify to me on this before we go on.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague who is wondering which institution is in charge of these expired foods or items. It is not the National Drug Authority but it is the National Bureau of Standards, which is under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Of recent we have been having an operation with Ndugu Kayanja; you heard many of the factories were even closed. I just wish to request my colleague, that if he has information as to where some of these expired foods are, he can let us know and we shall do the needful. Thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: One more clarification to the Minister of Health. In his response, I have not heard anything to do with maintenance of equipment in the hospitals, and it is really important.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: We have got maintenance units, which do this in hospitals and we have got a section at the headquarters for that purpose. 

I thank my colleague for explaining food safety, and very soon, through this committee of theirs, a Bill is going to come on food safety, I am informed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to assume that I have touched on most of the issues. I thank the members for their concern and appeal that our budget be passed so that we can deliver the health services. 

About the nurses, my colleague the Minister of Gender and Labor is going to talk about it and we have already consulted. She is going to talk about the migration of labor and what Government plans are - including the nurses. Thank you very much.

7.03
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson and the honorable colleagues for debating this report with a lot of enthusiasm. I think I have four issues to respond to. 

The first one is the issue of policies, which have not been finalized as per the concerns raised by the Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, polices have already been formulated by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and these include the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Policy, we have the Community Mobilization and Empowerment Strategy, we have the Employment Policy, which I could wave here; we have the policy on the elderly and the policy on culture. We are consulting with the Ministry of Finance and these will be tabled. In Cabinet they have been finalized, especially the one on employment. My colleague, hon. Ssentongo Teopista, knows very well that there are very many stakeholders and they had to be extensively consulted before we could come out with a complete document. I want to inform members that very soon Cabinet will pass these polices and they will come to Parliament.

On migration of labor, which includes –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I recall that since last year there have been consultations between the Ministry of Labor, Gender and the Ministry of Finance for some of these policies, and she is saying “very soon”. How soon is this “very soon” since already two years have elapsed before the consultations with the Ministry of Finance are complete? Is it an indication that the policies were evolved on not very good and acceptable premises that the Ministry of Finance is finding it difficult to give its concurrence to your ministry, Madam Minister? Could we get more clarification as to what is holding back these polices? Thank you.

MRS BAKOKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the honorable member, with his past experience, knows very well what I am talking about. He was a participant in that process before he came to Parliament and he knows how long the process is for people to take Cabinet memos to Cabinet and finally bringing it to Parliament. But I want to stand here and tell you that the employment policy needed a lot of consultation. It is a tripartite process, we have got to –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: The information I want to give to the Minister of Labor is that I am quite aware that this policy or labor laws were already tabled in Cabinet in 1991. So, I just wonder why they are always with the Minister of Finance, in Cabinet for consultation, and this and that? There is no will.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the Minister was responding to the honourable member, they were talking in a language we do not understand and yet the question was for the benefit of all members. The question is still, “how soon”?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I recall in 2001 the women Members of Parliament had a workshop, which was opened by Her Excellency the Vice-President then, and the Ministry of Gender, Labor and Social Development was represented by hon. Bitangaro. We were told the policy on orphans and vulnerable children was on the way – in 2001. This is 2004, Madam Speaker, and it is still “very soon”. 

So, when my colleague hon. Wagonda Muguli says, “how soon is this very soon”, and knowing the plight of the affected groups, could the honorable minister be helpful to us so that we can appreciate it? Maybe hon. Wagonda Muguli knows the process, but some of us would also benefit from the same question if it is answered appropriately. Thank you.

MRS BAKOKO: Madam Speaker, I think patience helps us a lot. I was still going on with my answer and I want to insist that developing a policy is a process and this is very true, hon. Members of Parliament. It would be very unfair for me to stand here and lie in front of you and say that we will do this in one day. The truth of the matter is, the employment policy, which has now come into a final document that must go to Cabinet, had to be debated by the different interest groups and we know that. This covers a wide area, it is not just about employment per se. We are looking at the levels of unemployment, we are looking at the levels of under employment, we are looking at issues of child labour, we are looking at issues of HIV/AIDS at the workplace; we are looking at issues of occupation safety and health; we are looking at issues of labour administration and migration of labour. This is all in the employment policy. So this is a document which has been finalised, hon. Members, and it is going to go to Cabinet and we have consulted with the Ministry of Finance. After that, it will come to you and I would appreciate if you could also be able to understand that it had to take a consultative process; and you as Members of Parliament, we are one of the stakeholders but there are other stakeholders who also have to be involved so that when we are implementing the employment policy, it is acceptable by all.

Madam Chairperson, the issue of migration of labour.  Migration of labour policy was developed, Cabinet has passed it and we have received the minutes and my ministry is now developing the legal framework through which negotiations will be done with the countries which are seeking our labour force, including the nurses, the teachers and all other categories whom we can show that the process is already being finalised.  

Madam Speaker, the third point, which was raised in relation to my ministry was the issue of the library.  For five years, we have been looking for land to build a national library and finally, KCC has given us land in front of Parliament and International Conference Centre. My colleague is raising an issue that this land is not fit for public library.  Libraries today are modern and we are going to modernize this library.  It is not going to be the libraries of the 1960s where people used to come and do nothing but read books.  I think hon. Nkuuhe will agree with me because he has been our resource person in Parliament.  So, we are grateful as Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because the resources are available and UNESCO is willing to assist us in building this library. We are going to move forward and continue with KCC and develop that land for a library – (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I thank the minister and I will be ready for more consultation.  Now, the – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nkuuhe, do they pay you for consultancies?

DR NKUUHE:  Obviously, I am not cheap. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.

DR NKUUHE:  Madam Speaker, the issue that I want the minister to comment on is the report by the committee that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development spend 30 per cent on rent. You know you are a poor ministry and for me a poor person should be eating Kawunga and beans not sausage and all those things.  So, when are you going to start to live within your means?

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, the fourth point I will respond to is the industrial court.  Madam Speaker, we are housing the industrial court in Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and currently they are using our boardroom for the Court when they have cases to judge upon and we really would appreciate if we had more resources. We want these people to be housed in their own premise with an industrial court, which would befit a court.  Recently, we launched the medical arbitration board, which is also going to take care of the very difficult cases, which arise between workers and employers.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, hon. Nkuuhe has talked about the rent. I think the report clearly says that we are now in the final stages of purchasing a building so that we can reduce eventually on the cost of paying rent.  

Madam Chairperson, I think as a person, I can stand here and say that the performance of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development improved when we were housed under one roof.  Before I came to that ministry and for half a year when I was in that ministry, we were in five different locations, including Kisenyi.  We were in Udyam House; we were in Span House, we were in Amadinda House; we were somewhere down where the Prime Minister is; we were all over the place but we decided to go under one roof and I believe that has helped us. I can now stand here to say that we are finalising arrangements with my colleague the Minister of Finance and that a house is going to be purchased and Government will own it as one of its properties.  I thank you, Madam Chairperson and Madam Speaker.  

MR MUTULUUZA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised the issue of facilitation for these culture leaders.  This is a constitutional requirement and it is under her ministry.  I want her to explain because this thing has been going on all this time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we shall ask the Minister of Public Service to say something about that. Let hon. Deputy Prime Minister answer first.

6.35
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The issue of providing facilitation to cultural leaders has been with Government for sometime. It is a complex matter.  The fourth proposal was not accepted, so we had to go back on the drawing board and now we have another proposal which will be considered by Cabinet the day after tomorrow.  So, the matter is on.  Its urgency is appreciated and we are going to do our very best. It is item number one on the agenda to the Wednesday meeting of Cabinet.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think on this matter of the cultural leaders we are now breaching rule 60, because I understand the committee on public service has already addressed that issue and is due to report. Now, if we are importing it in the committee of gender and debating it, we shall be unfair to our committee.  So, please hold your fire; when they bring the report then you can take the minister to task.

MS ALASO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I just wish to remind the hon. minister.  She has not made a response on the equal opportunities commission as raised by hon. Awori, and we would like to be told what is happening about setting up this equal opportunities commission.

7.25
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje, Masindi District):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Mine is slightly different but it falls under her ministry. I was reading through the policy statement but I could not find it.  This is about remand homes and a reception centre.  What is the policy about these centres because the conditions there are really pathetic? I will quote one example of Naguru remand home, which is supposed to cater for 45 children, as of now we have 120 children there; and what is even worse they are only eight staff, a warden, sweepers and a clerk - only eight looking after 120 children.  The right ratio would have been 1:5, but now it is 1:15 children. I would also like to say that the resources which are given to that school are very minimal.  If you look at the structures- yes, the Government put a fence all over but the structure inside leaves a lot to be desired. 

The other issue is that the children who are taken there have committed capital offences and others non-capital offences. Those who have committed capital offences are supposed to spend a maximum of six months, and if no action is taken they are supposed to be released.  But as we talk now, many have spent over a year on remand, and yet those who committed non-capital offences are supposed to spend not more than three months on remand.  If Government cannot take them to court they are supposed to be released.  So, I do not know what the Ministry of Gender - because I am told this falls under your ministry - is doing to ameliorate this condition.  I would be glad if the ministry responded and we see how we could help each other.

MR WAMBUZI: I take it that the Ministry of Gender is the one in charge of centres like Sanyu babies home.  Some of us visited the home yesterday and we have been amazed that it appears that the Ministry of Gender is not aware that it is its responsibility because the place is chocked with small babies, there is no food going there, the Government is not contributing anything and yet these are your citizens of today and tomorrow.  They might have been dropped, but they are in a precarious condition as other children in such dangerous conditions.  Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify to me whether she knows that this is actually one of her key responsibilities, in spite of the fact that it is just a Sanyu babies home.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am seeking clarification on the issue, which came up on the Floor of this House concerning the utilization of women councils and youth council’s funds and the funds for the people with disability.  Currently, there is a conflict between the finance commission directives to local governments on the upper ceiling for bank accounts that they can run at the district.  Therefore, the hands of the CAOs are tied, and yet the Chairperson for Social Services Committee informed this House in her presentation that there is a directive according to the law that when these funds are allocated, they should be operated under a different account.  As we speak now most CAOs in our districts have completely refused to open up bank accounts for these funds; they claim that these funds must be run under their account handling the community development services in the districts.  As a minister, what is the way forward for us Women Members of Parliament as we superintend over the use of these funds.  I hope the minister has carefully internalised my concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, I can give you time to consult because this is an important matter.  You have got the answer?  Okay.
    
 MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Madam Speaker, the issue of the UShs.2.5 billion to the vulnerable groups, which was a directive of His Excellency, the President, is a very important issue.  These councils are being facilitated now and they have received these allocations this financial year.  Indeed for us as a ministry, we want to uphold that independent accounts be opened for the women council fund, the youth council fund and people with disability fund because we would not want these people to be marginalized. We are consulting with the Minister of Finance on the directives which have been sent down, because our ministry really wants this money to gain the prominence that it must have because these groups have been marginalized for a long time. I think very soon we will tell members what the final decision is, but we as a ministry had told the CAOs to open independent accounts for these funds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, you see that has become a Government assurance.  Can you tell us when you will report to this House that the CAOs have actually implemented your directive?

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Madam Speaker, I will give you the information.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, opening the accounts is not the directive of Ministry of Gender.  It is the Ministry of Finance; she cannot do that, she is doing a wrong job.

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Madam Speaker, it is a collective responsibility, the issue is under my ministry.  I am consulting with Ministry of Finance. I will advise Ministry of Finance on what is supposed to be done. Sanyu babies home, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, we have several homes, over 100 homes, which have been registered under my ministry and we do supervise them.  But we do not supply the food ourselves; we have guidelines on how these homes are supposed to operate.

Naguru remand home, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I visited Naguru remand home last year and indeed I found out that the conditions there were not very good. I called my Permanent Secretary and the Commissioner and we discussed at site, not in my office, what was happening in that premise. Now through the promotion of children and youth funds, we are going to rehabilitate the remand homes and resettlement centres.  

Madam Speaker, the equal Opportunities commission is the final issue, which was raised on the Parliament Floor this afternoon.  The equal opportunities commission is one of the very many commissions, which is supposed to be under the mandate of my ministry. This is one of the commissions, which is supposed to be formulated, by law because it is in the Constitution.  Madam Speaker, we have been consulting with hon. Dora Byamukama and her committee on this very important issue. We are consulting on this so that we can take the Cabinet paper to Cabinet.  I thank you, hon. Members of Parliament.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, tomorrow we shall commence at 2.00 p.m., not 2.30 p.m. so that the Minister of Education and Sports can be allowed to respond to his very diverse empire -(Interjection)- No, a lie is a serious word; you will have to tell us what lie he has told you.  

Now I would like to notify the Leader of Government Business.  Let me finish, -(Interruption) 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Did I hear correctly, is it 2.00 p.m. or 10 a.m. because, Madam Speaker, a decision was made considering the time we are remaining with to conclude this process, that come this week we shall be deliberating both mornings and afternoons.  Madam Speaker, you will note that we have 10 sectors to handle, we are remaining with actually less than 7 days and when your colleague was in the chair, I thought we had agreed we would sit in the morning and afternoon and handle two papers per day; but if we meet at 2.00p.m. tomorrow then we shall have a problem as to the deadline of the 31st of this month.  So, I am appealing that you reconsider the matter and we start in the morning, possibly we finish one sector in the morning and another in the afternoon so that we try to beat the time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I was considering doing three reports tomorrow and I have no problem starting at 8.00 a.m..  If you want to be here at 8 O’clock I will be here at 8.0’clock but since 10 O’clock is the usual time, let us meet at 10 O’clock.  We shall conclude Ministry of Education and Sports; we shall do Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development; we shall do Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication.  I think those should be able to take us until tomorrow.  So, I really expect that since you are the one who has insisted, the Government whip must also be whipping people seriously in the morning to be here at 10.0 0’clock and of course the backbenchers, I know you will be here. So the house is adjourned to 10. 0’clock in the morning.  

Now I was just informing the First Deputy Prime Minister that before you came, the Minister of Education and Sports was holding your portfolio; there was a complaint from Busia about a looming disaster and your colleague undertook that your ministry would give a response on Thursday, so please keep in mind.  

So, hon. members, the House is adjourned to 10 O’clock tomorrow morning.  

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 August 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)



