Monday, 24 August 2009

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I thank those of you who are here, although I expected many more having seen many vehicles in the parking yard. I do not think each of you drives three vehicles. We have to give ourselves time to finish this Budget. As I indicated, we should have finished these estimates by 31 and now we should concentrate on the work to finish it in time.

The bad news I have received is that our former colleague, Hon. Jacob Oulanya, lost his dear wife. There was a prayer service at All Saints Church and burial is taking place either today or tomorrow at his home in Gulu. Let us observe a minute of silence.

(Members observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: This should be the last day for the general debate on the Motion by the Minister of Finance for us to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply. The ministers should now take the opportunity to make brief comments on what was said in respect of the various ministries. If there are no other issues to comment about, then the Minister of Finance can wind up.

Hon. Kabwegyere, you indicated to me that you have a very brief explanation to make. You can now make it. 

But before that, I would like to inform you that I was told that the Minister of Agriculture had some statement to make in respect of the state of emergency – I do not see any minister from the agriculture sector. Anyway, we can go ahead.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would have wished that the hon. Member representing Kaberamaido were present in case she had any clarifications to make. But in the circumstances, let me go ahead – 

THE SPEAKER: You can make your explanation; I believe she will be able to trace the record.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, it is the second time today that the hon. Member representing Kaberamaido, Florence Ibi Ekwau, has complained about the Office of the Prime Minister failing to deliver food to Kaberamaido. She has claimed that there is a short-landing of more than 1,000 bags of food, which were scheduled to arrive in Kaberamaido. She has gone on to say that she is sending that issue to the IGG. She has called for an investigation because she suspects this food has been diverted.

I would like to clarify that the hon. Member is misleading the public about the situation in Kaberamaido. That district is okay, except two parishes that were identified, on assessment by the district leadership, to be in need of our intervention. We have indeed intervened. I would like to emphasise that there are only two parishes and not sub-counties –

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us the names of these parishes?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I would like to ask my colleague here who is familiar with the parishes to give us the names.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, the parishes are two; one in Anyara Sub-County and the other in Lwala Sub-County. I do not have the precise names of the parishes – Kumam language is difficult – but that is all in Kaberamaido District.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for that cooperation, which indeed is commendable in the situation we have had. We have worked together and succeeded in controlling the situation.

When the President visited Teso, he saw it necessary that we also intervene in schools. We accordingly worked out a figure to correspond with both primary and secondary schools. Now that schools are on holiday, there is no way we can send food to those schools. There are no facilities for storage even. More importantly, why send the food to schools when it can be immediately used now in other places as we wait for the schools to start. 

There is no short-landing of food in Kaberamaido. I would like to add that Kaberamaido has not been one of our worries because the two parishes were certainly easier to deal with than a whole district like Amuria or Katakwi.

I would like to inform the House that I spoke to the CAO who chairs the disaster preparedness committee of that district. She gave me the details, including when the Parliamentary Committee –

THE SPEAKER: So, maybe for clarity, are you saying you are keeping that food for the schools to be delivered when schools resume?

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Exactly, Mr Speaker. One of our problems is storage. When we deliver food –

THE SPEAKER: Oh! The hon. Member has come in. Can you repeat that last part of your response?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we had two deliveries; to the communities and schools. In the case of communities those who were in urgent need as we have already informed the House, were two parishes in the whole of Kaberamaido.

But the need became extensive when we had to deal with primary and secondary schools. The quantity of food for schools totalled to 1,738 kilograms. But these bags could not be delivered during the vacation for the simple reason that there would be a problem of storage. So, the honourable member who thinks that food was short-landed or diverted is not informed. 

The commissioner in my office took the initiative of ringing the honourable member to inform her of those details, but she went ahead today to call a press conference and repeat the same allegations.

I talked to the CAO this morning and I found she was a former student of mine who graduated in 1994 - so we are not talking about a person who has just started work. She told me that even when a committee of Parliament visited the district, they found that full assessments had been made and Kaberamaido was only worrying about the situation in two parishes. 

So, I would like to request the honourable member to use our offices if she wants to intervene to help people. And she knows that we are in the same enterprise - we can collaborate. We could even help her if she is campaigning, that she delivers the food and she witnesses the delivery of the food, but we are not going to accept unfairness, false accusations, when facts are available.

I am glad the honourable member is in the House, if she has any clarifications she wants to get from me, I am fully available, and for any complementation if there is need, hon. Echweru is here.

But to say that food was probably diverted and it went to the constituency of hon. Ecweru is not only unfair, it is unjust and it is not something that should come from a leader because we are all trying to help our people. If you want to help your people, collaborate with those who are also in the same job. Our office is in control of the situation we have the money, we have the trucks and we have the information.  

Lastly, I think the honourable member should respect the district leadership as well. There is an LCV chairperson, there is a committee, there is a CAO, and there is an RDC. I do not want to call a press conference and say the honourable member is misguiding the country and the public, but I also hear that there is somebody, probably a former member of this House, who seems to be walking in the direction of wanting to come back. If that be the fright, please keep within the limits.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, before asking supplementary questions, permit me on behalf of Teso Parliamentary Group to express our sincere thanks to you and the Deputy Speaker, and all members of Parliament for the outpouring of sympathy towards the people of Teso at a time when we were most affected by severe famine. Permit me also to thank your office for your physical involvement in receiving relief assistance from the public.

I would also like to express my sincere thanks to you for making it possible for the Teso Parliamentary Group to keep out of the sessions of Parliament while together with the Committee on Agriculture; we toured the Teso sub-region.

When we members of Parliament raise a concern, it should be seen as a concern that is intended to help in the effective running of this country. It should not be seen as a way of trying to throw dirt at the government, as a way of trying to pull it down. The response that the honourable has given this afternoon to this House, I think is not cognisant of the fact that we as members of Parliament take interest in whatever goes on in Government, and especially when it affects our communities directly.

The question of food distribution in the Teso sub-region has been done in such a manner that many times, the district authorities and the district disaster committees are bypassed, and so, maybe this is something that needs to be taken into consideration. 

As far as actual deliveries are concerned, I would like to re-echo what my colleague hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau raised, and to say that I have a living example with evidence of food that has not been delivered to one of my sub-counties and yet in a letter written from the Office of the Prime Minister, signed by Prof. Kabwegyere, it is claimed that this food was dispatched. The sub-county in question, and I am going to give the details, is found in Kumi County. This sub-county is called Ongino Sub-County, and it is reported in the minister’s letter that food was dispatched on 9 July 2009. The quantities of the food are as follows: 200 bags of 100 kilograms of maize, 60 bags of 100 kilograms of beans, and 200 cartons of vegetable mix, which was dispatched on the 9th.

I would like to confirm that, actually that batch of food arrived and it was delivered under delivery note No.3492 on vehicle number UG 0104Z, driven by a one Mr David Muhingi. The 200 boxes of fortified vegetables were delivered under delivery note No.3654 by the same driver and it arrived at Ongino Sub-County on 10 July of this year.

Our point of contention, however, is that food dispatched to the same sub-county on 11 July 2009, did not arrive in its complete package. Allow me give the details. Whereas in his letter, Prof. Kabwegyere claims that 200 and 60 bags of maize flour and beans respectively, were dispatched to Ongino on the same day, what was received fell short of this claim. I would like to inform the House that this food arrived on 13 July 2009 under Delivery Note No.3498. It was transported on vehicle No. UG 0102Z and driven by a one Mr Nsereko J. 

The food delivered was as follows: 70 and 30 bags of maize flour and beans respectively, each weighing 100 kilograms - our observation is that there is a discrepancy between what the ministry claims to have dispatched, and what was received. I would like to ask the Office of the Prime Minister to take interest in these discrepancies. 

As I said earlier, we are here to help not just to criticise and condemn. This food was meant to go to the hungry people in my constituency. Some of it arrived; some of it did not. Where is that food that did not arrive? These are critical questions for which we would like answers. 

And, because we have noticed this discrepancy, I, as the Chairperson of the Teso Parliamentary Group, decided to write to all the chairpersons of districts of Teso asking them to verify the information in your letter, which suspiciously was not copied to them, about the food dispatched in terms of quantities visa-a-vis what was actually received. 

I would like to appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister to use the set mechanisms – I have heard the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness firmly say that they are going to take food directly to the sub-counties, disregarding the district disaster committees headed by CAOs. This system of by-passing the CAOs’ offices and the district disaster committees does not help in doing checks and balances in as far as food supplies are concerned. I thought this is very vital information to be given to the House. I think the minister in charge of disaster owes us an explanation as to why he does not seem to be following what goes on in his ministry. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Because, this may be a long process, let the concerned members of Parliament from the various constituencies in the affected areas, make returns on what has been received and what has not been received. What you send to the ministry or the Prime Minster’s Office should be copied to the Speaker’s Office. We may not really do it here. Give all that information on figures and vehicles that dispatched the food and so on to the Prime Minister’s Office for them to verify in order to give us an answer. Otherwise, it will just be a question of tracing the Hansard. You write and we see what will happen. 

3.04
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the Minister for the response given so far.

However, I want to inform the responsible minister that – in fact this ministry has made us lose confidence in its performance. According to the newspapers – I do not know whether the problem was with the officer who released this information to the press, otherwise, the dispatch dates were 23 and 30 of July 2009. I would like to repeat that the information I gave to this House last week was exactly this.

I would like to add that giving this information was done in good faith and intended to have an accountability and mechanism of following up the matter to establish where the problems are. I urge the minister to honestly accept what we always say - at times it is in good faith.

Last week, after I raised this issue – imagine out of 1,738 bags meant for the children in primary schools only 260 bags reached, yet accountabilities indicate it was dispatched. The issue is that, although you released that much, what was received by the district is what I reported. I believe none of what I reported is false. 

The ministry has a bigger problem. At the moment, they are fire fighting. Immediately after I said this issue in the House, they called me to go and receive food. The work of a member of Parliament is not to distribute food. We have told this ministry that food is supposed to go to the Department of Disaster Management. The members of that team know where the food is supposed to go; they have always carried out audits. They have followed the communities in the villages and they know the right places that are supposed to receive food. 

While that goes, you can imagine out of 643 bags of maize grain, 283 got lost – and you claim to have dispatched? Be informed that what the district received was far less than you sent.

I would like to inform you that I swore to represent my people. When I call your offices, the people there at times get too busy to pick our calls. What do you expect me to do as a people’s representative? 

The information which you gave about districts not having storage facilities is 100 percent false. I would like to inform you that some time ago Hon. Musa Ecweru gave food to the schools in Kaberamaido, in November 2007, after the floods. That food was kept in the district stores for over three months and it was being kept by the CAO as the chair of the District Management Committee. So, the problem is not about the information that we give in the House; the problem is far bigger than that. These people do not reach with the food that they sign for from your offices. You should own up political responsibility as the head of the ministry, instead of blaming us when we air out what is expected of us. 

When you flout the procurement procedures - the other time it was rotten seeds; some other time it was plastic pangas and hoes and this time out of 1,743 kilograms, you are delivering 260. Is that the problem of the people’s representatives? Clean your house; that is all I ask of the minister. 

And, we warn these officials, should this food not arrive in these districts, we will want an audit. We are going to follow it up and whichever officer is responsible or will be implicated, will answer. We are very tired of people using the poor communities to grow fat, eat all the food, and eat all the money, while the community remains suffering. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof.  Tarsis Kabwegyere): First of all, I am glad there were details of the vehicle, names of driver and the date of arrival. That is the procedure we follow, and that is how we ensure accountability. 

Secondly, short-landing of 30 bags or 20 bags or 10 bags, on simple analysis, can happen in the following ways. The short-landing can be on loading, in that you load less than you are meant to deliver, or the driver can sell some bags on the way and deliver less. But fortunately, that can be checked, because if that figure of short-landing is verified by the recipient, then there is a record that you delivered so many short. And that information from the receiver should come to the sender so that the person who has delivered short, is immediately handled. If that does not happen, then there is a problem.

Thirdly, bypassing the District Disaster Management Committee can only be possible because the driver has been misguided. But there is certification from the receiver at the sub-county, or like in the case of Kaberamaido, at the parish level. The delivery for this particular food was actually signed for by the LC III Chairperson. 

We have on record, letters written to the Prime Minister, requesting that we deliver where the food is needed. When you take it to the district, there is no money for the district to deliver the food where it is needed. So, in the wisdom of the Prime Minister, we now decided to deliver as near as possible to where the food is needed. If one says, like the honourable member who represents Kaberamaido is saying, “Now deliver to the district,” and yet the district has no facilities to deliver, then we have also failed in the job we are doing. 

So, what are we supposed to do? We want to get the food where it is needed. When we deliver it to the district, it does not go because the district does not have facilities. When we take it to the sub-county where it is needed, then we are told that the stores are at the district. I wish you were in our position. You are either on the frying pan or in fire. So, where can we be? We do not want to be in those places at the same time. 

Lastly, let us have trust in the local government and let us have trust in ourselves. Because when the honourable member says that it is not the duty of the MP to distribute food, but it is his duty to talk about it - but if you talk about it and it does not arrive, what have you achieved? In the case of a minister, it appears that it is expected that when the truck leaves the food store, Kabwegyere should follow it and see where it is delivered. The checks and balances - the Police are there. For example, when there is short-landing, let the information go to the Police in the district that food that was supposed to be so much, is short-landed by so much, so that the Police investigate immediately. But if one waits for end of August when the short-landing happened in July, will we have saved the situation? 

THE SPEAKER: How long are we going to spend on this? I think we have suggested a solution. Let us follow that formula and see how it works. 

MR AMURIAT: The way the hon. Minister is proceeding is extremely annoying. I would like to take offence with it. I have just been telling this House that more than half of what was dispatched to Kumi in one consignment was not delivered; that is more than 50 percent. It would be understood if it were two bags or three bags that could easily be accounted for under the element of miscounting; but 130 bags have not arrived! 

Secondly, I would like to –(Interruption)  

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I did not want to rise because my senior minister was on the Floor, but I want to give this House this information. 

Hon. Amuriat informed me that there was such an anomaly. I took trouble to cross-check and I found that the food he was talking about was actually delivered. The delivery notes are signed by the responsible officers: The sub-country chief, who is a graduate, and the LC III chairperson. I do not want my colleague to mislead this House. He is telling a lie.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, - 

THE SPEAKER: Now, let me suggest this. For this emergency that we are facing in the area, is it possible for the Prime Minister to send me a copy showing the details of delivery to the area and then I will see how to liaise with members of Parliament, who will also check and find out whether what you have said here has been delivered or not. Let us try that. This is not my work, but I undertake to do it now.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I gratefully oblige. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we should go to the next item. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2008/2009

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: The debate continues and as I indicated, we are ending today. If there are any members who want to make a contribution, they should make it, otherwise I call the ministers to conclude this debate.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the House that we have received communication from the Ministry of Finance that there is corrigenda No.1 to the draft estimates for financial year 2009/2010. It is copied to all chairpersons. So, I am just requesting members to take note of this. According to the communication, it arises out of errors, omissions and new decisions taken. So, this is just to notify the House about this corrigenda No.1, the draft estimates for the financial year 2009/2010. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.19
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to start by thanking the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the presentation of the Budget estimates for 2009/2010. 

According to the budget estimates, the minister identified priority areas which she thought would be the ones to be financed proportionately. Agriculture came as the first priority area, followed by transport and infrastructure, energy and then fourthly, human development. 

In my view, development needs human resource, but if human development is ranked fourth, then I do not know how priorities are considered, because without a healthy population there is no development. I would have thought that human development should have been ranked as the first priority, at least starting from this year’s Budget estimates.

I would like to say that human development, education and health are critical areas in the development of a country. For me, I take health as the most critical because without health, there is nothing; there is no agriculture and infrastructure development, and you cannot be educated if you are not healthy. Children must be healthy in order to be in school.  So, in my view, although the minister has ranked human development as the fourth priority in accordance with the visions of the NRM, I think this may be overlooking vital areas of our development.

I would have thought that the Ministry of Finance should have at least attempted to approximate the Abuja Declaration which says that at least 15 percent of the national budget should be allocated to health. For the last one decade or so, Ministry of Health has got a raw deal in the Budget allocation. I think now we are at the level of 9 to 10 percent of the Budget. If we continue like this, I do not think Uganda will meet the requirements of the Millennium Development Goals in the health sector.

I would like to, perhaps, urge the Ministry of Finance to reconsider a supplementary budget when it comes to considering the health sector as a priority. As I have said, health is a fundamental area of development. Without health, there is no significant development. 

As far as Uganda is concerned, we have very important diseases which should have been catered for under this human development. As we all know, Malaria still stands as the major cause of morbidity and mortality in this country.  

The minister has talked of malaria eradication through insecticide spraying. At the same time, the funds allocated for this are to me insufficient. How will this target of malaria eradication be addressed? 

HIV/AIDS is still scourging Uganda. As you all know, Uganda did well in this area, but as I talk now, the incidence of HIV/AIDS is increasing; with the allocation in the health sector, how are we going to counter this? 

Mr Speaker, maybe the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development should start to at least find other means of addressing this issue. If the incidence continues to rise, it may be too late to reduce it. We know that the A, B, C control measure seems to be failing. There must be new measures in place at least to make the incidence stagnant, but not to increase it.

I would like to mention something about UPE - human development in the process of Universal Primary Education. UPE as it stands is not meaning what it should mean, because as we go around, there are a lot of children who are of a school-going age, roaming the streets for their livelihood. So, is it right to talk about UPE or are we meaning a different thing?

I would like to end by urging Government not to look inwards, but to look outwards. Government should look at the people of Uganda as the vehicle of development, and look after their health properly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.28
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I take this opportunity to contribute to this motion. I want to start where the Professor ended. If I am asked to mention three things why Africa is a backward continent, I would say we lack a highly skilled and developed human resource. I repeat; we lack a highly skilled human resource. I get worried when a government in Africa puts the development of human resource as priority No.4. Now, what are your first priorities? Which resource works on other resources to transform them into finished goods?

If you want to develop human resources what do you need, you need teachers, lecturers, and you need health services to develop the human resource. The moment you have a highly skilled human resource, they will work on the other resource to transform our country. So, how do you make development of human resource the fourth priority here in Africa? I cannot understand. 

However, Mr Speaker, I can understand that; even when you read in the background of our economic growth, they will tell you that our economic growth is at 5, 7 and 9 percent. That is true to the generation that was born during the Second World War; those people believed that economic growth at 5, 6 and 7 percent was enough for them; they could go and sleep. But to us the ‘dot com’ generation, that is not enough. 

If the economic growth is at 5, 6, and 7 percent, how does it reflect on our poverty levels? That is our question. The economic level is high at 6 and 7 percent, but the poverty level is also growing. The trickle down effect to our people in Katanga and Lower Naguru is sewage water. For us, economic growth should be reflected at the rate to which the economy is generating employment. 

You go to Kisekka Market; people are committing crimes because they are redundant. People offer themselves to committee crime at a cost of Shs 2,000, yet the economy is growing at a rate of 6 and 7 percent. If the economy is growing at that rate, we of the ‘dot com’ generation wonder, what about the income inequalities –(Interjections)– population growth is not a question; you must plan for a projected population. What is the projected population after ten years from now - and then you deceive me that the population is growing! Are you thinking? Are you planning? What is your problem? 

Mr Speaker, the point I am pushing is that we must work and develop a highly skilled human resource to start planning within a period of 20 to 100 years. What will the population be? What should be your production capacity? This is the information we want now. As long as the economic growth of this country does not reflect the poverty levels in relation to employment and to income inequality, then it would be a waste of our time. Even if you quote the economic growth at 100 percent but with no reflection on those three elements, then you are just making noise. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. As the Minister of Finance prepares to wrap up the general debate, I want to make a few points in respect to the Budget, and also to the approach of our response this year. 

What we have said in summary is that, whereas Government can take the money it needs, it cannot take our eyes away from the money. That message should have been very clear. The money can be appropriated; the money can be given; but the eyes of the people through us, their representatives, will remain firmly on the money; what it does and how it is used. 

Secondly, I just wanted to make it clear that our presentation did not include any new information. It is based on information provided by Government; it is based on information provided in budget speeches; it is based on information which has been published; and it is based on information which is circulated here in form of abstracts, discussion papers and progress reports of ministries, especially the Ministry of Finance. So, that is your information and all references are there.

Thirdly, the point I want to raise is in regard to the integrity of statistics. Generally, there is a debate about the integrity of the statistics we base on for decision making. We have various houses that generate these statistics. We have the Bank of Uganda; we have the Ministry of Finance; we have UBOS; and we have various sources. 

There is a debate about the integrity of the statistics that we are given. Even when you talk about economic growth, people have different figures to attach to it. When you go to various websites, you get different projections. You have researchers who do research independently; you have Economic Policy Research Centre, and this raises questions. What is the linkage between ministries, specifically the Ministry of Finance, and these research centres? 

Of special interest to us is the Economic Policy Research Centre. It is a government-funded institution, but I believe there is also concern about the level of demand of research work by Government and research work done by the Economic Policy Research Centre. These are grounded research documents and research activities that bring out salient issues affecting the people of Uganda. 

Fourthly, and I wish to address this to my honourable colleague from the other side. Government should be careful with the statements they issue. We have taken the opportunity and we have issued a statement for the past performance in form of our response to the Budget statement this year. We will be closely marking Government statements in respect to the Budget and finances. 

I implore my colleague on the other side that we will be marking every thing you say in this House, and elsewhere in terms of the statements we will be issuing later in response, and that is what we have exactly done in response to the Budget this year.  We went back and revisited what the Ministry of Finance said over the last so many years as you have noticed. Likewise, at an appropriate time, we will come back to you and ask you to account for what you have said in respect to budgets in this House.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that governments all over have clear objectives in terms of what they undertake to do for their people, and that is expounded in manifestos, in budgets, and in goals and objectives in chunks of 100 days, five months, half a term, and a full term. 

What we have said, in short, in our statement of response is that, we have not seen a clear statement of objectives based on which we are clearly going to measure the performance of the government after five years. It is not there, hon. Minister; that after five years of Government in power, we will have achieved the following macro economic objectives. We have statements of general intentions and it ends there. What can we use? Where is the marking scheme that the people of Uganda will use, and say the Government has achieved or has not achieved this? 

As I said, this is an opportunity for you, hon. Minister, to begin on a clean slate, and we are waiting as we move on, to get the red pen and the marking scheme, and assess the performance of Government under your stewardship in the Ministry of Finance. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Are there some individual ministers that want to say something about their portfolios? If there is none, then you can make the statement. 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Syda Bumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues. I would like to make a reply to the - 
I know, honourable colleagues. I would like to give a reply to the parliamentary debate and the Opposition’s response to the Government Budget statement for the financial year 2009/2010.

By way of introduction, permit me to thank the honourable members who have debated the financial year 2009/2010 Budget statement. I thank you for your input, observations and comments. I would like in a special way to thank my colleague, the Shadow Minister, for the detailed analysis of the Budget proposals I made, and the issues he raised, though in a number of instances, his statements had inaccuracies.

The Budget Focus and Themes 

The respective Budget themes over the years have complimented each other and are aimed at signifying Government’s focus on strategic areas for the year in question, while building on the previous themes.

In the spirit of emphasis, the budget themes over the last seven years have maintained the same focus on using public expenditure to increase production, promote economic growth, create employment, increase household incomes and eventually create prosperity for all Ugandans.

In order to sum up the debate on the proposals, I have structured my response on significant issues in the following six themes: Economic performance management and poverty reduction; revenue and taxation; agricultural sector performance and financing; infrastructure development; public service delivery in education and health; and value for money, accountability and corruption.

Quality of Growth 

The quality of economic growth of the Ugandan economy is clearly reflected in the reduction in household poverty from 56 percent in 1992 to 31 percent three years ago. While economic growth has averaged 60 percent per annum over the last two decades, it is true that inequalities exist. This arises from continued civil strife in the north and north-east, and the fact that redistribution of wealth lags behind in countries with high economic growth, such as those in Asia. It comes later; it does not precede economic growth. 

The best way to accelerate redistribution of growth is, therefore, to intervene in areas that help the disadvantaged people of our society. Interventions that increase agricultural production and productivity; increase universal access to primary health, education, water supply and sanitation, as well as enable easy access to markets are, therefore, key to reducing poverty.

Government has addressed inequality by targeting initiatives such as the Northern Uganda Recovery Programme, NUSAF I and II, and more recently the PRDP in war affected regions.

Balance of Payments, Confidence in the Economy and Exchange Rate Movements 

The statement that our balance of payment deficit is a sign of loss of confidence in the Ugandan economy is unfounded. The balance of payment deficit is financed by our international reserves, which are now equivalent to five months of imports or US$ 2.4 billion. This is an impressive status, given the recommended threshold of three months and compared to the current average of the African region, which is between two and, two and a half months.

Uganda’s overall balance of payment is one of the factors which have contributed to the improved sovereign rating of Uganda from B to B+ by international rating agency Standard & Poor’s, and from B Stable Outlook to B Positive outlook by Fitch in their latest rating which was released last week. These ratings reflect an improvement in investor and creditor confidences in our economy. These are international rating agencies; they are not local and they are not contracted by Uganda.

The depreciation of the Ugandan shilling between October and December 2008 was a result of portfolio investors exiting the market in order to rescue their investments abroad at the peak of the global financial crisis. Since then, the exchange rate has been stable and has even slightly appreciated in recent months. However, we should not forget that between June 2003 and August 2008, the exchange rate appreciated from nearly Shs 2000 per one US dollar to Shs 1623, which reduced the competitiveness of our export sector. The recent depreciation in a way is, therefore, positive for our export sector.

I would like to assure the honourable members that a five-year annual borrowing cap will be announced after we have established with greater certainty the impact of the global economic and financial crisis on our balance of payments and fiscal revenues. This will likely be in the national budget of next year, and will follow the methodology stipulated in the 2007 debt strategy. The annual borrowing cap will be in line with our huge infrastructure needs and will ensure that a five-year average is maintained.

Inflation 

Inflation reduces the welfare of consumers and negatively affects investment planning. Recent inflation has been mainly the result of imported inflation from Uganda’s trading partners, including the effects of the Kenya political crisis. The increase in domestic prices was also a result of the escalation of international commodity prices such as oil, coupled with high regional demand for food. 

Inflation was as high as 15.8 percent in August last year, but declined to 11.6 percent last month. Further decreases are forecasted, especially as the food situation improves. It is, therefore, not correct to say that inflation has been caused by structural problems in the economy.

Domestic Arrears 

The stock of domestic arrears is estimated to have peaked in the financial year 2005/2006 at Shs 638 billion. Since then, Government has provided Shs 720 billion for the three financial years, which ended in June this year.

MR OKETCHO: To follow what the minister is reading, there are so many -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: She is summarising. She knows how to present her paper. It is her paper.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, so many issues were raised and the reply, if given out in full detail, is going to be a very long one. That is why I prepared a detailed reply for colleagues and my presentation is a summary.

Going back to domestic arrears, which peaked at Shs 638 billion in 2005/2006, these have since reduced. Government has since provided Shs 729 billion for the three financial years, ending 2008/2009. The strategy has been to prioritise the settlement of pension arrears with about Shs 334 billion over the last three years. The ministry has requested the Auditor-General to undertake an independent audit of pension arrears, which will serve as the basis for settling the outstanding stock.

In order to decisively deal with domestic arrears, Government is expeditiously clearing outstanding arrears focusing on those that are difficult to budget for such as court awards. In addition, sufficient allocations will be provided for pensions and utilities after finalisation of proper pensions’ estimation methodology and the revision of utility rates.

For all other expenditure arrears, spending agencies will be required to take full responsibility and clear them as a first call on their MTEF resources. Government cannot continue to increase allocations to these types of arrears as this would amount to rewarding errant spending agencies. It is worth noting that this category of arrears has been reduced to manageable levels.

Recent financial management measures are also aimed at curbing the domestic arrears problem. They have been instituted and they include the following: The rollout of the Integrated Financial Management Information System; enforcement of commitment control systems; and ensuring use of Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) for all payments. This will create the necessary audit trail and minimise ghosts on the government payroll.

Revenue and Taxation 

Government taxation reforms are aimed at improving efficiency and ultimately reducing the tax burden on Ugandans, while raising resources to finance public investment and social services. To further efficiency in tax administration, the Uganda Revenue Authority’s tax modernisation plan will bring the informal sector’s activities into the tax bracket. 

Compliance has improved as evidenced by revenue performance. The Uganda Revenue Authority last month exceeded its target by Shs 21 billion. We have updated our tax laws and brought them in line with international best practices with the introduction of VAT in 1998, update of income tax in 1997 and joining the East African Customs Union, and a new Customs Management Act. We are also working on tax procedure codes to streamline and harmonise tax procedures in the tax laws.

Regarding the non-tax revenues, the ministry is reviewing the relevant legislation with a view to streamlining administration and accountability.

Local Service Tax and Hotel Tax 

Amendment of section 22 of the Income Tax Act in July 2008 allowed local tax paid by an individual to be treated as a deductible allowance. There is, therefore, no double taxation as it was alleged in the statement of my colleague. Hotel tax is a consumption tax paid by people who reside in the hotels, and these are people in the higher income bracket. So, the tax is a progressive tax and does not affect the poor.

The proposed transfer of one percent of total VAT to local governments as suggested by my honourable shadow minister would neither be sustainable nor adequate. All funds collected through taxation are deposited on the government Consolidated Fund and there is a budgeting process through which resources are allocated to the various spending agencies, including local governments. Earmarking funds to spending agencies would undermine the reform process currently underway to improve efficiency and efficacy of public spending.

With regard to VAT exemption of some items consumed by the poor, I would like to inform honourable members and in particular my good friend, the Shadow Minister of Finance, that salt, paraffin, transport and unprocessed food, among other items, are already VAT-exempt.

Budget Performance 

Budget performance is reported in both financial and physical terms. While I presented an overview on both financial and sectoral performance in my budget statement, a comprehensive report of physical performance will be contained in last year’s budget performance report to be published next month. Details of the physical performance showing the outputs achieved are also contained in the various ministerial policy statements that Parliament has already received, and has been deliberating on for the last one month.

The implementation of PRDP has not been delayed as claimed, but we begun with consultations aimed at putting in place an appropriate implementation framework. In this financial year, we have provided an additional Shs 100 billion for implementation of PRDP directly, and development partners are expected to supplement that amount.

Agricultural Sector Performance and Financing  

Permit me to put the record straight with respect to the agriculture sector performance. Growth in agriculture is expected to have doubled during the financial year 2008/09 to 2.6 percent per annum compared to the financial year before it. This growth was mainly driven by increased production of food crops, which grew at 2.9 percent last year, compared to the growth of 2.4 percent in the financial year 2007/08. 

The improved performance of food crops production is partly attributed to refocusing of service delivery through NAADS and agriculture recovery in the north and north eastern parts of the country, following resettlement of the formerly internally displaced persons. In addition, the high market prices offered for food crops and the extension of acreage in the sub-region have also contributed to the increased production of food crops in the rainy season before the drought came in.

While it is true that the last comprehensive agricultural census was done in 1965, Government undertook sample surveys in 1991, 1992 and 1993. In order to further inform the planning and budgeting for the sector, the livestock census has been concluded while the agricultural census is ongoing. 

In the last financial year, Government and the donors committed Shs 5.8 billion and Shs 1.2 billion respectively, towards the agricultural census. An additional Shs 2.4 billion has been provided by Government in the current budget for the completion of the census. Data collection for the first season has already been done and the second and last round is expected to be completed by December this year. The results will be availed at the end of the financial year. 

I would like to strongly dispel the notion that use of profit-oriented commercial banks for agricultural financing is detrimental. The agricultural credit facility I proposed is meant to provide affordable credit at no more than 10 percent to commercial farmers and agro processors, who wish to mechanise, thereby stimulating agricultural production and agro processing. 

Commercialisation and modernisation of those farmers who pursue agriculture as a business will help to move agriculture away from traditional subsistence farming very quickly. This is a partnership between Government and the commercial banks. What is important to note here is that more funds are going to be availed through that partnership and also the interest rate will not exceed 10 percent. 

For the majority of the population engaged in agriculture, the NAADS programme is precisely designed to help traditional farmers develop into commercially oriented ones in future. The proposal to scrap NAADS is, therefore, based on lack of information. The overall impact of NAADS during its first phase has been evaluated by independent consultants and positive aspects of the programme have been reported. These include, increased food crop productivity and household incomes, among others.

Government is already reviewing the identified challenges such as weak procurement processes and restructuring the programme to include utilisation of public extension workers for provision of advisory services. 

In accordance with the Maputo Declaration that encourages Government to allocate at least 10 percent of their budget to agriculture and rural development, I want to inform the honourable colleagues that Government has a holistic approach to funding the agricultural sector.  Therefore, in addition to allocation to the agricultural sector, there is funding of other sectors which ultimately benefit agriculture such as infrastructure funding, especially rural roads, water for production, and energy to facilitate agro processing, particularly in the rural areas. 

Members will concur with me that increased agricultural production cannot be realised with inaccessible roads, inadequate backwater for irrigation, and without energy for industries. 

Land 

Government is committed to creating an efficient and effective land delivery system. Government will develop the land information system, complete the inventory and survey of Government land, and complete the computerisation of the land registry. We are also going to construct 19 land offices as well as the Lands Information Centre and the School of Surveys and Mapping. 

Furthermore, the Land Fund was established under the Uganda Land Commission with the following objectives: 

1. 	Redressing the historical injustices and inequities in land ownership

2. 	Acting as a catalyst in implementing current key government policies, which include poverty eradication and agricultural modernisation. 

Since the financial year 2001/02, Shs 5.7 billion has been dispatched to the Land Fund, and almost 90,000 hectares of land has been acquired. All these actions clearly show the commitment and deliberate measures that Government has undertaken to ensure security of land tenure for all Ugandan people and investors who want to use the land. 

Infrastructural Development

The Energy Sector 

Government has instructed UMEME to install prepaid meters to eliminate theft and inaccurate billing. In the revised strategy, UMEME will focus on energy loss reduction, customer service, safety and efficiency. 

On the Energy Fund, the Energy Fund was transferred to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development last year and it is, therefore, not true that it is managed by the Ministry of Finance. By the time of the transfer, the balances held on that account were Shs 211.5 billion and US$ 75.4 million.

Roads Infrastructure Development 

Road works and other physical infrastructure development financed by Government have improved greatly following the increased funding, to over Shs 1.1 trillion per year and reforms in the management of the portfolio include the strengthening of the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), and operationalisation of the Road Fund. In addition, Government is to undertake value-for-money audits in the road sector to guarantee delivery of agreed outputs. 

Public Health Delivery 

Health 

The per capita expenditure on the health sector in Uganda is US$ 12 and not US $8 as it was stated in the alternative budget. This is in addition to the estimated US$13 that is provided by the private sector. While it is true that this is lower than the internationally recommended standards, Government has progressively increased funding for the health sector.

Furthermore, I would like to dispel assertions by my good friend, the Shadow Minister, that health centre IIIs and IIs receive, on average, Shs 260,000 and Shs 60,000 on a quarterly basis. This statement is completely inaccurate. On average, the health centre IIIs receive Shs 5.5 million and health centre IIs receive Shs 1.5 million per year, translating into Shs 1.4 million per quarter for health centre IIIs and Shs 375,000 for health centre IIs. This, however, excludes funds for medicines which are passed through the credit line. 

For financial year 2008/2009, the drug credit line for all health centres in the country was Shs 8.4 billion. The total Government allocation to medicines in 2009/2010 is 110 billion. That is what has been provided. The funds quoted above do not include medicine supplies through projects like the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria. 

With respect to funds for rehabilitation of regional referral hospitals, in financial year 2007/2008, these were budgeted for under the relevant ministries. However, some of the budget resources were reallocated to purchase theatre equipment for health centres and for purchase of medicines. Nonetheless, some rehabilitation work was carried out in the following regional referral hospitals: Mbarara, Fort Portal, Kabale, Mbale and Lira.

With respect to Mulago National Referral hospital, there are allegations that the hospital’s services have all been privatised. It is only the provision of non-clinical services such as cleaning and provision of food which have been privatised. The hospital, therefore, remains a public health facility providing referral services. 

Moving on to water and environment, in order to improve the environment, Government is promoting tree planting under the Saw Log Production Grant Scheme in addition to other ongoing efforts under the National Forestry Authority and National Environmental Management Authority.

Furthermore, increased enforcement of environmentally non-compliant plastics known as buveera of 30 microns and below has reduced local production by 70 percent while the 120 percent levy on importation of buveera less than 30 micron material is being effected by the Uganda Revenue Authority. The ban on importation of used fridges and computers is also being enforced. 

The provision of water is central to a healthy livelihood, agricultural production and pacification in areas like Karamoja. To this effect, several dams, boreholes and piped water systems are being undertaken across the country. 

On education, the factors causing the failure rate to be high have been identified and these include the following: high teacher and pupil absenteeism, lack of parental support and intensive engagement in home chores, especially of the girl-child.

Although the completion rates are still low, efforts are being made to improve the completion rates, including the recent enactment of the law on compulsory primary education, and the programme of quality enhancement being implemented in the 12 districts which have the weakest results.

On the proposed increase of teachers’ salaries, I wish to state that Government increased teachers’ salaries to Shs 200,000 only two years ago, and this is even higher than what is being paid by private schools. This is a fact which can be checked. Additional increments will continue to be made in line with availability of resources. 

On the local governments, not all the budgets for programmes in local governments are provided for directly under the local government votes. Some programmes such as the Road Fund and Universal Secondary Education are   managed under Central Government votes for purposes of streamlining the implementation modalities, before the funds are decentralised to individual local governments.

The Central Government transfers to local governments have been experiencing nominal increases. The percentage share to the national budget has remained around 32 percent of the national budget.

The increase in the national budget has been allocated to programmes such as the Road Fund and the Energy Fund, which are under Central Government votes. Accordingly, the Central Government transfers to local government will increase from the current level of 32 percent to the proposed 40 percent of the national budget as funds become available.

Regarding value-for-money, accountability and corruption, let me reaffirm Government’s commitment to the fight against corruption. The NRM Government is committed to zero tolerance to corruption. Government is determined to do whatever it takes to deliver full accountability to the people of Uganda. 

It is in this spirit that Government has undertaken the following decisive actions:

i)	accounting officers are now held fully accountable for the responsibilities assigned having signed performance contracts with annual undertakings, and with clear deliverance;
ii)	six audit committees have been established to oversee five key sectors; 
iii)	the budget monitoring function is now regularly tracking Government expenditure. In my Budget statement, I stated that we were going to set up quarterly presidential roundtables to discuss monitoring reports and to call the non-performing officers and political leaders to order; and
iv)	the Treasury inspectorate function is being strengthened, among others, to ensure timely reporting of weaknesses in the financial management systems, as well as effecting sanctions of non-compliance.

Government remains committed to the strengthening of the anti-corruption agencies, including the recently established Anti-Corruption Court. Both the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, are undergoing major amendments to specifically strengthen the provisions on reprimand and surcharging. 

As a measure to improve accountability, Government has also embarked on implementation of computerised systems, which reduce opportunities for corruption as I have already stated. Given the success reported so far, Government will extend computerised systems to pensions and payroll management, and also computerise financial management of foreign missions and public universities.

This financial year, Government implemented output-based budgeting, which enhances transparency of budgets and budget execution. This mechanism creates a clear linkage between resource allocation and actual output. It also simplifies performance monitoring of Government projects, minimises wastage of public resources, and reduces opportunities for corruption.

In conclusion, I would like to once again thank colleagues for the enthusiasm with which they have debated my Budget statement. Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to move. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Minister for that statement.

4.18
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for replying to the Opposition’s response to the Government Budget. I still believe as per your guideline that the general debate will end when we finish the committee reports. 

But Mr Speaker, you being the current chair of the Commonwealth Speaker’s Association, and ensuring that the Opposition is given space – we are very encouraged especially for ensuring that the multiparty system of democracy is enhanced under your leadership. So, hon. Minister, I want to thank you very much. I just need a few clarifications.

The Minister of Finance is a senior member of Parliament, a senior minister and has been in this Government for quite some time. But there are a few issues that she stated as if they are new in practice. Before I go to that, I want to thank her for accepting where there are gaps. For example, on the issue of corruption, she has really been very honest, stating that corruption is there and she intends to address it. But this may be from the perspective of being the new Minister of Finance. Otherwise, in terms of the entire Government, the movement to addressing corruption has been very slow. 

We have passed several laws, but most of them are on the shelves, apart from the recent action of the Minister of Internal Affairs. Under the leadership of the new Director CID, they arrested people in Apac, Lira and Amolata. I hope that Police will move to other districts like Tororo, Mbarara, Masindi and others. I want to commend that action among others. 

I am concerned when the minister talks about corruption in the road sector. She says that they are coming up with systems to address – having acknowledged here that unqualified contractors – that is on page 14, “Low supervision, overloading of single contractors with many contracts, and corruption -” 

Mr Speaker, this is the issue I wanted to raise last week under matters of national importance. The road between Bugiri and Malaba was poorly done three years ago. Government instituted investigations and established that it was poor workmanship. The road between Jinja and Bugiri is supposed to be handed back to Government. But as we speak now, from Jinja – Madhvani junction, to Bugiri, the road is already “pleading”. That is a technical word. What I mean by “pleading” is that when you drive along that road, you see the tar on the entire road and the road is also ratting. That means that it is already sinking and developing a valley. 

Now, when I speak like this, some people ask, “How do you know?” That is the road I ply on almost every week. And for an ordinary eye to see very easily – just ply that road when it has just drizzled; you will see that where a trailer passed, the water stands still on the road. I raised this matter with the minister and it seems no action is taking place. What they are doing instead is to establish rumble strips at every point. 

I want to ask the minister if action is taking place? This has been going on for the last ten or twelve years - with all due respect, hon. Nasasira has been in this sector since NRM was established. The same permanent secretary – I do not hate these officials; they have done their best, and now I think we need to change because of the quality of roads. Start with the CHOGM roads, the quality of roads is very poor in the entire country, and we are paying very handsomely for them. 

So, I want the minister to clarify for me; what concrete action are you going to take? These permanent secretaries are also employed on annual contracts. So, what action and what kind of support do you need from Ekanya, MP of Tororo County and from the new district to come? 

On the issue of energy, she was the Minister for Energy when we passed the Energy Act. We provided in the law that there will be two percent, what is called Energy Levy Fund, which will go towards rural electrification. But because of the gap in the Privatisation Act – for all these sectors which have been privatised, the entire management goes to Ministry of Finance. There is a substantial amount of money which has been collected. 

The minister says that there is a difference between energy fund and the levy. This money should be given to the Ministry of Energy so that is it passed on to UMEME. As per the agreement which you signed, hon. Minister, before you left that sector, UMEME is supposed to extend power within a two-kilometre radius. 

Let this money be given to the Ministry of Energy so that it is passed on to UMEME so that we can have rural electrification; it will even help you to fulfil the manifesto of your Government and enhance Prosperity-for-All. Don’t you think this is a good idea for you? The President told people in the last campaign that there will be rural electrification, let the people see it. 

Right now, the Minister of Health’s hands are tied. You have the money – and I raised this matter last time. The ministry authorised UEDCL to use part of this money to build a headquarters, yet we have Amber House. This is illegal and wrong. Let the minister come out honestly on the floor of this House and challenge me on this matter. Let me give you time to compare notes because this is a very serious matter. We need clarification. 

Lastly, we passed the Forest Act –(Interjections)– but the minister issued an executive order and stopped National Forestry Authority from implementing part of this Act. I want to thank the hon. Minister for stating on page 15 that, “Government is promoting tree planting under the Saw-Log Production Planting Scheme.” 

Hon. Minister, I want to declare my interest in this matter. I have applied for the saw-log project fund but they are having difficulty to give this fund because they want to work with the forest Authority. The forest Authority’s hands are tied because Government is not allowing them to give land licences and to remove the encroachers from the forests. Some forest officers who have tried to remove the encroachers have been killed and the vehicles burnt. 

I raised this matter with the minister in charge of the sector and I do not know – we need the relevant institutions to implement the law once it is passed here. Otherwise, the National Forestry Authority cannot even access funding from the European Union because of the President’s directive suspending part of the National Forestry Authority Act. So, I really call upon you, Mr Speaker, and the Prime Minister to advise the President to lift his suspension on the activities of the National Forestry Authority. 

I want to end here and I thank you very much, Madam Minister of Finance. I want to assure you that we are ready to work with you, especially in Malaba, but we have some problems at the border. Kenyans, Sudanese and Rwandese are allowed to enter this country to buy food from farmers direct from the garden. We have registered farmers who have opened offices and they are licensed, but they cannot compete because these Kenyans, Sudanese, Rwandese and Congolese are not registered. So, at the end of the day, the Ugandans’ registered companies cannot raise profits and pay corporate taxes and, therefore, Government is losing revenue. In Kenya, unless you are a registered trader, you cannot be allowed to enter and trade even under the East African Community. So, we should impose restrictions. We had a meeting with the President on this matter and he issued an order to URA not to allow any companies that are not registered and licensed in this country to go to the villages and buy unprocessed food, because this denies us revenue and it denies our people business opportunities, and even the by-products that we would use as manure. So, what action are you going to take to address this matter? Thank you very much.

4.29 
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the Minister of Finance for this response. I am cognisant of the fact that I will, as a Shadow Minister for Works and Transport, bring a critique paper here in a few days to come. But I thought I should get clarification, especially on the road infrastructure development - section 35 of the minister’s presentation this afternoon, on whether this particular section was written in consultation with the line ministries and, therefore, why it would appear that the Ministry of Works knows of some of the flaws that result into substandard or poor works, and why they have not taken action. I would like to call to the attention of the House, particularly that of the Minister of Finance, her revelation to us that the causes for low value-for-money for road and other civil works include the employment of unqualified contractors. Why should such contractors, even with the knowledge that they are unqualified, win contracts in this country?

There is also the revelation that corruption is responsible for the high cost of road works. It would look like Government knows there is corruption in this ministry. Since the NRM Government came to power, I have never heard of a ministry official being charged with corruption and punished or proved to have –(Interruption) 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. It is not true that there is no action taken by Government or the Ministry of Works against officials that have been found not to do their work, or those who have been involved in corruption. As we speak, an Engineer In-Chief has actually been interdicted – Engineer Bagonza – and this was done because he was found wanting in his execution of the assignments given. So, this is one of the instances that Government has actually taken. So, if you say there is no official that has been interdicted, then this is an Engineer In-Chief. Thank you. 

MR AMURIAT: I wish to thank the minister for that information and to say that I am not a lawyer. But Mr Speaker, as a prominent lawyer, you know that somebody is innocent until proven guilty. As far as I know, Eng. Bagonza is in court now. How do we know he will be found to have indulged in corrupt tendencies? So, I think the government needs to wait. As far as the law is concerned, Eng. Bagonza is innocent until proven guilty, but to also mention that the engineer is in court allegedly out of negligence on just one single project. The projects that my brother, hon. Ekanya has talked about, are a mess and yet nobody has been arrested or even convicted. So, I think rather than be defensive, the Front Bench on the other side needs to take seriously whatever they say. This country is stinking of corruption and there is no doubt about that and this is one of the biggest failures of the NRM Government. (Members rose on information, clarification_) You can stand up if you wish. Thank you. 

The problems in the road sector have drained this country to the bone marrow and I think statements like the minister has brought to the House need to be examined.

The other issue that I would like to comment on is on the energy sector. On page 13, the minister says that the revised strategy proposed by UMEME, the company presumably in charge of energy in this country, will focus on energy loss reduction, customer service, safety and efficiency. 

I would like the minister to inform my understanding. As far as I know, the very first agreement between Government of Uganda and UMEME was on the basis of energy loss reduction. You have come this afternoon to tell this House the same thing we heard several years ago. I think you need to be honest and sincere with us if the other agreement does not stand. It would not be correct for you, Madam Minister, to come and reinvent another agreement. Would you like to tell this House if government is reconsidering the agreement that was signed earlier, and that spelt out the area of energy loss as critical? Why do we have to talk about energy reduction at this stage, yet we have an agreement that is already signed, and I believe should be under implementation? 

These are the two comments I wanted to raise and I wish to thank you for the opportunity.

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would also like to thank my colleagues for having raised these issues. In the course of debate, there were issues connected with my ministry, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, to which I would like to respond before the Minister for Finance can come up and answer the rest.

I can confirm that since April this year, indeed the Energy Fund has been transferred to my ministry and is being managed by my ministry. 

The other thing I would like to comment on is that there is a two percent levy and this is not from the distribution company, but rather from the transmission company, and this levy is being sent to THE Rural Electrification Agency, and that is how we are able to do the little rural electrification works; needless to say that this agency would do with some more money. 

Finally on page 13, I think in all fairness, the minister said that in order to curb energy losses, there is need to revisit the distribution system loss reduction strategy. The minister went ahead and said what is being done as part of this strategy. This is on paragraph 33: “In order to curb the energy losses, there is need to revisit the distribution system loss reduction strategy and this will include installation of prepayment metering…” and so on.

I would like to inform Members that loss reduction or losses on power system are a continuous thing. It is not a thing you can solve once and for all. So, I wanted to clarify this. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, this is in response to the question raised by hon. Ekanya. Yes, the road between Jinja roundabout and I think Iganga or Bugiri - that is what you were saying. No, you said Jinja and Bugiri. As you realise, this road is still under construction. The road has not yet been handed over, and as my brother Engineer Amuriat knows, normally after the completion of the road, the road is formally handed over and there is even - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable minister for giving way. What is happening on that road currently - and I think I am confident of this, because I often use that road - is that the contractor is marking the road. As the minister will realise and the engineers who are in this room will know, this is about the last stage in the sequence of road construction. When everything is well done and you are satisfied, you go on to put the road marks and the road furniture, those signposts you see. These include the stop sign, the school ahead sign; That is road furniture. 

The road marking is almost the last operation that takes place on a paved road. Now, most of it is now being done, which is an indication that the road works are about to be concluded, but as hon. Ekanya has observed, a defect called bleeding is very prominent between the roundabout at Iganga all the way up to Bugiri, and it is occurring on the right hand side of the road as you travel towards Tororo. The section of the road that was earlier done between Malaba and Bugiri begun to fail that way before the contractor or the road had been commissioned. It already had failed with runt everywhere. So, our fear is clearly not being exaggerated. 

So, the information I would like to give the minister is that it appears the contractor believes he has surfaced the road well; that it is well built, and so it is time for him to mark the road. I think you need to take interest and where possible, point these defects to the contractor and ask remedial works to be done before the road is commissioned.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, hon. Amuriat. That is precisely what I said. The road has not yet been handed over. The defect liability period is enshrined in any contract, especially in engineering works, for example, and, therefore, that period is supposed to take care of any defects that occur, and that have not been done yet. The road infrastructure has not been completed. So, we cannot say that the road has been completed and, therefore, there is nothing that is going to happen. We appreciate and acknowledge that whatever default is there will be addressed before the road is formally handed over. You are aware of the retention fee, it is not for nothing. It is precisely for that. So, Mr Speaker, the road is still undergoing construction and it has not yet been handed over. We appreciate any defects that show up and we will address them before the road is handed over. 

I wish also to state that the setting up of Uganda National Roads Authority was precisely to separate policy from implementation. Right now, UNRA is busy undertaking an exercise to identify and encourage competent international firms, and even local firms are welcome to tender for road construction. 

Hon. Amuriat, you are an engineer; you are welcome if you have a firm. UNRA is doing a very good job and that is why you find that right now the updating or prequalification of competent firms is actually being undertaken and soon, this is going to be published. I thank you. 

4.46
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for ably answering the questions that were put across, and I also want to thank hon. Ekanya for the concern raised on my sector. However, I want to say that I know of no loan or grant withheld because of the executive order. At least my permanent secretary or the director of environment or the executive director of NFA, have not alerted me of any loan or grant withheld to that effect. 

Although as a sector we have suffered from the lawlessness and indiscipline of the people who have encroached on the forests, and regarding this, we have been able to approach the Minister of Foreign Affairs who has finally agreed to give us personnel to help our staff as they move into and around the forests. in the same light, we are also coming up with a training programme to have our own forest rangers back in place so that they can monitor.

On the issue of the executive order, as Members are aware and especially hon. Ekanya, it was issued to save people who were being thrown out of the forest at the time when it was difficult to solve the problem then. Since then, my Ministry has been tasked to produce a report highlighting the reasons why each central forest reserve was identified and gazetted. We have done so and we have submitted the reports of all the 506 central forest reserves to His Excellency the President, and we know that any time, be it tomorrow or the day after, we are going to have his response and guidance on how we are going to move. 

So, I want to call upon members of Parliament to help us sensitise the communities because most of the time this violence is somehow backed by some leaders who really want to agitate some people and cause violence. We have got the example in Bukaleba, Kiboga and a few other places. So, we want to get the support of every parliamentarian to ensure that the forests are here for us. Thank you very much.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I would like once again to thank the honourable colleagues from the other side for the issues which they have raised on my elaborate reply. (Laughter) I would also like to thank my colleagues, the honourable ministers, for responding to most of the issues, which have been raised. I think there are only two issues which have not been addressed, and that is what I want to address. 

The first one is corruption. Hon. Ekanya is very appreciative that Government is biting, but he was also saying that Government is biting in only certain parts of the country. I want to clarify on that.

The zero tolerance to corruption by the NRM Government cuts across the entire country, in all sectors and all people. Recently, the magistrate of Mbarara was arrested and Engineer Bagonza, who was arrested and charged, comes from the western region. So, reprimanding the corrupt is not limited to certain parts of the country. 

I want to respond to the last issue, which is a very serious issue, and this is to do with foreign companies crossing the border and trading in Uganda in violation of the law, because there are laws which govern foreigners who do business in Uganda; They must be properly registered; they have to register with the relevant authorities. So, those who are doing it at the Malaba Port are trespassers. And, I would be very happy if hon. Ekanya, a very popular Member of Parliament of Tororo, could help us to give us concrete information so that we can arrest these people and teach them the procedure they are meant to follow. Because, under the East African Community, we cannot stop people of East Africa from doing business within the East African region. But what is important is that they must follow and respect our laws. So, I am going to seriously follow up the matter with the Uganda Revenue Authority.

I once again thank the honourable colleagues. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. minister and members for your contributions on the motion. The motion is that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2008/09, and the budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. We shall start with the Committee of Supply tomorrow. We will be handling Votes in this order: We shall deal with Public Service and Local Government which has Vote 005, Vote 011, Vote 0146, Vote 147, and Votes 501 to 850, and 751 to 764. If we complete this, it shall be followed by the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, which are: Vote 015, Vote 110, Vote 117, and Vote 154. This will be followed by Infrastructure: Vote 016, Vote 113, Vote 012, and Vote 156. 

You will get a detailed programme, but these are the first ones we shall deal with, because you may find that we may clear some Votes within an hour and others could take a whole day. For instance, there are many Votes falling under Social Service.

I am appealing to you that we do work in the morning so that we start at around 10.30a.m. Is that not fair? Thank you very much. 

Yes, honourable.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, with the outline of the programme that you have read, it leaves me and my side a little confused in the sense that, as is the practice in the Commonwealth parliamentary system, is the Opposition going to be allowed to take on the most critical sectors that it wants to have detailed presentation on in light of the fact that time seems too short?

THE SPEAKER: I have told this to you several times that many parliaments do not go through all these Votes. The Opposition is given the opportunity to select key Votes but you have never taken it up. I am glad that you are now thinking about it. However, it has to be agreed upon by all of us on how to proceed. People seem to be interested in going for every Vote even where it is not necessary.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, last year, we had ample time and we were able to cover more than six sectors. The year before that, we covered four sectors. I am asking whether this is going to be a repeat of last year.

THE SPEAKER: It was arranged this way because some sessional committees are not ready and the committees I read to you are ready. Otherwise, we should develop what you are saying. We have lined the committees in such a way that the ready ones present. I think other committees have not even finalised their reports.

Honourable members, there is a brief statement by the Minister of Agriculture on something that has occurred in the country.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries would like to inform Parliament and the public that there is an outbreak of Simulium fly, also known as Black fly, in Kamuli and the surrounding districts of Kayunga, Jinja, Kaliro and Iganga. 

The flies move in large swarms, attacking and killing poultry by causing loss of blood and anaemia. They breed in fast-moving water and only adult flies live outside this water. It is also only the female flies that bite. While the females feed on blood, the males feed on grass.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has dispatched a team of Entomologists to identify the breeding sites of these flies in order to control them. In the interim, the farmers are advised to do the following: 

•	Keep your poultry indoors because the flies avoid indoors.
•	Dust your birds with poultry insecticide powder, for example, Sevin to repel the flies.
•	Report the presence of the flies to the district authorities working with the Entomologists in MAAIF.
•	Assist in identifying breeding sites so that they can be treated with chemicals to prevent their multiplication. 

The Black flies are only active during the day and are most active between 9.00 a.m. and 11.00 a.m. and between 4.00 p.m. and 7.00 p.m. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is working with the Ministry of Health to tackle the breeding sites to ensure that we do not contaminate water being used by the population.

Colleagues, we shall put the necessary literature about these flies at the reception tomorrow. I thought it was important to inform people because I have been receiving calls from members of Parliament about what was happening.

The flies normally appear periodically and normally after dry spells of weather like at this time. We shall control the problem as it is not very serious. Our veterinary officers and entomologists are sensitising the farmers on how to handle the problem.

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The only problem is when you say that keep them in the House. (Laughter) This pre-supposes that these are modern farmers and they find food for them; these are birds that find their own food. So, if you keep them –(Laughter) 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you and I wish to thank the Minister of Agriculture for being pro-active. I wish all ministers operated that way. 

I have a question and that is to do with your advice to the farmers to spray their poultry. We are talking about poor people living in the rural areas who allow their poultry to run around, catching grasshoppers for food. I do not know whether the ministry has provided insecticides to support these farmers, during this time of crisis. This is a disaster coming out of your ministry and I believe you need, as a Ministry of Agriculture, to be disaster-prepared. That advice is very good, but if you are not providing insecticides, then you are condemning all the poultry to death because for sure, the people would accept your advice but they would not be able to implement it.
 
Secondly, there is need for extensive education for our poultry farmers. Most of our people in the village actually do not have houses to keep their poultry. In fact, there is even a problem of housing human beings, and so the poultry sleep on trees. In my village, certainly that is what happens. Now, to advise the population, that they should keep their poultry in houses means you are actually telling these people to keep poultry in the same houses that they sleep in. (Laughter) Yes, he did not say so, but this is what they would do if they took his advise. 

I think it will be important to prepare the people for such situations. I am not sure whether this is the first occurrence of this Black fly, but the government should have known in advance because it occurred some time back; that those are the mitigating factors that need to be put in place and so, our farmers need to be given advisory services. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Member for raising this issue. One is that, this is not the first time it has occurred. It occurs and the farmers around that area where it occurs have been sensitised before and we are only giving them information ahead of time. We have dispatched our veterinary officers, entomologists to work with the local leadership.
 
Secondly is that, we cannot use the normal insecticides because they are sparse; they do not move in one big swarm. They move in small swarms and therefore, there is a powder, which is available on the market and is affordable by farmers. 200mg of Sevin is enough. If you have it, you put it on your poultry and you can leave them to graze because it acts as a repellent for sometime.
 
The last and most important part of your question is the policy of Government. We do not buy acaricides for farmers to kill ticks and likewise; the policy is that we supply this powder for free. But under the circumstances, through NAADS and our veterinary officers, we are making sure that farmers access this powder and maybe, we may decide to take affirmative action. But normally, the farmers know how to go about it. This has been the policy of Government, and as I mentioned in my communication, I will avail the necessary literature tomorrow at your counter for everybody to understand the Black flies, and early next week, I will inform Parliament about the actions taken to stop this nuisance of Black flies. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Once again, I thank you honourable members for the motion just disposed of, and other matters that came to us. I think we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. We have agreed to start at 10.30 a.m. tomorrow with those Votes which you have cast. With this, we come to the end. House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.30 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 25 August 2009 at 10.30 a.m.) 

