Monday, 26 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.38p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the communication is in form of thanking you for the understanding you have displayed since we started considering the budget. This understanding has been exhibited by your willingness to be present on Fridays and Mondays when we don’t usually sit. I am very happy with this kind of conduct that will enable us complete this budget within the time envisaged by the Act.  Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this is a statement relating to the national census known as “The 2002 National Population and Housing Census (with Agricultural and Livestock Module)”.  

Population and housing censuses are the main source of demographic and social-economic data necessary for policy formulation as well as implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development programmes, at both national and the lower local government levels.

Since 1948, Uganda has been conducting population censuses at approximately ten-year intervals. Two censuses were held during the pre-independence period, in August 1948 and August 1959. Thereafter, three post-independence Censuses were conducted in August 1969, January 1980 and January 1991.

The Uganda Bureau of Statistics Act No.12, 1998, Section 15(1) requires the bureau to collect statistics on population and housing characteristics, as specified in the Fourth Schedule of the Act.

In Uganda, the last population and housing census, conducted in January 1991, provided data that has been useful for planning at national and local government levels. However, ten years down the road, this data has now been outdated, especially with the initiation and implementation of new government policies since then.  The decentralisation policy, for example, devolved some of the planning functions to the local governments, which functions now need updated statistical data.

Furthermore, there is need to conduct another census, which will update the statistics and aggregate them at lower administrative levels to form the planning process, including the demarcation of constituencies for future parliamentary and lower local elections.  

The census information will also be used as a benchmark to revive the registration of births and deaths. Mr Speaker, the registration of births and deaths will in future be used to update the demographic indicators, reducing the current total dependency on expensive censuses and national surveys for such updates. 

We have put in place a mechanism to ensure that we have two books at each parish, one to register deaths and another to register births, so that every month as the parish chief picks his pay at the sub-county, he will have to take a return of how many people died or were born in his parish in that month. This information helps us to know why there are so many deaths in a particular area of, say, infant children. It is going to help us in our planning process.

The Bureau of Statistics had planned to carry out the census in September 2000, but it was not possible. Now we have been able to finalise all matters relating to financial, facilitation and preparation, to enable us carry out the census in September this year.

The census of this year is going to run from the 13 - 19 September. Many people would like to know how a census could run for a week. The night of 12th to 13th is the census night, and even if we get to you on the 17th, we shall ask you, who are the people who spent their night in this household on the night of the 13th.  But the information that we require is comprehensive; it is not just about counting the number of people. We are building a data bank about our people, their agricultural practice, and their housing condition so that we can in the long run be able to use this information in our national planning process.

We have arranged these dates taking into consideration a number of factors:

1. A census should be held during school holidays so that we can utilise the students and the teachers in the census process. So, we have been satisfied by the Ministry of Education and Sports, that these dates will be within the holiday time. 

2. This census we will ask questions about crops grown by households and the month of September is the most convenient one to ask about crops grown in the first agricultural season of March to June 2000. This past agricultural season accounts for about 60 per cent of the annual crop yield, and it is the only one in some of the areas of Uganda.  

We will spend seven days carrying out this enumeration exercise. When we calculated we found that to cover the country in one day would require 250,000 enumerators. The enumeration area is equal to the LCI. The LCI was taken as the enumeration area because this makes it easy for us to map the LC boundaries. It would be difficult for us to have 250,000 people trained, supervised, monitored and facilitated all in one day. Even then, the training costs would be very high if we chose to use those big numbers.  

The quality of the census is also important. We wanted to get quality people to do a thorough job than have quantity, which will probably not be able to deliver.  

On the census methodology and organisation, Mr Speaker, we will use interviewers who will go to all households. It will be a de facto census, which will record all persons who will have spent the census night of 12th/13th in a household. The de facto census is easier to administer than the de jure census, which records the usual members of the household.  

The enumerators will collect the information by asking questions and recording the answers using the household, the small and micro enterprise and the community questionnaire.  The questionnaire on the household will be about the personal particulars and the household characteristics, and will be answered by the individual household members, the head of the household or a knowledgeable member of the household. 

The community questionnaire will be administered at LC I level, and a group consisting of the LC I Chairperson, the Secretary for Women and the Secretary for Youth will provide the answers.  

The cartographic work (Census Mapping) has divided the country into small units called Enumeration Areas (EA), with about 150 households or 750 persons, each with clear boundaries. We have also used the office of the chief Administrative Officer (CAO), who will have the overall responsibility at the district level of ensuring that all census activities are carried out. The District Census Officer, who has been appointed by the CAO from among the district administrative officers, will implement the routine activities. We shall pick either the District Population Officer of that district or the District Statistician, who has been nominated or appointed as the District Census Officer for this purpose.  

At the lower level, there will be the sub county supervisor and the parish supervisor and then the enumerators. The CAO and the lower level supervisors will together appoint the most efficient field workers. As far as possible, the field workers should be residents of the hierarchical area where they will work.  

Mr Speaker, the census programme will largely rely on the district infrastructure and equipment like supervision vehicles, training venues, stores and furniture. Also the district will be expected to provide other personnel like secretaries, drivers and security to guard the census materials.  

Since the government has decided to hold this census on the 13th of September, I appeal to my colleagues in this House to assist in sensitising the public about the exercise. It is well known that if we do not have a successful census, or if a particular group of people are not represented in our national numbers, it will not be possible for us to plan for them. I therefore request the Members of Parliament to assist their people and ensure they get counted; otherwise, we will not be able to plan for them accurately during the planning process. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable minister the following facts or information. 

It is a very well known fact that nearly one third of Uganda, that is, the northern region, is under very strenuous circumstances of insecurity.  Nearly half of the population in the North is not living at home. What measures are you going to take to ensure that these people are also counted? I am talking about IDPs and others whose whereabouts have not been established. 

I also would like to know from the honourable minister whether he has taken any measures to make sure that our people, who live in the Diaspora, especially the nkubakyeyos, must also be counted.  Mr Minister, you know it yourself as Minister of Finance that these people in the Diaspora, the nkubakyeyos, are contributing to our treasury as much as US$600 million per annum. You cannot afford to ignore this kind of group of workers. They bring in more money than most of our exports. Are you going to make sure they are counted?

We also have a third section or group of our people in the Diaspora, especially in the US, Australia and England, who have been given permanent residence. Would you count them as Ugandans or people who have forfeited the Ugandan citizenship? If you are planning to include them in the census, do you have any plans at all to contact the immigration departments of these countries so that they can give you accurate information? 

Lastly, to what extent are you going to use security agencies in your exercise? Are they going to assist or are you going to restrain them?

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek a clarification on top of what hon. Aggrey Awori has said.  

Now that one of the cardinal uses of information obtained from the population census is to assist in allocation of resources, and with the prevailing situation in the North, it is very unlikely that people of northern Uganda will be fully counted in this forth-coming census. Is there a contingent arrangement by the government that it can use as a yardstick for resource allocation if at the end of the day the people of northern Uganda are not fully covered in this census? What arrangements do you have for favourable resource allocation, which will not necessarily be based on the population census? The fact that for all these 16 years people’s lives have been tampered with, their numbers should not matter in resource allocations. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I want to know from the minister, because he said even the foreigners - there is a briefing we attended where even the non-Ugandans would be counted as part of Ugandans. I do not know what kind of statistics that is. You will help us to understand that.  

Secondly, I will imagine we are not going for a head count; we are going for a census where one’s means of livelihood, someone’s goats and the crops they grow is counted. Just to echo the voices of my colleagues, with a situation where you have 900 people in a protected village, I believe that the notion of half census will still arise. 

You said you couldn’t carry out a half census, but to tell me you are going to carry out a census in Pader, yet Lira-Kitgum road has just been opened two days ago - it had been closed for one week - it just sounds like a big joke to me. How will the census be conducted in those areas? So would you distinguish whether you are going for a head count or a population census? Thank you.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister said that there will be a book at each parish to register the dead and those who have been born. But in many parts of Uganda, it has not been the practice that people register those who have died and the children who are born. What measures will he take to ensure that the deaths and births on that day are registered? Because, Mr Speaker, it is not easy for people in the rural areas to go to the parish to register the dead. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for the statement. The last census we had was in 1991; that is more than 10 years ago. I probably will not be wrong to assume that the next one is likely to happen in another 10 years. The figures are used to calculate many things. 

In recent years we have had figures of growth and of human development that are calculated on a national average, and they are stated as the figures for Uganda. ‘Uganda’s economy is growing at such and such a rate every year; Uganda’s human development index is such and such; it is increasing or decreasing accordingly.’ I am very concerned that these figures place us in certain categories or groups of countries that are accorded different treatment by the major powers like the international financial institutions, the United Nations and even the development partners. You have a category such as developing countries, least developed countries, the newly industrialised countries and so on and so forth. 

If there is no accurate measurement of the people, the incomes and the livelihoods of the people in northern Uganda because of the conflict there, isn’t there a possibility that the benchmark for Uganda’s development, basing on this census, will be more optimistic than it really is? Can’t Uganda be looked at in future as a country that is achieving more development than it really is? We may end up not benefiting from all the support that we could have benefited from if the true picture was there for our partners and the international community to see and internalise. 

I am concerned about the national averages and what this census will mean for that measurement if the true picture of development and the people in northern Uganda is not recorded because of the conflict there. What does the honourable minister have to say about that? Thank you.

MR DAVID WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. Mine is just a brief clarification. I come from Manjiya, which borders with Kenya and about a quarter of a million people in that area do not spend a night in anybody’s house. They just keep on trotting to and fro. I suppose also the fishermen do not spend any night in any people’s houses. How is the Minister for Finance going to handle these very big numbers of people who do not even know about the census night? Thank you.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Minister how he is going to manage, especially the Matheniko, who are bordering Turkana land. Currently, there is famine in Moroto district, and so most of these people have crossed over, because in the other country they provide them relief and they get a lot of food from there. 

Secondly, how is he going to manage the cattle camps? Because there is no house in the cattle camps and they hardly come back to their Manyatta during the dry season.   I do not know how they will have slept on the 12th night or mid-night. So, I do not know whether there are any measures in place to address those issues. 

There are also the Turkanas who have come into Uganda in search of water and grass. I do not know whether there are measures in place to ensure that such people are retained, not go to Kenya so that they will be there to be counted on the census night. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: I was happy to hear the Minister say that births, marriages and deaths will now be recorded. I want to find out whether that kind of exercise does not require an enabling law to ensure that everybody reports deaths, births and marriages like it is done in other systems  

I want also to find out from him whether the authorities that will be registering these deaths, marriages and births will issue documents to the people reporting. 

My next point of clarification is with regard to people with disabilities. I hope this time the minister will ensure that adequate questions are asked at the end of the exercise to ascertain the number of people who are disabled by categories, because last time there was a question which was not properly framed. Even the enumerators, in many cases, did not take care to ensure that this question was actually answered. Therefore, I hope this time the minister has sought appropriate advice on this matter and people with disabilities will be adequately covered during the census.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of recent we have been reading in the newspapers that the government is negotiating peace with Kony rebels in the north, and it has requested them to assemble at a certain place in Sudan.  Since these people also affect the distribution of our resources directly or indirectly, I am seeking clarification from the minister concerned if there are other measures that he has put in place to enable him count these rebels. Thank you.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the on-going process of the census to up-date our economic policies and so on, but I would like to ask the honourable minister to consider using this census as a job base for the local people, to make sure that the counting of the people is fully decentralised. We would be disappointed if we got strangers from Kampala or from any other offices coming to our villages trying to count us and to ask us questions, which could probably be personal. 

So, we ask the people concerned to make sure that our youth are fully participating, and if there is any kind of employment possibilities, they consider students who are doing economics because these are the people who are going to do the job in future. If they are involved in the beginning, they will use this as a learning process. Thank you very much.

MRS ANIM ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. I heard him talking about a death registration form and a birth registration form. I want to know whether on the death registration form there would be a limitation on years, because some families lost their people some 10 to 20 years back. If that is not limited, people may reflect deaths, which occurred some 30 years back, which may not help the government in planning.  

Secondly, the minister stated that the census will take place on the 13th of September, and it will take into account the people who will spend their nights in a home on the night of the 12th. I do not know whether the honourable Minister has taken into account the issue of polygamous families. In a home of five wives, the man normally tends to move around –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Same night?

MRS ANIM ANGUPALE: Can I be protected, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MRS ANIM ANGUPALE: The man normally moves around to check the status of the wives –(Laughter)- and therefore it may affect the 13th day where every woman in a polygamous family will have to state the man as being in that home. How can we control double counting on that very day? Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members who took interest in this matter and asked these questions. 

Hon. Awori and a number of other honourable Members expressed concern about how we are going to manage the census in the areas where there are internally displaced persons and so on. Mr Speaker, our hope is that at the time of counting, there will be peace in that area and people will be in their homes. But if it not so, we have made arrangements to ensure that people are counted wherever they will be. I will give an example. If people are from a certain sub-county in Kitgum, but because of this displacement have found themselves in a camp somewhere in some sub-county in Gulu, we will ask you where you come from, because we have found you in a camp and we believe it is not your natural home.  So we will record you as having found you in a camp but coming from Kitgum so that when the temporary camp situation ends, we will know how many people actually belong to Kitgum, although we found them in a camp in Gulu.  That is the way we are going to record them and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to have a different format of the form you are going to use in the north?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, we have made a provision for that area. There will be a form that has those two aspects, and we are discussing with security agents to provide security for our enumerators who will also be largely drawn from the community. That was also the question from hon. Kassiano.  In fact, hon. Odonga Otto and the honourable Member from Ibanda South asked whether we would count the rebels. 

We will count every person that we find in Uganda. A census is not a citizen registration exercise. We will count you whether you are a foreigner, because this is a planning function and we want to know. If you a foreigner we will register that you are a foreigner. We will count you if you spent the night here so that we also know how many foreigners are drinking our water, how many foreigners go to our hospitals, because they use the services that we provide for any other human being. 

So, we will count people wherever we get them and for us, Sir, we do not have a different form for the rebel because we do not know the rebels. We will know the person whom we will have found in the territorial boundaries of Uganda and who spends the night of the 13th here. 

Similarly, that should answer hon. Awori’s question about the people in the Diaspora. We are not counting them. It is not an exercise of establishing citizenship or loyalty to Uganda. It is an exercise to establish physical presence in Uganda as at midnight the 13th.

MR AWORI: Correction, Mr Speaker. The honourable colleague misunderstood me. When you talk about Ugandans in the Diaspora, it does not necessarily mean that you have lost your citizenship. You are abroad either to study or to work and earn a living. That is all. I did not mean to say, what about Ugandans who have lost their citizenship by being in the Diaspora, no. I am simply referring to those people who are currently living abroad and who perhaps come back home annually, including our diplomats.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Awori. There is no contradiction. The census exercise is not one of establishing citizenship. It is to establish physical presence in Uganda on the night of the 13th. So the people in Austria, America or wherever, we love them, they are our people but since they will not have spent that night here, we will not count them. 

The same goes for the honourable Member for Manjiya. There are fishermen and other people from both Kenya and Uganda who spend the whole night moving up and down. We will have one simple question for them. “Did you spend the night in this household?” If yes, we will count you. If no, you will be counted from wherever you will spend the night. That is the test and the cut off point.

It also goes for hon. Ogwel Loote. We have to ascertain where these border people spend the night, in which manyatta. I think it is also in our interest as leaders to ensure that we encourage our people to spend the night in the manyattas in Uganda so that they are counted. 

Hon. Mwandha asked if we have any enabling law on registration of births and deaths. There are two laws in existence now and we are legally covered. There is a law for the registration of births and deaths, which is managed under the Ministry of Justice. It is there and if you want to prove an event of death in a court of law, you go and get a certificate of death under that law. 

That process and that law will continue to operate. Ours is the raw data from which the Ministry of Justice people pick their respective information. Ours is under the statistics law, which authorises us to get statistics about any event in Uganda. That law does exist too. 

We think we have fully captured the issue of disability. I will however take this one up so that special arrangements are made. If you have anything to add or subtract, we will find a way of accommodating it in the process of recording the findings. That we will do. 

The Member of Parliament for Kalungu asked about the counting of strangers. There will be no stranger in Uganda on the night of 13th. If you spend that night here, we will count you. The form indicates what tribe you are, what religion, and all other information. So we will record you as a foreigner but we will have recorded you all the same. 

Hon. Angupale, I thank you for having raised this point, which I must clarify. The registration of births and deaths will start from the 14th of September. This is what we are going to do. On the 13th, we will count everybody and on the 14th, we shall start recording the events of births and deaths that may affect our data, which we will have collected. 

The District Planning Officer and the District Statistician will collect this data at the district. These will update our census data frequently to ensure that we have, by the push of a button, a graph and ready idea of how we are performing on some of these population matters. 

She did also ask about polygamous men. I know at least that the polygamous men in my part of the world allocate days or nights to their women. They say that on Wednesday I will be at the place of so and so, on Thursday I will be -(Laughter)- I however think that the people who count will take care of that concern. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I asked the honourable Minister a question concerning how national averages are going to be calculated if the most disadvantaged and the poorest region of Uganda is not actually pre-recorded by this census. I pointed out the problems of having over-optimistic indicators for growth and development as a result of leaving out this region. I did not hear him make a reply. 

Secondly, on the question of Ugandans living overseas, I would kindly like to probe from the minister a little further. We are moving to a situation where we shall have to aggressively fight for global labour markets at the WTO. Currently, if you go to a country like the Philippines, as you enter the immigration lounge, you will see a big sign reading Overseas Filipino Workers (OPW). That is their major export. They have a policy of encouraging their semi-skilled, unskilled and even skilled people to go and find work in Hong Kong and in the global market. It is a clear policy. They compete with Indonesians and other Asians for these markets. I see that we are also moving in that direction. If we do not count our Ugandans who are abroad and know what skills they are selling where they are, how shall we have a policy or put in place one to promote this important export? They are currently giving us a high source of revenue. 

So, I think that the honourable Minister should take time to reflect on this and tell us whether there is going to be another opportunity to count these people. We should know what they do and where they are allocated, so that we can have a good policy for getting money out of this important source. Could the minister also address the first question I asked? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must apologise to hon. Byanyima and also hon. Araali from Fort Portal. In my rush to conclude this matter, I overlooked their concerns, but I had recorded them here.  

I will start with hon. Byanyima, of course, since she drew my attention to this omission. Hon. Byanyima, what we are doing is taking the census in the country as of the night of the 13th September. That is the exercise for 13th September.  However, I agree with you entirely about knowing the professional capacity of Ugandans, and this is not even limited to the people abroad. The government has been concerned that even here locally, we do not know, or we do not have a databank where we can say we have so many trained or practicing health workers, so many people who are qualified in flight engineering, or so many qualified professionals in dental surgery!  

Let me assure this House that I have already prepared instructions to the National Planning Authority. When the board is fully approved by this Parliament, one of the first things they are going to do is to establish a databank for Ugandan professionals, both locally and those that are international, and wish to participate in this programme. But that is going to be subject to another exercise. For now, we are limiting our operations to a census as known traditionally.

The other point is, ‘how will absence of accurate figures from the north affect our general findings?’ Let me say that on the contrary, because the figures in the north are low, it is putting the national average low. For example, if we are looking at agricultural output or GDP growth from, say, the housing sector, we will take into account how much building materials have come into this country in this year, and how much of those have actually been converted into houses. And if a part of Uganda is not developing at the same speed as other parts of Uganda, the national average will definitely be low.  

It is my hope that finally, when the problems in the north are sorted out, the picture that is going to emerge from this country by way of development figures, is going to be much more impressive than it is currently portrayed. So, the GDP figures will definitely be high, because there will be increased economic activity even in those areas. But that being as I have said, it is important for all of us to appreciate that we need to see uninterrupted development across the entire country, and we must all work towards that as a goal.  

The other issue hon. Araali was raising is, ‘what measures are we going to take to ensure that registration of births and deaths is enforced. In the past, for you who were alive then, there used to be a situation where no person would be buried at a village unless they have reported that case.  Similarly, whenever you gave birth to a child or a household got a new member of the family, they had to report. A chief working with the LCs will ensure that whenever there is an occasion or occurrence of death, a report is made. 

I do not know about other villages, but in my village, if someone dies it is a concern of the whole village. In fact, you must all, by our Local Council By-law, go and attend to that funeral and partake in the work of digging the grave and so on. So, it is common knowledge.

Finally, the current statistics law makes it an offence if someone does not provide information, which is required for statistical purposes, to a statistical officer. In fact, for purposes of registering births and deaths, the parish chief I have just talked about is going to be appointed as a statistical officer under the statistics law to collect this data. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03.

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03, ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, we do not have enough copies of this report. I have made an inquiry and I am told the machine has broken down. So, it is difficult for us to follow and make contributions to this important report. Can arrangements be made for us to have copies?

THE SPEAKER: I am going to ask the chairperson to present the report, because if the machine has broken down, what do we really do? I will ask the chairperson to read the report in full so that we follow, otherwise, this day is going to be wasted and there is no indication that the machine will be working tomorrow. I am sorry that this is causing some inconvenience to you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to inform the honourable Member who has raised this question that very many copies of this report were handed out. Whether they reach each and every Member of Parliament, I am not sure, but I think sufficient Members of Parliament received copies of this report - (Interjections) - to be able to –(Interruption)

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of this House for Mbarara Municipality, I speak for the people of Mbarara Municipality. If I do not have a copy of that report to speak for the people of Mbarara Municipality, is it in order for the honourable Minister to say that because members of other constituencies have their copies, that is sufficient? It is implied! Mr Speaker, is he in order to marginalise the people of my constituency in this House? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, as I indicated before, I quite appreciate the point you have made. You were right to say that you are entitled to a report and I only expressed regret that this was not the position. Anybody castigating you for that should be out of order.  

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, Rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates the sessional committees inter alia to critically examine government’s recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations thereto. The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs considered the following votes under its mandate: 

Vote 001 – Office of the President
Vote 002 – State House
Vote 004 – Office of the Prime Minister
Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Vote 034 – Mass Mobilisation

Mr Speaker, the committee held consultative meetings with ministers and officials from the Office of the President, State House, Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Movement Secretariat.

During these meetings, the respective ministerial policy statements and budgetary estimates for the financial year 2002/2003 were discussed alongside other documents presented to the committee via the respective government ministries and departments. A special meeting was also held with Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). It is on the basis of these meetings that the committee compiled this report, which it now wishes to present to the House for consideration.

With your permission, Sir, I wish to thank the honourable ministers and the officials for their co-operation during the time of our examination of their ministries’ recurrent and capital estimates.

Vote 001 and Vote 002 cater for the Office of the President and State House. If you allow me, I wish to skip the mission statement and the functions of the presidency so that I can move fairly quickly. I also wish to skip the political leadership of the presidency and also the government corporations that come under the Office of the President. This is because the information is readily provided, and honourable Members can refer to it.

In the course of our meetings with the Office of the President staff, the committee discussed issues relating to –(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, you ruled that the chairman would read the entire report because we do not have copies yet now he is taking it upon himself to jump certain parts of his report. This is a disadvantage to some of us who do not have the report. Doesn’t he want to obey you?

THE SPEAKER: How many members do not have copies and therefore need verbatim reading? Okay, you read everything.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry about that. I do not know what happened. I was made to understand that enough reports had gone round.  

Rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, that one you have read. Proceed with page two.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Vote 001 and Vote 002, Office of the President and State House respectively. These votes are for the presidency and they comprise Office of the President and State House. 

The Mission Statement of the Presidency

The Presidency’s mission is to uphold the Constitution and sovereignty of the Republic of Uganda through: 

1. provision of good leadership;

2. formulation, monitoring and reviewing of economic, social and political policies and programmes of government;

3.providing guidance on ethics and good governance;

4. ensuring and maintaining the nation’s territorial integrity and security; and

5.mobilising the population towards development.

Functions of the Presidency

The functions of the Presidency are as follows:

• To provide an efficient administrative machinery and support to His Excellency, the President, in exercising his constitutional executive functions.

• To provide for the security of the President, the Vice President, and their families.

• To provide adequate welfare and logistical facilities for the President, their families, staff and visitors.

• To provide the effective and efficient machinery for follow-up of special programmes and projects undertaken by the Presidency.

• To monitor and maintain internal and external security of the country.

• To keep the President fully informed on the implementation of government policies and programmes.

• To provide a framework and co-ordinate office accommodation for all central government ministries and departments.

• To organise and manage national and international functions, including national day celebrations, international forums, and other functions such as state visits.
• To oversee prompt and effective implementation of inter-ministerial and government-wide initiatives as may be directed by His Excellency, the President and/or Cabinet from time to time.

• To co-ordinate an effective campaign against unethical and corrupt behaviour in society.

• To co-ordinate the anti-corruption agencies to receive, follow up and ensure enforcement and implementation of recommendations made by commissions of inquiry and other constitutional agencies mandated to fight and prevent corruption.

• To promote and maintain good public relations and understanding between the Presidency and the general public and the enhancement of Uganda’s positive image nationally and internationally.

• To provide guidance and oversee the electronic and print media as a whole.

• To inform, educate, entertain and mobilise the people of Uganda using multi-media and multi-sectoral approaches.

• To publicise government policy by producing educative programmes on various aspects of life in society such as good public health practice, improved agriculture, micro-finance credit and disseminating such materials around the country.

Political leadership of the Presidency

Mr Speaker, the political leadership of the Presidency is as follows: It is headed by the Minister in charge of the Presidency, assisted by the following Ministers of State. There is the Minister, Office of the Vice President, the Minister in charge of Security, the Minister in charge of Economic Monitoring, the Minister in charge of Ethics and Integrity and the Minister in charge of Information.

Government Corporations under the Office of the President

The government corporations that come under the Office of the President are: 

• The New Vision Printing and Publishing Corporation, 

• The Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, 

• The Uganda Aids Commission, 

• The Broadcasting Council, and 

• The Media Council.  

Presidential Advisers

In the course of our meetings, the committee was informed that the terms of reference of Presidential Advisers are being reviewed. The current Presidential Advisers have gone through the first phase of job evaluation. It is hoped that some Presidential Advisers will be working on call, that is, working only when their services are needed.


The New Vision Printing and Publishing Corporation
 
We were told that the corporation is currently under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pending privatisation. Some technical aspects of the corporation, however, remain under the Office of the President.  

Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) 

The committee was informed that the RDCs are senior civil servants and have been graded so by the Public Service Commission. 

We were also told that RDCs experience fluctuations in their allowances due to the fluctuations in the cash budget. They receive a portion of the Poverty Action Fund (PAF) for purposes of monitoring PAF activities in the districts.  

We were also told that the government is in the process of improving RDCs’ offices with new equipment. It is also in the process of recruiting secretaries to be posted to RDCs’ offices. 

The policy regarding the vehicles for RDCs is that when an RDC is transferred from one station to another, he or she moves with the vehicle that he or she has been using. The purpose of this is to take into account the different levels of maintenance that the different RDCs give to their vehicles. 

The RDCs’ terms of appointment are being adjusted to have them serve on contract.

On training of Gombolola Internal Security Organisations (GISO), the Office of the President acknowledges the fact that the initial training of the GISOs was insufficient. A programme is therefore on-going to screen, train, re-orient and integrate the GISOs into the country’s security apparatus so that the GISO is the first rank in the Internal Security Organisation structure. The screening phase was recently completed.

Uganda Broadcasting Agency (UBA) 

The UBA will be put in place as soon as possible to ease collection of revenue that currently does not favour Uganda Television and Radio Uganda in today’s liberalised economy. It is important to note that stations cannot capitalise until UBA is in place. 

Disarmament in Karamoja 

The committee was told that this programme is on course. It has yielded results that have led to the diminishing of cases of cattle rustling and insecurity in Karamoja.  

The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

1. More than any other office in the district, the office of the RDC is vital for the success of government programmes because it is the one that monitors government programmes at the grassroots level. This role is in addition to co-ordinating government activities in districts. In view of this, the government should make special efforts to ensure that this office is given adequate facilities to enable it fulfil its functions. The facilities already given to the RDCs make a mockery of government’s determination for its programmes to impact on the ordinary Ugandan.

2. The committee has observed that the integrity and impartiality of some RDCs with regards to political participation has been greatly undermined. The committee recommends that the practice of political participation by RDCs, that pits candidates against one another, is not healthy for the dignity of the office of the RDCs and should therefore be discouraged.

3.  The future appointment of RDCs should, as much as possible, comply with constitutional provisions. The committee has noted that this observance has not been the case in some of the appointments. 

4. Some deputy RDCs and the assistant RDCs have over-stayed in their stations and have become overly identified with both cultural and other local nuances of communities in which they work to the extent that has compromised their neutrality and impartiality. The committee strongly recommends that the officers should be regularly transferred.

5. The committee notes that security organisation arrangements that take place whenever there are very important persons, such as the President, at national functions need to be improved and modernised. Both the security of the President and convenience of the members of the public must be a priority in such situations. The committee commends the security arrangements of the Republic of Tanzania at similar occasions and urges our security apparatus to take a leaf from their Tanzanian counterparts and be sophisticated and humane but effective in their organisations.

6. Noting that office accommodation is now the business of individual ministries and yet the Office of the President still has domestic arrears of over Shs688 million in respect of such accommodation, the committee recommends that these arrears should be taken over by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

7. The remuneration and terms of reference of Presidential Advisors should be commensurate with their status.

8. The committee recommends that cultural groups that entertain guests at national functions should reflect and promote Uganda’s diverse cultures instead of relying on a few common cultural groups.

9. The committee accepts the assurances of the minister responsible that the State House Sponsorship Scheme is being phased out. For the remaining scheme, the committee recommends that its management should be transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports. The committee further recommends that for the sake of transparency, Parliament should be given information on who the beneficiaries are.


10. The committee recommends that clearer role differentiation between State House and the Office of the President be undertaken urgently since some of the activities done by the former are more appropriate under the later.

11. The committee observes that hiring of the President’s motor vehicle fleet compromises his security, and is costly. The committee urges the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take this matter more seriously.  

Mr Speaker, recommendation 12 was deleted because it is not appropriate at this stage. The next one, which is number 13, now moves up.

12. The credibility of the government as a champion against corruption will be greatly enhanced when the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity is given adequate human and financial resources. The current inadequate funding of the directorate hardly augurs well for the government’s successful fight against corruption. 

13. The Internal Security Organisation (ISO) and External Security Organisation (ESO) should each have a separate vote created for them because their activities are different and yet important for the stability, security and development of the country. The committee is deeply concerned that the two organisations are under-funded to the extent that they even have no funds for staff development. The committee observes that the two organisations are so under-funded that they lack modern equipment and transport to gather information. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make great effort to appreciate the vital role of these two organisations. 

14. The committee notes that the plan by Uganda AIDS Commission to use local governments to reach the grassroots in the fight against HIV/AIDS is not effective since local governments do not have adequate skills as well as resources to fight the pandemic. In light of this, the capacity of Uganda AIDS Commission should be strengthened for it to support the work of local communities through local councils.
 
15. The committee observes that research in medicine to combat HIV/AIDS in Uganda has been completely donor dependent with limited government funding. This is not a sustainable way to combat the scourge. For our country, with a reputation as a leader in the war against HIV/AIDS, the committee urges government to invest in research. 

VOTE 004 - OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

Mr Speaker, vote 004 caters for the Office of the Prime Minister and the mission statement is to lead Government Business in Parliament, to ensure efficient and effective implementation of government policies and programmes, and conduct policy and management issues on disaster and refugees and special programmes on pacification and development. 

The political leadership of the Office of the Prime Minister is as follows: 

• The Prime Minister, 
• Minister for General Duties, 
• Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, 
•Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, 
• Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees,
• Minister for Luwero Triangle, 
• Minister of State for Northern Uganda Pacification and Reconstruction, and 
• Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs.  

Regarding matters pertaining to the Office of the Prime Minister, the committee received information on Rural Micro Finance Support Project and Northern Uganda. 

Rural Micro Finance Support Project 

The committee was informed that the project deals with the population through intermediaries like NGOs, village banks and in some cases, individuals. In choosing these intermediary agencies, the capacity of these agencies is seriously considered. As a result of this method being applied, districts that have developed intermediaries have more funds loaned to them as opposed to those with few or none. Efforts are, however, being made to develop the capacity of intermediaries in districts where there are few or none. 

Northern Uganda 

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Works implemented the telecommunication component of Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme. 

The committee was also informed that Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) would be put under separate management from that of the Office of the Prime Minister.

Mr Speaker, the following are the observations and recommendations of the committee: 

1. The committee recommends that transparency must remain the cornerstone of the project’s management. The project should critically support the northern region, which has undergone serious upheavals that threaten the region’s development. It should also consider other parts of Uganda so that benefits of the projects are nationally spread. 

2. The committee urges the office of the Prime Minister to educate members of the public more about the project so that the take up of loans under the Rural Micro Finance Support Project is improved.

3. The committee observes that benefits of the projects are not reaching the poorest of the poor, and this development is not in direct harmony with government’s objective, which is to eradicate poverty. Therefore, everything possible should be done to ensure that the poorest of the poor in our society also have access to this project.

4. Research should be carried out to re-examine the needs of people in Northern Uganda and then incorporate them in the NUSAF project. Eliminate those current components of the project that are not appropriate to the people’s needs.

5. Members of Parliament should be regularly informed about the programmes taken to their constituencies and they should be encouraged to take part.

6. The committee commends the efforts of Non Government Organisations that are supplementing government in taking services to the people. The recent role of NGOs in the resettlement of Ugandans expelled from Tanzania is a case in point.


7. The committee feels strongly that the Office of the Prime Minister to effectively monitor and evaluate all government activities and programmes, its capacity to do so must be improved. The office should work with the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that more staff with relevant qualifications and skills are posted to the Office of the Prime Minister to boost its current strength that is inadequate.

VOTE 006 - MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Vote 006 caters for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In the affairs of most countries in the world, not least the more advanced ones, the ministry that handles foreign policy and affairs is second in hierarchy to the Head of State or government.  

Mr Speaker, that speaks volumes about the premier position of a ministry that is responsible for foreign affairs on behalf of its people. That ministry, more than any other, handles matters of foreign policy and defence that have the potential to usher in national prosperity as well as stability. 

The mission statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to conduct Uganda’s foreign relations and commercial diplomacy in order to promote an international environment, which supports Uganda’s security and development needs.  

The political leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is as follows: There is the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Third Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of State for International Co-operation and the Minister of State for Regional Co-operation.  

During the presentation of the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, issues arose on the region, which had a bearing on our region, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Sudan, Burundi, the East African Community, Somalia and the African Union. 

The security and diplomatic problems affecting the Great Lakes Region are partly a result of the region’s colonial history. The following countries’ relations with Uganda were discussed: 

The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) 

The various combatants in the war in the DRC are inching towards a peace settlement. The United Nations has applauded Uganda’s role in seeking a lasting solution to the war.  

The Sudan 

Bilateral relations between the Republic of Sudan and Uganda are on the mend. To supplement the efforts of IGAD under President Daniel Arap Moi’s chairmanship, President Museveni was recently able to cause a meeting between President Bashir of Sudan and SPLA leader, Dr Garang. The co-operation of the Sudan Government has also helped Ugandan forces flush Lord’s Resistance Army rebels under the leadership of Joseph Kony out of the latter’s camps in Southern Sudan. This reduced these rebels to banditry acts that have regrettably included savage and often fatal attacks on fellow Ugandans in northern Uganda.

Burundi 

Uganda has actively participated in talks designed to bring unity among the various conflicting parties.  

East African Community 

A Customs Union is being negotiated. Uganda is advocating for a 20 per cent common external tariff, while Tanzania and Kenya are advocating for 25 per cent. How to abolish internal tariffs is also being discussed.

Somalia 

Mr Speaker, Uganda acknowledges the interim government in Somalia.

African Union 

The development of the African Union from the Organisation of African Unity is a response to the changing times. Economic and social realities faced by Africa demanded an appropriate response that culminated in the African Union and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).

Official Spokesperson of the Ministry 

The committee was informed that a Department of Information, Policy and Planning has been set up within the ministry although posting of an official has not yet been done. This office will be responsible for ordinary statements pertaining to the ministry in relation to foreign affairs.  

Management of Uganda’s Properties Abroad

The committee was informed that Uganda Property Holdings Limited under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is now responsible for that.

Visa fees for students

Visa fees for students have been abolished.

International jobs 

Mr Speaker, Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda have agreed that when a vacancy appears in the international labour market, all the three countries will put their weight behind the East African candidate who qualifies best. Efforts will also be made to get information on jobs available on the international stage so that applications by East Africans for such jobs are encouraged.

The observations and recommendations made by the committee in regard to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are as follows:

1. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs contributes to the consolidated fund through its conduct of commercial diplomacy and management of relations with other countries. The monetisation of this contribution to Uganda’s economic wellbeing is difficult but it should not be doubted that the flow of funds into this country has a lot to do with the work of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Noting that Uganda is a donor-dependent country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is therefore key to the survival of Uganda’s economy. For this reason, the committee does not agree with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that has categorised the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under Public Administration. The committee is deeply concerned that certain individuals in the Ministry of Finance who are charged with managing the country’s purse have limited appreciation of the vital role of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. These officials see the ministry as a consumer. This is regrettable. There is no civilised country in the world that exercises its international influence without having a strong Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Our country’s influence in the world and the resources it generates for the country through trade with the rest of the world very much depends on how well supported with resources the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is. The committee urges, without any equivocation, that the Ministry of Finance adequately funds this ministry. This would enable it to play the role of reflecting and managing Uganda’s relations and commercial diplomacy effectively.

2. The poor state of our missions abroad is a sore on the conscience of our country. And in ways that may not be readily appreciated, this state of affairs in which the missions are damages Uganda’s prospects for improved trade and international support. The committee recommends that a team from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Parliament and the Ministry of Finance visit a sample of the missions for a comprehensive report to government that would form a basis for a new approach to funding of vital national interests that these missions represent.

3. Uganda’s arrears to international organisations currently stand at about US$7 million. The committee observes that this situation is not in the best interests of our country. The Ministry of Finance should source funds to pay up for this country’s obligations to the organisations in question. The loss in employment for our nationals, as well as other disadvantages arising from non-payment, are incalculable. 

4. Considering Uganda’s historical links with Cuba, the Embassy in Havana should be re-opened.

5. On hiring of vehicles, the committee notes that it is cheaper for government to acquire vehicles through a lease purchase arrangement. Government should explore the possibility of using this method for the country’s missions abroad.

6. The committee recommends to the government to nurture a culture of debating in Parliament those international developments that have enormous implications on our country. A recent case in point is the conversion of the Organisation of African Unity to African Union.

VOTE 034 - MASS MOBILISATION

Mr Speaker, Vote 034 caters for the provisions of the Movement Secretariat. The Secretariat is the administrative organ of the Movement. The authority for the above Vote is provided for by the enactment of the Movement Act, 1997, done in pursuance of Article 70 of the Constitution. 

Following the presentation of the policy statement from the Movement Secretariat, the committee made the following observations and recommendations: I suggest that what I am about to read should have come under the Office of the President, and I have discussed the matter with the honourable minister. He has accepted to regard this particular point under the Office of the President.  

1. The quality of some RDCs and mobilisers leaves a lot to be desired. The post of the RDC is critical. The success or failure of government programs much depends on the office of the RDC. The committee recommends that the office should be adequately funded and those appointed should be persons of integrity, knowledge and commitment. The Secretariat is also called upon to intensify the training of RDCs and mobilisers.

2. The facilities at the National Leadership Institute, Kyankwanzi, should be improved and expanded to cater for large numbers of participants.

3. The committee recommends the continuation and furtherance of restructuring of the Secretariat so that instead of being top-heavy more emphasis is on the grassroots presence.

Budgetary Proposals

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends to Parliament for approval the following for the financial year 2002/2003. 

Vote 001 - Office of the President 
Recurrent expenditure of Shs33,069,000 and Development expenditure - Shs2,030,000.

Vote 002 – State House 
Recurrent expenditure of Shs22,580,000 and development expenditure of Shs20,230,000. 

Vote 004 - Office of the Prime Minister 
Recurrent expenditure of Shs3,223,657,000 Development expenditure Shs56,209,499,000. 

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Recurrent expenditure of Shs10,270,000 and Development expenditure of Shs12,269,570.  

Vote 004 - Mass Mobilisation 
Recurrent expenditure of Shs5,820,000,000 and Development expenditure of Shs583,000,000.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I wish to make a correction on vote 002, which should read: Recurrent expenditure of Shs22,580,000,000 and Development expenditure of Shs25,209,021,000.

On Missions abroad, under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Recurrent expenditure of Shs16,230,000,000 and Development expenditure of 500,000,000. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the Committee -(Applause).

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs for such a very well presented report. I think he is drawing from his experience as a former employee of the Office of the President. I am also happy to associate myself as a former employee of the Office of the President. 

Now, I would like to seek a few clarifications, Mr Speaker.  I felt pain when I heard that the performance of some of the RDCs is wanting. Traditionally, the Office of the President has always had the first call or the best brains in this country, and that is how I got there -(Applause). We are told that the RDCs are senior civil servants. Can I know why the provisions of Article 172(1)(a) of the Constitution are not being followed with regard to recruitment?  

Under that Article, Mr Speaker, the President is supposed to get advice from the Public Service Commission, and under the Public Service Act and the regulations thereto, it is provided that recruitment in the Civil Service is by open competition. In which case, positions of RDCs, Deputy RDCs, Assistant RDCs would be subject to advertisement and people apply for them openly so that all Ugandans have an equal opportunity to become RDCs and Deputy RDCs. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Speaker, RDCs are supposed to represent the President. You cannot pick on anybody to represent the President. So, this question of open competition and advertising in the papers cannot hold. How do you pick on a man who cannot represent your interests?  That is why, Mr Speaker, the President is given liberty to pick on people he feels are capable of representing him.  This is the kind of information I want to give to my colleague. I will come at a later stage to give my information regarding RDCs. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAGONDA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for that information, but if he had stayed long enough in the service like me, he would have known that there are ambassadors –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think when you are addressing an issue that is in the Constitution, you should always refer to the Constitution. I think the relevant provision of the Constitution on this issue is Article 203(1), which provides as follows: 

“There shall be for each district a Resident District Commissioner who shall be a senior civil servant appointed by the President.” 

So where you say he is representing the President, actually he is representing a country, because this is what it says. But the appointment is made by the President; I think that should be made clear.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. The issue I am trying to point out is that these are senior civil servants who are provided for in Article 172(1)(a). The same applies to their method of discipline. I wanted to seek clarification whether the RDCs who were dropped without going through the Public Service Commission would be justified in going ahead to press their case against the state.  

I would also like to seek clarification from the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs as to whether they inquired into the issue of presidential pledges. I was dismayed on Sunday when I saw a cartoon ridiculing the issue of accumulated government pledges. This is a serious matter! It actually brings about dissatisfaction among communities, which wait for pledges that are not fulfilled.  

Besides that, have they also inquired into the effect of such pledges on regular government programmes, which are actually meant to serve the whole country equitably? Inevitably, some of these pledges are being pushed to sectoral ministries to manage. Why were they not left there in the first instance for these sectoral ministries to manage them in the way they had prepared to manage them?

The report talks about the post of the Minister of State in the Office of the Vice President. To the best of my knowledge, I am not aware of any minister in the office of the Vice President currently, although I am aware that there is a candidate who was nominated and approved by Parliament for the post of a minister, but without deployment. Could the committee give me further information on this issue so that the whole country knows whether there has been a deployment recently? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the presenter of this report on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and I would like to support their budget with the following observations: 

First of all, under the President’s Office, under the functions, it is recorded that the purpose of the media is to inform, educate, entertain and mobilise the people of Uganda using multi-media and multi-sectoral approaches.  I am quite disturbed by the way I see our national media, Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. As I speak now, I do not think they can easily play the best functions as far as informing, educating, entertaining and mobilising the people of Uganda are concerned. 

The studios of Uganda Television and Radio Uganda are badly off; they lack equipment. Uganda Television, maybe, for so many years has not had new equipment and cameras used out of the studios. The TV-OB Unit I think last worked during the Referendum. So really, the situation they are working in is so pathetic.  

When you come to Radio Uganda’s FM studio, the workers the other time had not been paid for the last six months. How can they be motivated, and how can they compete with the leading radio stations like Radio Simba, where I happen to belong? How can they compete with a station, which is computerised, which is digital, and the like? As for them, they are using equipment, which was there from the ’60s. 

I do not think our Movement government is fair when it comes to mobilising our people. We remember one President Amin, who was not all that educated but was very concerned and committed to supporting the Ministry of Information. But this government, which has done a lot of mobilisation everywhere - women, youth, the disabled - its national station is in a very pathetic condition! So, I think with this budget, government should see to it that more money is given to get more – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, you have said that you have got a very good radio, Radio Simba, would it be harmful for government to use it to mobilise people?

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: Yes, they have used it. I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. 

Recently, I heard that the Minister of State for Information is coming up with some kind of appeal in Cabinet to stop some of the “bimeeza” shows that have been operating. We thought that these “bimeeza” were supporting government to allow people to use them to speak out their minds, instead of going to the bush to fight government. I think we should support these “bimeeza” to continue because they are partners in development where the Movement and the Ministry of Information have completely failed. So, I want to urge members to give them our support and to give the Ministry of Information our support.

Secondly, we also have a problem in Foreign Affairs. Some time back, some political people were appointed like Mr Birigwa who was to become an ambassador somewhere. He was interviewed by our committee here, but up to now he has not been posted. Just a few hours ago, I was talking to some of the former RDCs who were also posted to the Foreign Affairs Ministry. They were telling me, ‘Please talk for us. We are sitting there, we are not getting any information and so we do not know our plight.’  

So, we want also to inform the Minister of Information that we want to know the plight of these people. If they were retrenched in good faith, let us know. We want to know whether they will be posted in some of our embassies we have abroad. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start from the point of Radio Uganda, which the former speaker has been talking about. I would also like to inform the Minister of Information that some programmes have been removed from the main channel, that is the Red Channel. For example, Ateso programmes. In my constituency, I have Iteso and they complain that they do not receive any of these programmes that they used to receive. I do not know what has happened; we were not informed.

Mr Speaker, my submission is meant to do with micro-finance. This programme has not given proper guidelines to the people who are operating micro-finance institutions down at the grassroots. Many times we have been called upon to pass the Micro-Finance Bill that is coming on to the Floor very soon, but you find that it does not protect the people at the grassroots. Nothing at all has been said about this in the budget statement. There are no guidelines concerning interest rates and also methods of recovery. Methods of the credit money that have been applied are so harsh that you find the people even fear to get credit from these institutions.

I suggest that the amounts that are given to the village banks in the various areas should be the same for the whole country. But you find that the money for micro-finance is concentrated in particular areas. We have tried to mobilise women in the countryside, but they cannot access credit. So, I really do not know what is happening.

This afternoon, I found in my pigeonhole some circular informing me that the project has been transferred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, but nothing has been mentioned about this in the budget statement. I would like to seek clarification on this. Thank you very much.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few clarifications I wish to get from the chairman. Being a member of the Budget Committee, the chairman must be aware that the committee is concerned about the cost of administration, and in particular the number of advisers, assistant RDCs and deputies, and such appointments. I do not know whether the committee was able to inquire into this.  

He also mentioned that the RDCs are not being appointed constitutionally. Would he explain to the House what he meant by that?  

On Foreign Affairs - it is unfortunate that the ministers responsible for foreign affairs are not in the House, because I do not know whether there is somebody properly briefed to answer –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Mwandha for giving way. As you know, we are always disaster prepared. That responsibility has been assigned to hon. Omwony Ojok, who is going to handle the issues efficaciously. He will be assisted by other colleagues as and when the need arises. But we shall sort other problems about their absence administratively. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I am happy that the Leader of Government Business is always disaster prepared. I have some questions on foreign affairs, and I hope hon. Omwony Ojok will give us precise answers. But the questions really are addressed to the chairman.  

There are certain concerns in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I do not know whether the honourable chairman and his committee looked into these. One of them is that Foreign Affairs has a lot of politically appointed foreign affairs officers. This undermines the progress of the career officers, and many of them are not happy.  

The other issue is that a number of officers have overstayed in their stations. There have been attempts in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to recall some of them and to transfer some of them, but many of them have given a lot of excuses for not moving. Others say, ‘You see, I have a sick family, I have to continue taking advantage of the medical services available here, and it will not be fair for me to move at this time’, and so forth. 

Indeed, in one of the missions I found a letter from the minister addressed to President’s Office and to ministers asking ministers to co-operate, because some of the ministers were in fact supporting some of the officers to continue staying where they are. The minister was really begging ministers, ‘Please, these officers should be moved from time to time; others should be recalled.’ It is not an offence for somebody to be recalled to Uganda. I do not know whether the chairman or his committee is aware of this situation and whether they have done anything about it.

There are also some officers apparently, who get appointed from the President’s Office, sometimes without the knowledge of the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In one mission, I found a situation of uneasiness where one officer had arrived and the officer he was replacing was not aware that he was leaving the station. That shows that even the Minister of Foreign Affairs was not aware that in fact this person had been actually posted. So, has the committee looked into this sort of matter?

Also in missions, a number of officers have their salaries in arrears for a long time. I know a case in point; I will not mention the mission, but I found one mission where one of the top officers in the ministry was concerned because the officers were now reporting at 9.30 a.m., 10 o’clock. They were giving excuses like they are sick and so on and so forth, and this was really a sign of frustration, because these people’s salaries were in arrears.  

Is Government taking steps to ensure that arrears of Foreign Service officers are actually paid up? Because these people are not like us who live in Uganda where if you have a problem, you may go to your neighbour and borrow some money or whatever!

Our permanent mission in New York is understaffed to the extent that they are not in a position to service all the committees. And if we are going to be efficient and effective, I think there is need to put more staff in our permanent missions.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, the chairperson in his report mentioned that our properties overseas are now being managed by this company which was created. He did not say much more, but we want to know whether the situation has now improved in terms of maintenance of these premises. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I thank the chairman for a well-written report, well delivered as well. 
Mr Speaker, I have a few comments to make. 

On the issue of Presidential Advisers, this House continues to face the problem of determining what the optimal number of presidential advisors is and their terms of reference, in order to be able to assess their output. We see that the President needs to appoint more professional people to supplement the many political appointments he makes of individuals who are not very knowledgeable about their sectors. I am talking about ministerial appointments.  

On the question of RDCs, I associate myself with the comments by colleagues about their qualifications. We cannot escape that statement in the Constitution that they should be senior civil servants. This was put there in order to establish a standard for these appointments that are made by the President. We wanted to establish a standard and it should be respected.  I observe that we still have RDCs of dubious qualifications. Some of them probably do not even have an “O” level certificate and they are in charge of supervising central government programmes!  

I am concerned about the use of Poverty Action Fund (PAF) to supplement allowances of RDCs. This is not consistent with the objective of PAF. Poverty action funds are part of the HIPC (Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative). We qualified for that debt relief on certain conditions. First, that debt relief would be channelled into poverty sectors only – (Interruption) 

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, honourable Member for giving way. What was put there are some monitory funds given by the planning unit to the RDC. These funds are to be used to provide political leadership because the RDCs have been complaining that they are not facilitated to move and supervise this programme. So, within the planning process, this fund was put there to give them the political supervision. These same funds were given to LC V to provide political supervision.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: I thank the honourable Member for the information he has given. It is precisely that information that I am reacting to, and reacting in protest against. Poverty action funds are intended to be channelled into poverty areas. Some of it is to be used for monitoring how the government is spending this money on the poor. It does not make sense to take that money and give it to a government person to supervise the very government he is serving. In fact, those funds should be channelled to non-governmental actors to supervise how the government is performing, how the government is spending on the poor. That is the purpose of the Poverty Action Fund, but I am surprised to find that now the poverty action monitoring funds are top-up allowances for local government councillors!  The LC V councillors are getting this money as – (Interjection) - will I get more time, these former RDCs are interrupting me!  

Mr Speaker, this goes against the whole objective of debt relief. The donor countries, which gave us this debt relief, were concerned that never again should their money be channelled into wishful expenditures. So, they wanted a mechanism for ensuring that if they forgive us some of the debts, it does go to the poor. 

It does not make sense to me to ask the very person in the government now to supervise himself and tell the donor how he has spent on the poor. That is not supervision, in my understanding of supervision. This money ought to go to non-governmental organisations. And we have a forum now - the NGO Forum, the Uganda Debt Network. These were established in order to receive that money and be the external check on the government on how it is spending debt relief funds.

On GISO, ISO and ESO, we still have a problem of classified expenditure. I am very surprised that this report has not brought our attention back to this problem of how poor taxpayers’ money is being spent in the name of intelligence.  

Recently, I put out, through the press, information about how money started off on an account of the President’s Secretary, went through the account of the Chief of Military Intelligence - one billion shillings - and half of it ended up on the task force of President Museveni. Half of it in cash, in the hands of Noble Mayombo we do not know its end.  

I expected that this committee would be interested in getting to the bottom of this story. In case they did not pick it up in the press, I am still very pleased to give it to them on the Table – (Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give hon. Byanyima is that CMI is under Defence and this committee was handling ISO and ESO, which are under the President’s Office.  

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I did say that this one billion shillings started off on a personal account of the Personal Secretary of the President, a lady called Amelia Kyambadde; that is President’s Office. The question is, ‘how did public funds get to the account of the personal secretary of the President?’ That is the question for this committee; it falls right under the mandate of this committee – (Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable member. If the account is a personal account, how does she know that these funds were from the Consolidated Fund or they are public funds?  

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know this because a person called Mr Noble Mayombo, who is the Chief of Military Intelligence, made an admission that this is money for classified expenditure. I am not the one saying it; they are the ones who have admitted that it is public money.  So, we should inquire and find out how public money is being used. Before the chairman can ask us to vote more money for classified expenditures, he should first take up this story and find out how this money was spent and why it is going through these personal accounts. Mr Speaker, I am pleased to put these documents on the Table for the scrutiny of this committee and other relevant committees so that we approve money with the confidence that public money is going for public causes.  Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the matter the honourable member is raising is such a serious matter that I would prefer that probably the minister responsible should investigate and report to the House rather than saying the Chairman of the Committee should investigate it, so that the House is actually informed as to the origin of this money and how it was intended to be spent, because this cannot simply be ignored. It is a very serious revelation.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I do support that proposal. 

On the issue of foreign policy, again I find this report quite superficial in certain respects - with due respect.  For example, while it commends Uganda’s stated withdrawal from the DRC and mentions that the UN has applauded Uganda, the same report ignores the fact that recently Uganda came before the Security Council for a warning regarding recent clashes in the Ugandan controlled areas of DRC. This is again a serious matter, and we should state it to the government while we give them money that this is not the record we want for our country before the United Nations.

With regard to the African Union and NEPAD, there is a provision in NEPAD for a peer review mechanism, and there is a condition under there that African governments should have a commitment to pluralism in order to access funds that will be raised under the NEPAD initiative. How does the government intend to access these funds given that we are in a one party system? Mr Speaker, this is the question before us.  The mechanism for getting funds from the African Union is clear now, and here we are in a one party state. How are we going to access this money? 

Lastly, regarding international jobs, I support the proposal in the report about supporting candidates who are East Africans. I would like to know also, maybe from the Minister, what is the position of Uganda regarding the executive directorship at the World Bank, which Mr Richard Kaijuka was waiting to fill? How far is the inquiry into the allegations of corruption and should it reveal that Mr Richard Kaijuka is culpable, can we keep that post? Have we got other Ugandans that will have lined up for this post? It is such an important post. It is an opportunity that comes to a country maybe once in 50-60 years, given that it is on rotational basis. Are we just going to lose it, or do we have a strategy for filling it, should it be found that Mr Richard Kaijuka is not the appropriate person to fill the substantive post of the executive director?

I want to know whether in this budget there is a vote to help our Vice President to write and deliver speeches effectively. Is there some support for her so that she tells the truth other than sex, and sexual relationships, so that the image of that office is restored? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to request you to allow me also to thank the committee, which has written a good report. I would like to limit my comments to the inadequacies, which I have observed in the report much as I have praised it that it was a good report.   

The first issue, as usual - the hon. Prime Minister knows my problem – how come this report did not comment on the presidential pledges at all, yet the people of Bulamogi have been waiting and are waiting in an ecstatic way about the pledge of the President giving us a district? This is a very serious matter; people are not sleeping and they are about to march to Parliament here. They will move straight on the issue of the district of Bulamogi. It is not my own making but it is the demand of the people in my constituency. Actually they are disgruntled. They did not vote the Chairman in Kamuli because he became a chairman by default.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, I think we should draw from past experience of how districts were being created.  Normally, I think the person who is responsible for granting districts is the Minister of Local Government. So this does not fall under the President’s Office, it falls under the Local Government.

MR WAMBUZI: Thank you for the clarification, Mr Speaker.  About presidential pledges, I would have expected the committee to make some small comment, and one of the key pledges was actually the issue of the district of Kaliro.

The other thing, which I would like to comment on, is GISOs. From the report, it is clear that the GISOs are eventually being screened. The issue of GISOs is a very serious one and we shall need, maybe, a substantial statement on how these GISOs have been screened because, it is known that they were involved in personalised or factional politics to the extent that some people actually have stopped growing cotton because a certain GISO is interfering with the production of cotton. I think the issue of GISOs is being attended to but, I would like to request you, Mr Speaker, that the minister in charge should give us a more detailed report about the GISOs because they are really key in the issue of the Plan for Modernisation and even for security, which is their basic mandate.

There has been a comment on the RDCs. I thank the committee for the comments in the report, but I think if you move around the country, you will not find the office of the Resident District Commissioners. To find an RDC you have to look for him, he is hidden somewhere. I think it is very important, like other neighbouring countries, that the Office of the President of the Republic of Uganda must be seen significantly in every district. I thought it was a shortfall.  

The other thing, which I feel was important and was left out, is something that I have always been scratching the back of the hon. Prime Minister about, and that is the reporting system in this country from GISO up to the RDC. It should be transparent. It should be possible even after at least three or four months, for people to access what reports are available so that we are all moving together. I think the issue of the reporting system - I will still hammer it on this Floor, that we have to develop a proper reporting system which is legal, which you can say, ‘I book you for this because you did not report this in time.’  

Secondly, the format of this report is something that the Budget Committee recommended that we should have a standard format. When I read through this report, it is certainly very different from the report I read last week or the other week. So it appears we are not moving towards standardising what type of report should be given to the Parliament, particularly when it is to do with the budget.  Why am I saying this? I think it is very important in modern government to measure every ministry.  

In this report, it has been mentioned that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a very important ministry, not administratively but in creating riches. Since it is very important and it is supposed to create riches, we should be able to measure it and find out what monetary value it is to this country. How much money are we putting in, so that we start measuring each ministry? Because any service can be measured; a doctor can be measured. That is why we give him a salary higher than a sweeper because we have measured his value. But in a situation where we have no monetary value attached to each ministry, it is very difficult to say whether we should give them less money or more in relation to what it is likely to produce. I would like the committee to bring that on board next time.  

Again, we are short of measuring our ministries. We cannot actually say this is the performance. When I read through this report, I saw nothing to show that in Result Oriented Management, which the honourable Prime Minister has told us about, it requires to have a method of measuring, and I think I saw it lacking in this report.  

Finally, the issue I want to talk about is the East African Legislative Assembly. It is a pity that our Members in the East African Legislative Assembly voted to make Soroti Flying School the centre of excellence. While actually we exhibit this as our centre of excellence, we shall cry tears when we go to Tanzania or in Kenya and you look at their centres of excellence in tourism. I think we need to add more centres of excellence from Uganda onto that one item so that -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you honourable Member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to inform the Member holding the floor that when Uganda or those Members we chose to go to the East African Community decided on Soroti as a centre of excellence, they did not make a mistake. We have carried out statistics and we found that in ten years, we will need 4000 flights’ crew and they will have to operate a fleet of 469 large body aircraft. The only centre now training such flight crew in the English-speaking countries is Soroti. We need to be encouraged and those Members of the East African Community made a very proper choice. Thank you very much.  

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I thank you very much, hon. Wakikona for pointing that out because it has enriched my speech. What I am saying is that we need more centres because this Soroti Flying School is a future issue, which we must pump in money. But then there are other centres, which you can actually show people that we have got this centre of excellence; like education, like research in virus, like research in agriculture, like medicine. So, I am not against what you are saying.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there is the issue of our decaying industrial base. If you look at what is going on in Kenya and Tanzania in as far as industrialisation is concerned –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, when we started the general debate on the presidential address, we dealt with the budget. Now these matters you are bringing like industrial development, what have they got to do with the president’s office? What have they to do with foreign affairs? These are topics for general debate. Actually when the committees started their work, you were advised that if you have a burning issue that is being handled by the committee, under our rules, you are free to go and present your views to the committee. They would be taken into account when the report is made. 

I am not saying that we are starting a general debate, which was concluded all over again. I think let us restrict ourselves to the kind of debate we have when we are in the Committee of Supply, having said what we wanted to say in the general debate. I assume you had the opportunity - not only you, but also any other Members - to go to the relevant committee to give your views. But please wind up.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Let me wind up by saying that it is the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, who are our ambassadors in the other regions of East Africa, who are actually under this Committee and who are our chief spies on industrial base. What I am talking about is what we heard from these Members. The Members are complaining that when they go to the East African Legislative Assembly, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not sending their money there. They are actually perpetually broke and they are becoming shy even to stand up and speak. 

One of the main tasks of the East African Legislative Assembly from Uganda is actually to do with making sure that Uganda starts approaching the industrialisation level of Kenya and Tanzania. With those few words, Mr Speaker, I thank you.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to begin by thanking the committee for their comprehensive report, and I hasten to seek the following clarification and to make the following observations:  

Mr Speaker, last year on this same Floor of the Parliament, I did raise concern about northern Uganda not having reception of television and Uganda radios. I was told that the equipment was already in the country and that they were going to do something about it in the last financial year.  I will be interested if this committee could relate to us what has happened, because in as far as I am concerned - I came from Arua yesterday - there is no television reception, and there is very faint radio Uganda reception. What has happened to the equipment? (Interruption) Since time is so limited, I wouldn’t like to be disturbed.  

Mr Speaker, I am going to talk on something, which at least will be stepping on other people’s toes. It is about the presidential pledges. For the last nine years, the office of the presidency has given colossal sums of money to cultural leaders. Last week, we witnessed Shs45 million being given towards a wedding. In the same week in a newspaper, I saw the photograph of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister pledging on behalf of Uganda government to give some amount of money towards the repair of the “Twekobe,” something to do with the Buganda Kingdom. That in any way does not wash down the fact that ever since these cultural institutions were re-introduced in this country in 1993, colossal sums of money have been spent on them and there are no pledges that are unfulfilled because of the heavy political weight that they have. Whenever government makes pledges, it meets them timely. How about districts like Arua, Yumbe, Moyo the whole of northern Uganda, Karamoja, Busia, even Western Uganda? Why don’t we believe in those institutions? How can we get our share in form of development?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable Member for giving way. First of all, I did not give the one billion shillings. It was a pledge by His Excellency, the President but I simply informed the relevant institution of this money being available. 

I want to draw the attention of the honourable member to Article 246(3)(c) of our Constitution. It says: 

“a traditional leader or cultural leader shall enjoy such privileges and benefits as may be conferred by the government and local government, or as that leader may be entitled to under culture, custom and tradition”. 

I want also to point out that we should have - if you like to rationalise a little more the approach to this matter - His Excellency the President directed me to ensure that the matter is rationalised and the matter is at hand. I thank you.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have the following to say on the information that has been given to me. First and foremost, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister fell short of explaining the source of that money that is being talked about. Was it His Excellency President Museveni’s personal money or it was from the government coffers? If it is from government coffers, that is the more reason why it is of concern to me.  

Besides that, we are not disputing the fact that there are constitutional provisions that entitle cultural leaders to certain fringe benefits. All I am saying is, if they are getting all these pledges so timely at the expense of developmental pledges, how about other areas where there are no such institutions? Should they continue to suffer because they do not have them? What I am asking is, ‘can it be converted in form of developmental undertakings, so that we know that these regions that I have mentioned are also catered for? Because there are a lot of outstanding pledges, which have not been honoured because they do not seem to have political weight. That is the point I am driving at.  

Mr Speaker, there is also one of the issues which was recommended by this committee, that the RDCs should begin having personal to holder vehicles so that they are transferred with them. One thing that we need to appreciate is the fact that many of the RDCs are not well equipped in as far as transport is concerned. If they are going to have this arrangement of ownership of Vehicles, how easy will it be for the Deputy RDC to access these vehicles for their own use? I think that is something we need to critically examine because having something personal to holder means that you are solely responsible for its maintenance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my understanding here is that this would not deprive the deputy RDCs’ also to have vehicles.  We assume that the deputy RDCs’ and the RDCs will get vehicles, but when one is transferred from Mbarara to Rukungiri, there will be an RDC from Rukungiri with a vehicle. He has been having a vehicle let him come with that one to Mbarara and the one for Mbarara goes with his to Rukungiri. This is to encourage these people to look after these vehicles instead of saying, ‘Well, I run it down, I will go to Rukungiri and find a good one.’ I think that is the policy behind; it is not that the RDC is not getting vehicles.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the explanation you have given, it is just the same way I understood it. As we talk now, there is no place in Uganda where you will find the office of the RDC with more than one vehicle. This policy may be useful for the future, if government can commit itself and make available these vehicles, but as of now, it may be counter-productive.  

Mr Speaker, the last issue that I would like to seek clarification on is about the role of the various directors in the NRM Secretariat, including those who witch-hunt us through the press. I would like to know from this committee whether these directors have got clear terms of reference and job schedules because, many a times their actions and activities, to my own understanding, do not seem to rhyme with the role that is expected of them -(Interruption)

MR STEVEN BASALIZA: The information I would like to give is that the directors have specific schedules. For instance, Mr Obiga Kania is in charge of research.

MR NYENDWOHA: I would like to inform hon. Wadri that the Director of Research and Information is from his place and he is his neighbour. So he could get information from him about their roles. Thank you very much.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much for all the points of information you have given me. The more reason I said that they do not seem to do their work. If Obiga Kania was a Director for Research and he did not research, Terego will know whether he is popular or not and then it means he was not doing his work. That is the point I am driving at. These researchers do not seem to know what their role is. So, it may not only be Mr Obiga Kania; it may be other directors who are there who do not know what is expected of them. So, I should have been happier if this committee, in collaboration or in unison with the Movement Secretariat did come up with that issue.  

On the same issue, another question that I would like to ask is; whose interests do the RDCs and the directors in the NRM Secretariat serve? Are they there to serve the interest of Uganda as a country or they are there to serve the interest of the Movement system that is in place now?  Because, if we cannot clarify that, it becomes very, very, difficult, and that is more reason why there is a lot of animosity out there when some of these officials go in public. You can never mobilise communities unless you are with communities and acceptable to them. I think there is need for us to know whose interest these institutions serve.  

Mr Speaker, last year we painfully approved 60 posts for the frontbench. We thought this number was adequate to help His Excellency, the President in implementing his manifesto but along the way, we have had a lot of appointments in the names of Presidential Assistants and Presidential Advisers, even for the implementation of the manifesto. What are the ministers doing in their respective ministries? 

I look at the manifesto as a holistic programme. Health is there, the roads are there, defence is there, and agriculture is there. All these programmes, in their own annuity settings, have got ministers responsible for them. What is the difference between the role of these ministers vis-à-vis that of the many advisers? Do they ever get time even to advise His Excellency? Do they? And on what subject is he being advised that the Leader of Government Business and his team cannot be able to advise him on? I think these are all burdens on the taxpayer. So, we need an explanation as to what difference lies between the various advisers and these ministers whom we painfully agreed to place there. Thank you.

MR NYENDWOHA MUTITI (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I generally support the report, but I have a few observations to make on the GISOs. 

The Office of the President accepts that the training of these officers was insufficient but I think what we have not admitted is that the recruitment was not transparent. 

Some of these people were either recruited because they had some attachment to the officers in the office, or perhaps their clan-mates or relatives had some attachment to the appointing officers. When in this report they say that the screening exercise is on, I do not know whether it is already completed. But if the recruitment was not transparent, I am also imagining that even the screening may not be transparent.  

Mr Speaker, while I accept that the RDCs should be appointed by His Excellency, for the office of the GISOs, I am requesting that this post be advertised and then be competitively contested –(Interjections)- I am talking of the GISOs, not the DISOs. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

MRS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few comments to make, and I would like to thank the committee for its work but I am seeking clarification. I think they did not give us enough information, for example, on the disarmament in Karamoja. I would have expected more information rather than just one sentence on the progress and even more recommendations.  

According to reports, we are being told that there is still a lot of insecurity in Karamoja, there is still cattle rustling, and there is re-armament; that they are re-arming the youth vigilantes. So, I would like to know how this exercise is going on and how it will help to halt cattle rustling in Karamoja.

My other clarification is from page 8 on office accommodation. And this goes hand in hand with hiring of the President’s motor vehicle fleet on page 9.  

If Uganda was Mr Kato, I think it would have applied for bankruptcy. I cannot imagine Uganda, a nation, failing to raise enough money for the President’s motor vehicle fleet. I think it is a shame! And as the committee rightly recommends and notes, it can really be a cause of insecurity. I would like to be advised and educated on the figures of renting office accommodation and hiring vehicles, vis-à-vis acquiring these vehicles and constructing office accommodation for our ministries. I know the Ministry of Health managed to build one, and I do not know if it is not possible for other ministries to think about building offices.

Lastly, on page 12 - I have been trying to develop some intermediary agencies for Bujenje County in order to benefit from the RMSPA programme, but I have not managed. They tell me they do not qualify. I am surprised that they use intermediaries like NGOs, village banks and in some cases, individuals. I would like to be told the criteria. 

If the intermediary agencies in form of NGOs, companies and village banks can all qualify, I believe there are some individuals who could qualify to pass on this money in Bujenje County. I can tell you we are missing out because we do not have enough intermediary agencies to go to our villages to help our poor people. I would like my people to also benefit, and I want to be advised. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think let four more people contribute and then the minister can respond.

MR AKISOFERI OGOLA (West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy with this report, and I do say before hand that I will support the budget proposed, but I have a few clarifications I will need. 

On page 5 there is this question of the RDCs. I think we need to revisit the status of RDCs. Even though the Constitution states that these people should be civil servants, nevertheless it is impossible for them to remain civil servants in the manner we understand the role of civil servants.  

Civil Servants are supposed to be quiet advisers on political matters; they speak politics with their mouths shut, but a politician speaks politics with his mouth open. These people speak politics with their mouths open, and therefore, they cannot be civil servants in the traditional sense.  

These people should come out clearly as political advisers to the government of the day. They are necessary; every government needs these people, but there is no need to bring them up by the backhand.  We failed in the CA on this matter; we had a long discussion over it and in the end we had them as civil servants. Very well!  

You see this thing bringing problems in the district too. In the district, under the present democratisation process, the head of the district is the elected chairman LC V but there is always a problem between the chairman LC V and the RDC, even on a simple matter as to who takes precedence. That is a clash in the opinion of many. The chairman, who is an elected person in the district, should take precedence.  Can the honourable minister clarify whether this matter has now been cleared between the district head and the RDC? If not, it is, in my reckoning, because of the confusion of the role of a civil servant vis-à-vis politics.

On Page 7, there is a statement at the bottom of the report, paragraph 2, which reads as follows:

“The committee has observed that the integrity and impartiality of some RDCs with regard to political participation has been greatly undermined. The committee recommends that the practice is not healthy for the dignity of the office of RDC, and should be discouraged”.  

I would like to request for a clarification on what exactly is meant by this conclusion, “…impartiality of some RDCs with regard to political participation has been greatly undermined.” What exactly does this statement mean? It is not clear, and there is no need for diplomatic jargons around here. I think reports from the committee should be as clear as possible. That is my observation on that page.

My other observation is on the scholarship scheme, which is on page 9, paragraph 2, which they say is about to be phased out. It says: 

“The committee accepts the assurances of the minister that State House Sponsorship Scheme is being phased out.”  

Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, there has never been clear exposure of scholarships in State House which people would openly seek, either through competition or through examination or otherwise. Now, if it is being phased out, it is being phased out at this point without our knowing how long it has been there and whom it has been for. Is there any way in which the honourable Minister can make it clear to me how much money, for instance, existed under that scholarship? How many students or people benefited? Were they all citizens of Uganda or were others not? Could I kindly be educated? I think it will be to the interest of my constituency also to know that however late it may be, we may begin to pitch camp for it.

I have heard the bell, Mr Speaker, but I have only two points to make. One is on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I am very happy with the observations of the committee with regard to the status of the Foreign Affairs Ministry in this country, and I speak from the point of view of personal experience in the ministry. I have exceptional and high interest in this ministry.

I must say that the status of this ministry of recent has greatly diminished. The enthusiasm of the workers there has diminished. There has been a delegation from the career diplomats - and in this place there has been over-recruitment of political diplomats. I feel that as a country, we need to improve on the status of career diplomats because these are people who choose this business as their profession.

Political appointees are only as good as the government that appoints them. If that government is interrupted in any way, that is also the end of that political opportunity. But the country must go on. And there is the misrepresentation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as a ministry of suave people wearing nice suits and drinking champagne at parties; that is not true!

The definition and programme of Ministry of Foreign Affairs can be summed up in three sentences – to project the image of the country abroad, to provide protection to its citizens abroad both diplomatic and consular, and thirdly, to seek markets in order that the country may become richer.  

Now, all those three have been declining, and I request kindly that the minister clarifies when the career diplomatic service is going to be protected and improved upon. Where do they train the young diplomats whom they are now recruiting in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? Where are they made to improve on their culture and capacity to negotiate? I ask because it is the role of these people to negotiate important treaties into national agreements and all that. Where do they go?  

You can see on the same page that Uganda is in arrears in paying its contributions to international organisations. For most of these organisations, if you are in arrears, you lose your right to vote. Now, therefore, how do we stand at this international position? Are we safe as a country? Are we free to speak with dignity and with our shoulders high?  

Mr Speaker, these are the few questions I have. I do not want to stretch your patience, you have been kind enough, and therefore, I want to stop there. Thank you so much for giving me the opportunity to say something. 

MR ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of the importance attached to this matter, I want to say it again, even though speakers who have come before me have talked about it: the matter of presidential advisers!

As it has been said, the Constitution of Uganda has provided for a much smaller Cabinet and government than what we have today. However, the President in his wisdom came to this Parliament and asked for it to be enlarged to take care of the amount of work to be done - according to him - and to take care of regional balance in the Executive. This Parliament obliged. But it was to my surprise that after all that had been done, the President has been appointing a lot of presidential advisors. 

I would have therefore wished this committee to have told us how many of these advisors there are today and what areas they really advise in, which our ministers cannot do. I would have wished to know how much money is being paid to these people, whether there is a system and how it was determined – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to interrupt you, but when you are considering these reports from the committee, you should also consider what was in the policy statements given by the various ministries concerned. You have these copies and what is in them is the same information, which they included in the reports you have. You got a copy of the policy statements, so I think it should have been at the time you got copies of the policy statement and you felt very strongly on some of the contents, that you should have gone to the committee and opposed. This information is not new, but proceed. 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. I will do it next time, but I want to ask this committee, since this matter is for review, that they take keen interest and take these issues into account.  

I do not know what some of these presidential advisers advise on but I know about one or two who can hardly read or write, and I think this is a serious matter. If our President wants to be advised correctly, he should take on people who can really advise appropriately and give value to the money, which we pay to them. I think this matter should be taken very seriously, and I hope we shall not come back to discuss it again.  

The matter of RDCs to me is a very serious one. Some of these RDCs, if not many of them, are very serious political meddlers. In my area, in the last election, the RDC became almost an official campaign manager of certain candidates. I think this is a very serious matter because when we pay our taxes and when the RDCs are paid, I do not think they are paid so that they later on become campaign managers of certain people. This is what I have noted in this report. 

I am hoping that the minister responsible for his area will take this into account and ensure that the RDCs, the ISOs, ESOs and the GISOs do not become campaign managers because this has the effect of undermining the efficiency of this office as has been noted. But again, it has the effect of antagonising the community and the Office of the President, which they represent. I think this is totally unnecessary; it should be avoided.

We have raised the issue of pledges by the President. The President has not pledged much in my area, I will not ask him to pledge because I think it is his right to decide to pledge as he wishes, but I want to note that this is a very serious matter. We have noted that whenever the President has been invited for certain occasions, he has either not failed to attend or sent some people to attend on his behalf. When he does so, pledges are made. 

I just want to note here that when we had a new bishop installed in the diocese of Lango, the President was very effectively represented by the Vice-President, however, we were expecting pledges to come as usual but none came, and we are a little bit worried.

In Lango now we have a cultural leader whom we call Onyansi. Not many months ago, our Onyansi wedded, and for us we were expecting the usual presence from the President’s Office but unfortunately, this too seems not to have materialised. But maybe I can be corrected. The President was competently invited with a properly written letter, signed and sent in time but nothing came out.  

Mr Speaker, we are raising these matters in the context that the Office of the President, being the fountain of honour, should be seen to be fair and equitable to all sectors of the community. I hope the minister responsible will take this as a very genuine concern for Uganda and our solidarity.  

Lastly, I want to seek for guidance from the chair.  Hon. Winnie Byanyima raised the issue of the one billion shillings of Mayombo. I remember hon. Mwandha proposed that there should be an investigation and a report to this Parliament. We know that public funds are very important to us. We want to know what happens to all the money we give out and how they spend it and for what reasons.  If it is true that this money was spent for election purposes, I think this is a very serious matter. Would I know from you, Mr Speaker, whether it is taken that in fact the minister will make the investigation and report to this august House? Thank you very much.

MR BEN ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I have very few observations to make and I will ask the Minister holding the portfolio of Foreign Affairs to clarify.  

I am satisfied with the committee’s report and I only want to say something on salaries of Foreign Service officers, as it has been mentioned about them getting their salaries in arrears. Somebody said he found Foreign Service officers in a certain mission had not got salary for six months yet in Uganda salaries are paid by the 28th. 

In the 1960s when I was in the Foreign Service – I am not talking about that - I was in Foreign Service in 1960s; from 1966 to be precise. We used to get salaries before the home civil servants. If we fail to do that, then my humble recommendation to the ministry is that we have friendly countries. We should ask them to take care of our missions and we close because that is a very big embarrassment to our country. And this is why we are always rated the poorest because these European countries pick it from our missions when our Foreign Service officers start going for Kyeyo or work at night. Because I am told they report to the office very late. They must be working at night! 

In London, for instance, where I was for six years, I do not see how you can get a penny from anybody unless it is from your own pocket. So, I think our Foreign Service Officers must be as they call it, “Kukuba Kyeyo”. I think what I would suggest is that maybe we close up some embassies and- (Interruption)

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. The issue of salaries is a fundamental one, and I did set up an inter-ministerial committee chaired by Mr Mitala. Currently, he is the Head of the Public Service. And while he was chairing that one, I have visited many missions and they have told me that the issue of salaries and allowances has greatly improved. But if any mission abroad reported that they were not getting their salaries and allowances on time, then either the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or even the missions abroad has to explain. 

It was incumbent upon Mr Mitala to ensure that subject to Article 173 of our Constitution, which safeguards public servants, those people will be disciplined. So, that is no longer a major issue. But what is a major issue is that their money, for example, for rent and other requirements arrives late. I think it is not proper to argue, as we do, that the first call on the budget is salaries and so on. Other issues can shrink when the in-coming money has not arrived, when our budget is small. I think that is the problem. The Minister of Foreign Affairs will be submitting a paper concerning the ranking of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the way forward; how we can ensure that they get properly remunerated. 

I do also agree that we have not done very well, and whenever I travel, I visit them and I talk to them. I do not think we have done a good job; we can do better. So, it is a matter we must address because on the one hand, our image has been positively globalised, but the way we have run our missions has tarnished, in some respects, the image we have earned. So, it is a matter, which government is addressing. I thank you.

MR ETONU: I thank the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for that information. In fact, I have also learnt another thing. I am now going to give him that. In fact, it is even maybe better to delay salaries of our staff but rent is even worse. I think we would even pay rent before the salaries because they will be locked out and you can even be taken to court, which is a very big embarrassment.

Mr Speaker, I am now going to move to the issue of the RDCs. I do remember this issue was discussed and we really argued for a long time in the CA, to which I was privileged to be a member. My humble request is that maybe consideration be given for RDCs appointments because the President appoints Permanent Secretaries, he appoints Under Secretaries - least those upper scale of the civil service. Since these RDCs are supposed to be senior civil servants, the proposed names should be sent quietly to the Public Service so that they are interviewed and appointed. 

This will also maybe go along way with the appointment of ambassadors because somebody raised a point here that our ambassadors were approved in the Appointments Committee - Ibingira I think is his name - has not yet maybe reported. I would like to say that when one is appointed an ambassador, the name is sent to that country he is supposed to go to. Sometimes that country can delay to accept. This maybe the cause but I would rather the name is sent before the approval is sought by the Appointments Committee. Those are the few remarks. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate colleagues are tired. I thank the committee for its report, but I have a few clarifications I am seeking first on page 16. There is a company being talked about, Uganda Property Holdings Limited, under the Ministry of Finance which is now responsible for the management of Ugandan properties abroad. I would like to know, what is government policy on doing business? I thought the present policy of government was to move out of doing business. Why is government forming parastatals at this juncture to do business? In whose names are the titles to these properties abroad? Is it in the name of this new parastatal or in the name of the Republic of Uganda?

Three, this is a legal matter: What happens to the immunity of these properties abroad now that they are managed and maybe owned by a company? Can somebody give me a satisfactory answer as to what happens to the immunity of these properties? And you should also tell me, what was the policy behind diplomatic immunity on a country’s properties abroad?

Mr Speaker, on page 15, the committee addresses regional issues and says the following countries’ relations with Uganda were discussed. It mentions Congo, Sudan and Burundi. To my knowledge we have other neighbours; one of them is Rwanda. A year ago, the Minister in charge of Security stood here and declared this country hostile. A few weeks ago, there have been accusations and counter-accusations about relations with this country. Why did the committee not discuss this particular relationship of this country Rwanda? Maybe I can ask another question. Is it all well with Rwanda, or it is that bad that it cannot even be discussed?  

I go to page 12. Again, Rural Micro-Finance Support project. Around two months ago, Mr Speaker, I was walking out of Parliament with around ten ladies from my constituency, and I bumped into hon. Mondo Kagonyera - unfortunately, he has walked out. I told him that these women had defaulted on their loans with these micro-finance projects - only ladies. They had come to me to bail them out. 

The point I am trying to make is that, does government have a policy on controlling the interest rates of micro-finance support projects? Does it have? Because, Mr Speaker, as you realise, in any commercial institution, loan interest has been going at 18 per cent per annum and the country has been crying. These are people who have been doing legitimate and big business until it has come to 12. They are saying it is now 12 and it is manageable. For Any micro-finance institution, on average the interest is 15 per cent per month. In a year you are talking of over 180. I want somebody to give me a satisfactory answer, Mr Speaker. What business will one do to make sure that he is able to pay this 180 plus interest, and also have something left for him worth to do the business? What business –(Interruption)

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I have a personal experience of what he is talking about, but in my case they were not women, these were youth. They came to me just a month ago crying because their property was being taken away. The few chattels they have: the chairs, the radios were being taken away because they had failed to pay back the loans! What did I do? I had to guarantee that loan and I am repaying it.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. I know he said I had walked out but I was listening to him. Maybe it is my memory, which is not correct, but I certainly do not remember the ten ladies he is talking about -(Laughter). If he was talking to someone else who resembles me, that is another matter and I am very honest about this. After all, normally we would not be conducting business merely in the lobby. The right place is the office and most likely, like I have invited him to my office several times to discuss issues of micro-finance, I would have asked him to send these ladies to my office. I usually call my staff and find out the circumstances under which these people got their loans and the reasons why they have not been able to pay back. That is how we conduct business and that is how we are capable of being proud of recovery rates averaging above 93 per cent.

Secondly, hon. Katuntu has said that the average interest rate is 15 per cent per month. Mr Speaker, I cannot speak for the more than 300 organisations involved in micro-finance in this country, but I can speak on behalf of RMSP. Until recently, we were retailing our money and we were not lending this money at any more than three per cent per month - that is our office - which went up to 36 per cent per annum. 

I do agree with Members that 36 per cent as a figure is high, but what Members must do is to go back and do a bit of accounting and establish for us whether you can retail this money at a lower interest rate and be able to sustain that micro-finance institution. A choice has to be made: either you charge a rate that is going to help you sustain the programme or you charge a lower one and you are sure to flounder, or you are a charitable organisation, which we are not. So, Sir, those are the two things I owe to hon. Katuntu should be privileged - and the House - to learn about. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have no intention to lie and certainly I could have said any other minister but I had to say Prof. Mondo Kagonyera because he is the one who talked to me then. He even talked to the ladies in fact. But anyway, he said that maybe his memory has a problem because I remember it vividly. We had a chat and they had not come here to discuss business with Prof. Mondo Kagonyera. They had come to see the area Member of Parliament, and when I was going out with them, we bumped into him and we had a chat for almost ten minutes. But as he says, he does not trust his memory any more.  

The point I am trying to make is that there is what we call social capital in economics. What hon. Mondo is talking about is the recovery. What happens? They no longer lend this money to an individual. They get you in a group of about ten and that money is lent to one person but guaranteed by the ten people such that if there is a default, then you can imagine how all of them have to suffer because they must pay that loan jointly. 

The success, especially of the ladies, should be understood.  What happens if my wife got such a loan and she defaulted? I will sell my cow and bicycle to pay back that loan and tomorrow in their books she would look like she is doing very well. But she is being shock-absorbed or cautioned from some other source! So, the point I am trying to make is, let government have a policy on the interest rates.  It is robbery to imagine that somebody would do business on a loan at 150 or 180 per cent. It is daydreaming; you can never –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there was a study by the Makerere Institute of Social Research on micro-finance. The study established that unless these women are borrowing more than Shs500,000, they remain in perpetual poverty. So, in addition to a policy on interest rates, I think you should look at the bigger social effects of poverty to prosperity.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you can see the problem. These women are not even lent Shs300,000.  They are given Shs100,000, Shs50,000; you can see! The effect of this one is that you are impoverishing our people more and more. You are not improving their livelihood. So, the choice which the honourable Minister is talking about which must be made is whether we keep this project for the sake of having a project which is micro-finance and our people are getting poorer and poorer or we address this particular issue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, when I read the report from the committee, I had expected one recommendation which was not in. I wish the chairperson could listen. I had expected one recommendation that government scraps off the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness because it cannot cater for it. When a disaster happens, the Ministry of Disaster has to apply for funds from the Ministry of Finance. As they wait for the Ministry of Finance to release the funds or if they do not release, a lot of damage is being done on the ground.

Mr Speaker, I will give a live example of the returnees who were sent from Tanzania and were put in a valley in Kikagata. The Ministry asked for funds to settle them, up to now it has never got the funds! The Ministry has been changed into a co-ordination centre to look for NGOs who can donate so that they resettle their people. Now, the donation has been made, the people are resettled in Kamwenge, but another disaster may happen, you cannot provide funds for their services. So, why do we not have a co-ordination office instead of having a ministry, which we cannot accommodate in the budget? I do not know whether the Committee studied that. Why should we create a ministry that we cannot –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think it was the other week when the minister in charge of this ministry made a statement on what he was doing about disaster. We took some time discussing this issue of disaster and the inadequacy of funds given to this ministry. We had an exhaustive debate and criticised the government funding to this particular ministry. I remember we did that.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but that is a concern that we might remove a disaster from one place and transfer it to another place. Once you take people and not provide for them, disaster might happen in that area. So, I had expected that recommendation. I do not know why it skipped their memory. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: This is relevant information. Some time last week during a workshop organised by the Budget Committee and Bank of Uganda, we were informed as Members of Parliament by the Governor himself that there are reserves in the Bank of Uganda waiting for disasters. I believe government should take advantage of this. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for considering me on this. I just have only one thing. The rest of the things I wanted to discuss were covered. There is one statement on the telecommunication component of Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme. 

The committee was informed that, that component was implemented by the ministries of Finance and that of Works and Housing. I am first of all perplexed that this component could have been implemented by the Ministry of Finance, given what I know about the functions of the Ministry of Finance. I am even more perplexed that the committee actually did not take trouble to find out whether this statement was true or not. To the best of my knowledge, no telecommunication component related to this has been implemented.

Some time in the first session of this Parliament, hon. Norbert Mao raised this issue, I think it was a loan of about four million dollars and no satisfactory answer was given. I am a Member of the Committee on the National Economy. We raised this issue and it was again swept aside. I would like to know the truth of this from the minister responsible. I think the money was spent and probably it is cheaper for them to tell us that the money has been spent rather than saying that the project has been implemented by the Ministry of Finance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think this ends the observations and comments from the Members. It is now time for the Minister answering for the Presidency to do so then we come –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, before we answer issues pertaining to the office of the President, I would like to do two things. One is to thank the Chairperson of the Committee and honourable members for this wonderful presentation. The other, Mr Speaker, is to request my colleagues in the office of the President, particularly hon. Basoga Nsadhu who is in charge of the Information Department, to make his input and then later on I will come in.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Mr Basoga Nsadhu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my senior colleague for the opportunity. I want, first of all, to thank the honourable members of the House for the very useful observations that they have made in relation to the department of information. 

The observations, which have been made by Reverend, my colleague in the profession, are correct. Our equipment, which we are operating now compared to modern technologies, are all obsolete. It is a correct observation and I hope that you will move with us in the various stages that we shall undertake in order to revamp the whole system. 

Mr Speaker, the government is doing something about this sorry state: For the last so many years, we have been putting emphasis on expansion of the network - that is increasing the area of coverage of radio and television - and my brother from Terego, stop intimidating me. 

We have two projects, which are under way. We have got the RSI project and the COMISAT project of which our friends from the Terego area and other neighbouring places were supposed to have benefited. But colleagues in this Parliament will appreciate that when we run a cash budget, even the well-intentioned programmes that we had intended to implement suffer along the line, especially when you know that we get budgetary cuts. So, along the line, some of the programmes for which equipment had already arrived in the country - because we could not pay the contractors in time because there was no money - stalled. That is how your project got affected.

Also, we have a second project, which we have initiated through the Ministry of Health. We call it the Health Project. It is being funded by the World Bank to help us disseminate information on STDs and other health related programmes.  These two programmes are on course, and with the little money that we have received under Vote on Account, we have done some work.  

Mr Speaker, the government has also applied for a third component, which will help us revamp the whole system. This is a Japanese grant, which will help us rehabilitate emphatically the UTV studios. This grant in totality will be implemented in phases but it will cost about US$14 million. This grant when implemented -(Interruption)- let me come, I am coming. I have prepared myself and I will answer your problem. This grant, we do anticipate that it will take television to areas like Moroto; it will take television to the areas of Soroti so that we save them the long masts, which they must put up before they can receive a TV signal. It will also take television to areas of Gulu.

For Arua, Mr Speaker, this financial year we are going to revive television services there. This money is available. There is a Committee of Parliament on Assurances, and I am prepared to face them to be brought to book if this is not done. In the meantime, colleagues who come from Arua should know that we have already installed FM Radio equipment and they have been tested. This equipment has been put at Ombaci. As I talk now, a signal is being played. The people may not understand what has happened, but it is there. They get this signal and very soon I will be moving there to commission that station.

Also, FM equipment has been installed at Lira and communication is about to take place there. But, of course, our colleagues from Gulu know that we have already installed a new and much more powerful station in Gulu, which has been baptised Mega FM and it is already on air.

Mr Speaker, let me quickly make a comment about re-designing our programming in the face of the new liberalised media. At Radio Uganda, we have done some re-programming and we have put some of those dialects from the East on Butebo channel. We have concentrated them there, but we have gone further and improved on the signal, not only to cover the eastern section, but we have also boosted it to cover areas of Jinja and Kampala. We have not reached Masaka yet. So on Butebo, where Ateso is, you can receive it very ably in Kampala and very soon Butebo will be covering the whole of the Eastern Region.

Mr Speaker, Ateso news and personal announcements are still running on the Red channel as well as on Butebo channel. Should my colleagues who come from that area, have specific complaints, you are free to come and we discuss. I want to remind you that our public function is to serve the Ugandan community, which speaks 57 dialects. We must find a method of accommodating most of these dialects. So, we had to do some reprogramming internally. 

Finally, last Thursday we had a press discussion on this issue of Bimeza. I think there was a misunderstanding. The letter, which the Bimeza people were talking about, did not originate from the Office of the President, instead it originated from Abakulu b’ebika who wrote to their Kabaka saying certain things about the way the programme of Bimeza or Mambo Bado was being conducted. So, we clarified this matter. Should we have any other views to present on it, definitely we have the avenues and we shall pronounce ourselves. So, for the time being, the Bimezas are continuing. I thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, a lot was said about RDCs and I am very, very grateful for the clarification which the Chair made and the various interventions which Members made that went a long way to clarify some of these issues which Members had with regard to RDCs. There is, however, one aspect, which I think I should throw light on. 

Hon. Wagonda Muguli asked about RDCs who were supposedly dropped, couldn’t they go to court to press for their rights?  

In the recent appointment of RDCs, these people were not technically dropped; they were however re-deployed and sent to various other ministries. A number of those in that category have actually been catered for. A few, unfortunately, who are supposed to go to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs have up to now not yet been placed. But I have been made to understand that efforts are being made to make sure that this category of officers is catered for. They are not, therefore, dropped and they will not be justified to sue government.  

With regard to presidential pledges, it is true that over time they have accumulated. Why, because these pledges are made as a result of a need. A community has a need, they approach the President to have that need solved and the President in his wisdom makes that pledge. However, the situation is not as bleak as it appears, much as they have accumulated. During the last financial year, Finance released some money and the office of the President and State House were able to reduce the bulk of the pledges from Shs6 billion to Shs4 billion. So, there is a downward trend, and I think a reasonable policy has been adopted to request the President to tone down on the number of pledges. Fortunately, he has agreed. There is every hope that if we go along those lines, and if Finance releases more money, we shall come to a time not in the far distant future, when these pledges will be a matter of history.

It is true there is yet no substantive Minister in the Office of the Vice-President and yet we know somebody was approved by Parliament to be appointed to a ministerial position. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the appointment of ministers and their disappointment is actually the prerogative of the President. When it pleases His Excellency to have a Minister in the office of the Vice President, so will it be. I think this is quite clear in Articles 111 to 114 of our Constitution.   

The question of advisors: These advisors are appointed according to a certain set of criteria and they are appointed to fulfil certain roles. Certainly, as we talk today, they have their terms and conditions of service clearly spelled out. There is no way they conflict or contradict with ministers. 

Many of these people are specialists in their various fields where they are supposed to advise the President. They have more time to study more deeply into those particular fields, much more than, let us say, a minister who was given the task of ministerial work plus the fact that he has to be a Member of Parliament, he has to nurse a constituency, plus many other activities. These people have time; they delve into their area of speciality and are therefore able to give the right advice, which the President wants. It does not mean, therefore, that the ministers are incompetent or they are not doing their work. They are doing their work. 

You can take the example of Makerere University where we have professors and lecturers, yet we even have research assistants who delve in and focus on one small area and come up with some advice and some write-up which can be depended on.

The question of PAF funds being used by RDCs to carry out one of their cardinal roles of co-ordinating and monitoring the performance of Government, I think the honourable member who raised this, hon. Byanyima, got this a little wrong. These funds have not been used by RDCs to top up their allowances. No! These funds are in fact in-built in the various projects, in the various activities specifically for monitoring. 

Monitoring has been done in the past by various agencies. It was felt that the RDCs, since it is one of their roles to keep track of government performance, should also have access to those monitoring funds, which are in-built, to carry out their monitoring and report. 

Yes, ideally maybe we should have a complete separation of powers that nobody in government should even carry out a monitoring function and the monitoring should be done by somebody who is completely alien and not in anyway connected to government, but under normal circumstances, Mr Speaker, this is not possible. It is a normal procedure even in accounting that you have an internal auditor to take charge of your accounts, who is part of the organisation and then eventually you get an external auditor. So, what is wrong with an RDC who, after all, for all purposes is not part and parcel of the local government, but who is there to safeguard the interest of government? And it is even in his interest to make sure that the interest of government is safeguarded; what is wrong for him to carry out this monitoring role? We have had a number of NGOs also who can actually be questionable.

On the question of classified accounts for the ISO, GISO and the ESO, if we analyse the Auditor General’s report for this year, it is quite clear that a lot of progress has been made in making sure that accountability is in place. At least now Parliament, through an agreed on arrangement, can have access to these accounts and even look at the audited accounts. I do not therefore feel that honourable members should be worried about these classified accounts. 

I am quite sure that come next financial year, the Auditor General will be able to present audited accounts of the classified expenditure. I therefore appeal that there should be no quarrels over this kind of thing. Why don’t we let the process that has been put in place work, and if it is not satisfactory in the end, then and only then, can we take steps to improve that system.

It may be true that the people who want to assist us are committed to pluralism, and maybe because we have a Movement type of government, we may not have access to some of these coveted funds. At the moment, a constitutional review programme is going on and we do not know what report it will come up with, with regard to this particular issue. But also, there are various constitutional requirements. In case we need to change our political system, there is a way, and I think one should not get worried about this. When it becomes necessary, we shall follow those channels to answer this particular concern if it is true.

On the alleged corruption of Mr Kaijuka, I think the committee has been put in place, let us wait. It was made in the policy statement.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I think the hon. Minister of State is moving extremely well. He should, however, have added that when hon. Byanyima described the Movement System as a one party system, she was really saying that we are defying Article 75 of our Constitution. It says, “Parliament shall have no power to enact a law establishing a one-party state.” 

We don’t have a one-party system here and Parliament has no power to even enact a law establishing one. There is a difference between a one-party system and the Movement System. Where you have a one-party system, people can even be thrown out of the system, as it happened in Tanzania. But when you have a caucus, they come here and take different positions but we do not throw them out of the Movement System. We have simply cajoled and counselled them. So, we must differentiate between a one-party system and a Movement System to which we all belong, and where you cannot be thrown out. If we throw you out, where will you go? I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I thought that the Prime Minister was going to comment on the request, which we have humbly made, that this matter of the Shs1 billion should not be put underneath the carpet. A clear investigation should be carried out and this House should be informed accordingly. 

The honourable Member has even tabled documents as evidence. I thought that the Prime Minister was going to say that the Minister of State should have given a categorical commitment to investigate this matter and report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are still going on with responding to members’ concerns, this is one of the issues that you may have to address.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I would like to continue. We shall perhaps come back to this issue as I try to wind up. 

It is true that Her Excellency has someone who helps her with her speeches. There is a speechwriter in State House who writes the speeches of His Excellency and Her Excellency. We feel that this person is doing a good job. And to the best of my knowledge, the speeches that Her Excellency has made since she assumed that office, are very many. I cannot say that all of them actually refer to sex or have sexual references.  

It is also true that our GISO have been screened; the exercise was quite strenuous. First of all, the annual reports on these GISO were used. A special team from the Internal Security Headquarters went to the districts where these GISO operate, armed with the annual reports about their performance. They interacted with their immediate bosses and the District Security Committees to help judge the performance of these GISO. 

The exercise was done without fear or favour. You can actually rest assured that at the end of it all, when we have the money for training and we begin recruiting, we shall have a good core of GISO. Those who will have gone through the screening will actually be trained, and those who will have been found wanting, will be relieved of their duties.

Mr Speaker, I have noted the point on signposts. It is a very useful point. Signposts should be put in place, indicating the offices of RDCs.

With regard to the recruitment of GISO, at the moment it is not possible to make advertisements for people to apply, then be short-listed, interviewed and appointed. Why?  Because of the nature of work they are going to be doing. We tend to rely on the spotting method, which is a little bit more comprehensive now. 

We spot, say three or four people in a sub-county and the names are given to the Chairman of the sub-county Security Committee, who makes a recommendation on each of them and ranks them. Their appointment relies on the Director General of the Internal Security Organisation, based on the kind of report that has been made on these people.  

For the time being, given our level of development, and at times intricate and conflicting interests that we seem to have in this country, we are not quite ready for that broad method of advertising. But even in the parts of the world where conditions are a lot better, these people moved away from that kind of thing. They still use the spotting method.

Hon. Kabakumba wanted to know more about the disarmament and she gave us useful information about the Karamoja situation. She wants to have a status report. Indeed, the disarmament exercise is going on and is still on course. There is no evidence of re-armament as she reported. What we have, however, are the 60 armed LDUs per sub-county. We are now trying to raise the figure to 146 per sub-county. At the moment, that difference between 60 and 146 is under training and when the training is over, they will be armed and deployed inside Karamoja to take charge of the security situation there. For the districts or sub-counties bordering the country and the county of Labwor, they will have a bigger number of 298 because these are exposed to greater threat from outside.  As we talk today, over 10,000 guns have been recovered from the Karimajong warriors, both voluntarily and involuntarily. The exercise is going on and is still on course. Mr Speaker, I think that can suffice on the disarmament exercise in Karamoja, given the limitations of time.  

On the question of hiring and renting vehicles, it would certainly be cheaper if we had the money and bought our own, but because we do not have enough money, we are forced to take this measure, which we do not like. I am sure that if we progressively get the money we require, then this exercise of hiring vehicles for the President and the presidential entourage would definitely stop.

Hon. Ogola talked about the impartiality of RDCs in political issues, and the undermining of their status. Well, I think the committee also raised it that some RDCs start taking sides after spending some time in an area. There were some GISO who took sides in the political contest. Definitely, it is not our policy to for instance encourage GISO to take sides because these people serve their community members. We have cautioned and advised these people a number of times not to take sides. However, where they refuse, some action has been taken. I think honourable Members are aware that there are some GISO who have actually appeared in court for having acted contrary to our directives. Mr Speaker, that seems to be all. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. James Mwandha is going to stand up again and say that you have not answered the question of the cheque.

MR MURULI MUKASA: I would like to concur with the honourable Member. This was a matter handled by the Directorate of Military Intelligence, if we are to follow the statements that were laid here on Table. Surely the Directorate of Military Intelligence squarely falls under the Ministry of Defence. I think it would be more appropriate if this concern were addressed to that ministry. However, a mechanism has been put in place for auditing classified expenditure. We know that the classified expenditure comes from Item 7010, Office of the President and then the Internal Security and External Security Organisations. Whether this money came from 7010 or not, is not clear. I cannot, therefore, come up with a categorical statement. I cannot say what is going to happen and what is not. I would request very humbly that this matter be addressed in the area where it fits most. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I think hon. Byanyima made a statement to the effect that a secretary from the President’s Office was involved, so it cannot simply be a matter for the Ministry of Defence. I think the minister is avoiding responsibility. Unless he wants to suggest that there will be a joint investigation between the Ministry of Defence and the President’s Office, what is necessary is to inform the House of what is going on. 

This is a very serious accusation, with evidence provided on the Table of the House. There is no way we as a House, if we are respectable, can simply go away and not get to the bottom of this matter, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As the minister has said, the person featuring here falls under the Ministry of Defence. Soon we will deal with the report from the committee handling the Ministry of Defence. This is a question that will definitely come up and then we will hear from them. He has said this does not fall under him so we should leave it at that. The lady mentioned, one Kyambadde, I do not know whether she was working for the Ministry of Defence in that capacity, or for the President. But I think the matter will come up when the time comes.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I wish to preface my remarks by thanking the committee and the honourable Members of Parliament for many useful comments, which have been made. I suggest that we move as follows - I do not want to be autocratic and centralise the affairs of my ministry. I shall make some remarks and then ask the relevant ministers to supplement me here and there. 

Let me begin with the report itself. It says,

“The committee was informed that the telecommunications component of NURP was implemented by the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Works.” 

It must be understood that the Prime Minister’s Office executes this project. The Ministry of Finance gives us money and the Ministry of Works gives us technical support. We shall hold a meeting to further sort out the issues that may arise when we are dealing with this component. When the Belgium Grant of 4.2 EQ was discussed by Parliament, members were saying, ‘why should government give money to UTL, which had been privatised?’ There were initial concerns that a privatised institution should find its money and so on and so forth. 

After a great deal of explaining, it was agreed that UTL should implement this project. But obviously we shall have a meeting between the Ministry of Works and Finance and UTL to sort out any problems that may arise. We are, however, still executing this project. The alleged theft does not arise and if anybody still thinks that we are thieves, the IGG can actually probe us. They can go to the courts of law to prove this. We have nothing to hide. This is public money and we cannot steal money that belongs to a deprived area of Uganda. Never! Never! Of course, culprits will be imprisoned or they will be harshly treated, if anybody has evidence to the effect. 

May I also deal with the issue of Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF)? It was said to be under separate management, but it is supervised under my office. We take political responsibility for it, and we also monitor this programme. Recently, hon. Didi asked for more staff, a matter that is being handled by a technical committee in the Prime Minister’s Office. Ministers and our top management are handling the matter, and then we shall refer it to the Ministry of Public Service. When it is satisfied that we require the requisite personnel, the matter will be referred to a sub-committee of Cabinet, chaired by no other than Her Excellency, the Vice-President. It will then be taken to Cabinet for resolution. So those are some of the issues, which I think we should not confuse.

I move on to micro finance. My colleague, hon. Kagonyera, who is articulate and incisive, will be making a number of clarifications on this. Let me however say this. The Rural Micro Finance Support Project (RMSP) was transformed into a company limited by guarantee. There is now a board in charge of ensuring that this matter is run properly, and it has a measure of autonomy.

In accordance with a decision of Cabinet, the Ministry of Gender shall take charge of the policy of this company. Only last Friday, I directed the Permanent Secretary in my office to interface with the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Gender, and hand-over any relevant information, assets and other liabilities, if any. So, that matter is at hand. I do not want anybody to say that the Prime Minister’s Office is hanging on to a matter that should belong to the Ministry of Gender. Why should we? We have enough to deal with. So, that must be made clear.  

Then the issue was made that the committee recommends that transparency must remain the cornerstone of RMSP’s management. Of course, we are transparent. That is why hon. Prof. Kagonyera, who is in charge, gave you copies of this document called “Basic Facts about Rural Micro-finance Support Project - Office of the Prime Minister.” 

If you read point 3.1 - Criteria for Accessing Loans, you will note that a person must be Ugandan citizen, be 18 to 65 years of age. Some of you who are over 65 may not qualify. People must be economically active-poor. “Active poor” is important because this is not a charity, as hon. Prof. Kagonyera said. They must be people of integrity and honesty, be industrious or enterprising, have at least six months’ experience in the business and sufficient skills for operating it, and be of sound mind and good health. They should not have an outstanding loan from any other source, and have their residence and business in the same area. The document is clear. We have discussed these programmes over FM radios. I remember participating in one when we were in Ankole. So we have been transparent and of course, as you know, our activities are audited. We have nothing to hide. 

It was recommended that we should also consider other parts of Uganda so that the benefits of the projects nationally spread. We have made plans to cover 56 districts and so far we have covered 45 of them, I think. Active plans are there -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Right hon. Prime Minister, if you agree with the recommendations of the committee, why do you not answer questions that have come from the members?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Oh, I thought that these recommendations are also raising problems at the same time. For example, they raised the question of transparency, Mr Speaker, so I was concerned.  

There was also the question of the areas in the north accessing loans. I said that Apac has so far received Shs213,052,000, Gulu Shs181,533,000, Lira Shs375,264,100, and Kitgum Shs97 million. So, we have not ignored the north. Where micro-finance intermediary entities have not been formed, they are being trained so that they can access this finance.

There is also a view that we should re-examine the needs of the people in northern Uganda and NUSAF. I want to make it clear that when this programme was being started it was bottom-up, as opposed to top-bottom. In fact there was a design by COWI, and COWI discussed project design with the population. We also had a national consultation workshop and honourable Members of Parliament attended, together with district leaders, CAOs, RDCs, and the civil society. In other words, the people in the area have taken part in designing NUSAF. I want to add that should you have any further contribution, we are available.

There was a view that Members of parliament should be informed about programmes taking place in their constituencies. We do that. We have done so on the re-stocking programme, and a similar one on rural micro-finance. And we are still available.

MR ETONU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable Prime Minister. In your submission you have talked of COWE and I understand that COWE has had problems in the past. I understand that it is de-registered. Would you clarify on the issue of COWE, since it has come up?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much. You are talking of another organisation. The COWI I am talking about enjoys administrative and managerial hygiene -(Applause). 

The Committee commends the efforts of NGOs that are supporting government in rendering services to the people and so on, but I wanted to mention that there are also UN agencies like WFP, UNHCR, which are also assisting us –(Interruption)

MR APUUN: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister, for giving way. I want to emphasise the point of Members of Parliament being informed about programmes taken to their constituencies. Surely, we have talked about valley dams in Karamoja for 16 years. These dams have not held water in Karamoja since that time. Even this season, we are bound to go into Teso, especially my people from Bokora County. 

There was lack of involvement of the Members of Parliament in this programme. Even now we do not know how much money has been injected into these valley dams It has been a waste of time, Mr Prime Minister. This should not be underrated. We need to be involved so that we can iron out our differences. As of now, we do not know where the problem of these dams and valley dams in Karamoja is. The Government gives money, the donors give money and the contractors play their role. What they do with the money, we do not know. They do shoddy work, which cannot sustain holding of the water in those dams So, Mr Prime Minister, we need to agree on this one. We need to be involved, as Members of Parliament in these constituencies.  

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, is there any problem for a committee recommending that for programmes of government, Members of Parliament should be informed? Should that require any debate? Certainly not, I think you should accept this recommendation. It is innocent and it is good.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, as I said, we have no problem with it. I want also to mention that the issue of dams belongs to the Ministry of Water. When the minister in charge of monitoring discovered that there were problems with the dams, for example the one at Kilong, we took steps and the matter is being addressed. So, as the Speaker said, this recommendation is a good one. In Luganda we say, “Osindise asitamye.” You are pushing someone who is already predisposed to what you are recommending. There is no problem there to discuss.  

There was also the issue of No. 7 but as the Speaker said, some of these do not pose problems The government feels strongly that in order for the office of the Prime Minister to effectively monitor and evaluate government activities, its capacity must be improved. Again we totally agree with that one and we want to point out that already Shs168 million has been given to us. Our problem now is vehicles. We have written to the Ministry of Public Service so that they may get us vehicles. 

Now, I come to a few questions, which were posed and I want to say that the issue of Karamoja has been well answered. 

With regard to the reporting system, LCs are supposed to meet regularly and I am a former chairman of LC I at Makerere University. When you meet regularly, you discuss matters that are reported to you and if there is any other important matter, which requires to be dealt with by LC II, LC III, you make resolutions and they go upwards. Of course, they may not have the money to have annual reports but this is a matter, which can be sorted out.  

Measuring of performance of ministries: You can look at their objectives and missions and then show to what extent they have fulfilled them, taking into account the infrastructure given to them. So, that is quite easy. 

On presidential pledges, a point was made that probably the cultural leader in Lango was ignored. I want to assure you that His Excellency the President directed me to ensure that under Article 246 of the Constitution, traditional and cultural leaders are facilitated. It is going to be a wholesome facilitation, which is going to apply to all traditional and cultural leaders. We even standardised what is given to the Bishops. In the past, the President used to give vehicles but it was not affordable. But he has been practising parity of treatment because he is an embracer of all the people of Uganda. 

With your permission, Mr Speaker, allow me to ask the Minister in charge of General Duties to answer some other issues, which I deliberately left to him. I thank all of you for your contribution.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker, I think the Prime Minister has covered the subject very articulately. I thank him.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ECONOMIC MONITORING)(Mr Omwony Ojwok): Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure to speak on behalf of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Third Deputy Prime Minister to answer very important issues raised both in the report of the committee and by Members of Parliament.

Regarding the report of the committee, I must say that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs very warmly welcomes the spirit with which these recommendations have come. Essentially they are arguing for arming, re-tooling, strengthening and putting the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the right place, which is to give a proper image for this country abroad, and also to ensure that our people feel confident that they are being properly represented. You will see that recommendations number one, two, and three are in that spirit.  

Regarding the specific recommendation for a team from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Finance and Members of Parliament to visit various missions abroad in order to make a concrete assessment, at this stage, I am unable to commit government to this particular exercise. But as we move along, we can see whether it is practical to do so.

THE SPEAKER: But for your information, we had the same exercise in the Sixth Parliament. I do not know whether there is any –(Interruption)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: I am not saying it is illegal or inappropriate. It is a question of once again the same problem of resources. But I agree that the matter will be taken into account. 

We come to the question of re-opening of our embassy in Cuba. There is nothing wrong at all with this recommendation as well. Once again, it is subject to the availability of resources. 

On the question of hiring vehicles, definitely, the government of Uganda, and indeed no government would enjoy having to hire vehicles when in fact you can get brand new efficiently functioning vehicles. The proposal here is to have this purchase arrangement. Now, as a person who has worked internationally on issues of trade and investments, I would like to tell you that there is also a cost to these purchase agreements. All proposals will be considered in order to ensure that we get the right vehicles for this purpose.

Regarding the final recommendation of the committee that government should nurture a culture of debating in Parliament those international developments that have enormous implications to our country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and government are fully on board. However, the specifics have to be looked at from the realities on the ground. 

For the case of multilateral bodies like the OAU – the OAU is a multilateral organisation which became AU - under the normal arrangements of parliament and government, all such matters would certainly come to Parliament in order for such a treaty to be binding internally in Uganda here.  

Regarding the questions raised, they follow the same spirit of the committee of trying to enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. However, one or two need to be brought out much more clearly. ‘How is the system of recruitment into the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and into our establishment?’ 

I would like to assure this Parliament and the country on behalf of government that personnel in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are recruited according to the rules and regulations that are determined by the Public Service. In fact, all the professional staff follow that procedure. If there is any case where it has not been done, please, draw our attention to it specifically.  However, I know there has been genuine concern about appointments, not recruitment, into certain positions of responsibility, particularly at ambassadorial level. Indeed, there are individuals who have been appointed ambassadors by His Excellency the President. 

According to the legal provisions, he announces the appointments, they are brought before Parliament and if Parliament does not consider that person fit, Parliament has the total prerogative to reject such an appointment.  However, it is up to those who would like to reject such a person to bring the necessary evidence. 

There is one point, which many Members of Parliament were concerned about. ‘Are we having too many people being appointed ambassadors who are not from the professional category?’ I think every country has such a provision. However, government continues to review from time to time, to ensure that as we professionalise our Foreign Service, and as we begin to re-direct it towards trade, investments, economic and business relations, more professional people come in. But it is a matter of continually reviewing the whole situation. 

I come to the question of the terms and conditions of service of our staff.  It is true that there is a lot that needs to be improved, and I would like to draw the attention of this House to page 26 of the report of the ministry. In fact, we agree with the concerns of the Members of Parliament that the conditions of service of our staff need to be seriously addressed. The matter is under constant review. 

On the issue of those who have over-stayed, we have heard some noises about it, and I request that we get concrete information to enable us to address them accordingly and at the right time. 

On the question of appointments from the Presidents Office and staff going to embassies without the knowledge of the ambassador concerned, this is really news to us. Once again, I appeal to Members to give us concrete information so that they can be addressed. 

Salary arrears: definitely that is a concern for the ministry as well. The problem we face as a government and as a country is that the cake is relatively small. We have to use this cake in such a way that we expand on our capacity to earn more, and at the same time we continue to build on what we have.

The question of need for more staff; nothing is less important. However, I think you will agree with me, honourable Members, that the issue of the need for more staff for Foreign Affairs may not be of the same priority scale at a time when we are not even meeting some of the basic needs.  Therefore, in terms of priority, let us first concentrate on making sure that the conditions of the staff who are currently in place are proper and then we can move to increase the number of staff.

Management by consolidated properties: A number of very positive questions were raised. Issues of concern were: ‘In whose name are these properties going to be registered? What will be the implications in terms of diplomatic immunity for those premises?’ I would like to draw your attention to page 27 of the report of the ministry, which is very categorical. It says, “Due to poor funding,” and I am quoting, “these properties are poorly maintained and the plots have remained undeveloped for a long time.” The key sentence –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, I thought government property is vested in Uganda Land Commission. Constitutionally, it is the Uganda Land Commission that holds even this building where you are. I think any property that belongs to Uganda, even the embassy property, should be vested in Uganda Land Commission. But of course, the Uganda Land Commission could have an agent to run to of late. 

MR OMWONY OJWOK: I fully agree with you, Mr Speaker. It is in that light that the sentence says, “there is a proposal,” - take note of the word ‘proposal’ – “for all government properties abroad to be managed” - that is the key word here – “managed centrally by Uganda Property Holding Company.”

THE SPEAKER: The question would be, ‘why should it be managed for Ministry of Finance rather than managed for Uganda Land Commission?’  

MR OMWONY OJWOK: The critical point I am trying to make, Mr Speaker, is that this is a proposal. Government is looking at the total implication of this proposal. So, the concerns being expressed now are being taken note of as part and parcel of the consideration before the issue is finalised. I think that is the point -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, honourable Members, the motion is that we adopt the committee’s report.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Excellent. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think now it will be Committee of Supply, but I think we will do this tomorrow. It seems you are tired. But I thank you for continuing to sit and deliberate in the manner you have done. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Omwony Ojwok has done a very good job, but of course he did not answer the questions. I think it is better that the Minister responsible, when he is available, gives us concrete answers because these are matters of national interest, and it is not good to simply brush over them and give general answers and get away with it.  We need concrete answers to questions that -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember when we paid tribute to the late Brig. Gad Toko, the Minister of Foreign Affairs was here. I met him in the VIP Lounge and said he was doing a good job, but we may need to get a statement from him on what is going on. He said he was preparing a statement to that effect. 

I think he will be informed of what has been raised here, and when he comes to make that statement, which he promised me on many other issues, he will take that opportunity to answer some of the queries you have raised. I think hon. Omwony Ojwok will brief him so that he can prepare. 

But as I said, I thank you very much for sitting up to this time. We have done the job. In fact, we should have finished this, had it not been for the statement, which came in, about the census. You know it took a lot of our time. But tomorrow, we shall start with Committee of Supply in respect of these votes and then we go to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. But I request that you come on time because I intend to start at exactly 2.05p.m. so that we can finish whatever we have. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.05p.m.

(The House rose at 7.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 August 2002 at 2.05p.m)

