Wednesday, 29 August 2007

Parliament met at 11.05 a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I note that this is the first day we are sitting in the morning and some people maybe did not know that we were going to sit at this time. However, we had to really do this because it seems we are a bit late with the budgeting process. As I indicated before, last year we were able to complete this process on time because all the reports were ready on time, but this year I do not know what happened. Anyway, we will try to squeeze time so that we finish this budgeting process. 

I have talked to the chairpersons of the different committees to at least lay before Parliament all the reports today and if possible give a brief summary. Some time in future - should it be necessary – we shall find time to discuss policy matters of the ministries after we have cleared the budget. I hope honourable members will understand why we are doing this. 

11.07
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter which concerns 31 percent of our people who live below the poverty line. 

When I was in my constituency disbursing the constituency development fund, I took it upon myself to mobilise my people to form themselves into Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs) to be able to access the wealth-for-all programme. However, yesterday as I was going through the newspapers I was taken aback by a statement attributed to the Minister responsible for Micro-Finance. On Saturday, the Minister was in Arua and the newspapers quoted him as saying that this fund is not for the poor. According to newspapers, the Minister said that this micro-finance money is not to finance people to begin life. 

Now, who is responsible for uplifting the lives of 31 percent of our people who are stuck in poverty? The Government Chief Whip is saying that it is the people themselves. Okay, but what is the essence of having a government, if we might ask? Why did we move away from the jungle law to organise ourselves into what is now called a government?  

As I was checking my email I came across several questions that were asked by a researcher who is also a member of staff of Parliament. He posted these questions into our e-mail boxes. I would like to request my colleagues to interest themselves in only three of these questions:

1. If the poorest are not the primary targets or beneficiaries of government interventions, why are they not a priority? 

2. Has there been a specific affirmative action policy, legislations and budgetary measures made targeted specifically to empower Ugandans who live below the budget line?

3. How best can Parliament be the guardian of the rights of the marginalised and poorest communities in Uganda? 

I would like the Minister of Finance to clarify on this. I am saying this because you remember sometime ago my colleague, hon. Oduman, the MP for Bukedea, requested government to come up with a policy regarding this Prosperity-for-All programme before we begin to operationalise it. It is important that government does this because we are now receiving mixed messages. I want to say that I have been put into a difficult position because I am mobilising the poorest of the poor to be part of this programme. Can I, therefore, seek clarification from the minister? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister of Finance is in charge of this.

11.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify as clearly as I can. The policy of micro-finance is a very important policy to the country. It is aimed at uplifting all the people and especially the poor. 

The policy is to increase accessibility to financial institutions by the poor. Up to now our people have not had access to financial institutions and that is why we have said that there should be at least one Savings and Credit Cooperative Society (SACCO) in every sub-county. This policy is being implemented. 

As you know, we took the sub-county chiefs from all sub-counties and trained them on how to mobilise people and teach them how to form savings and credit institutions. There is no discrimination in forming these institutions or on being members. Every person in Uganda is eligible to be a member of a savings and credit institution according to the cooperatives law. 

I want to make it clear that these institutions are open for membership to all Ugandans. We hope this will work out for us as a country because we are doing everything possible to strengthen these institutions. Government is spending money to provide infrastructure for these institutions, provide safes, filing cabinets and to train management free of charge on how to keep accounts and eventually to connect them to the nearest Post Bank branches so that we are able to oversee their accounting processes to avoid any fraud and so on. 

Mr Speaker, we are also working on the regulations, which we hope to bring very shortly before this House before the end of September. This, we hope, will help us strengthen the operations of these institutions so that the deposits of the wanainchi are kept safe. There will be a guarantee of deposits so that in case there is a problem with any of the institutions, then the ordinary people – (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I want to say that these micro-finance organisations are doing a very good job and some of them have grown big especially those in the urban centres. However, one problem that they have is that you cannot pay somebody using a cheque. If you give somebody a cheque of say Shs 200,000 such a person cannot deposit it on his or her account in a micro-finance institution. Is there a way the minister can facilitate this so that those who bank with micro-finance facilities can also use cheques although they are not part of the clearing house system? Is there a way that we can facilitate this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as I said, the concern of the honourable member for Madi-Okolo County was that the statement that was made by the minister of state in charge of this sector when he was in Arua, that this project is not for the poor when actually “bonna bagagawale” means both the poor and rich should now prosper, was controversial. What was it meant for? That is the concern. I think this is important because people may be getting worried that the money they had been hoping would help them as poor people is now, according to the minister in charge of the sector, not for them. Is that the case?

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I talked to hon. Gen. Saleh yesterday after I read the story in the Daily Monitor. He had lunch here in the restaurant and as we talked I asked him what he meant exactly. In his response Gen. Saleh said, and I absolutely concur with him, that what he meant was that if people wake up in the morning and just drink waragi and as a result they do not work, making poverty become a permanent guest in their homes, then such people even if you give them money it will be difficult for them to become rich. According to him, the message was urging people to work. They need to get onto their feet and be seen to be working before government comes in to support them with this Prosperity-for-All programme. 

We, the people from Western Uganda, have a saying that if someone gives you a cow when you have never owned one, you will not be able to tell when it has fallen sick. What this means is that it is better to give a cow to someone who has owned one before, one who knows how to look after it and how to remove ticks. If you are just there and someone gives you a free cow, you will not even know how to graze it, water it and so on. So, what Gen. Saleh meant was that although the programme is for the poor, it would target the hardworking ones. If you sit, how will you handle?

THE SPEAKER: So he was talking in parables? (Laughter) It can confuse, you know.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to really answer the question. I think -(Ms Ekwau rose_) if the honourable member could allow me –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish and then you can contribute.

DR SURUMA: I want to make it categorically clear that the basic mechanism of micro-finance, which has been selected by government, is the Savings and Credit Cooperative Society.

Secondly, I want to make it clear that cooperative and credit societies are accessible to all people. The only condition is that they have to pay an entrance fee because only members of the cooperative society can participate in these activities. They can deposit money and non-members cannot deposit money. This is the fundamental difference between a cooperative society and a bank. In a bank any member of the public can go there and open an account, you do not have to own shares in the bank. However, in a cooperative society only members can deposit money in the cooperative. 

Similarly, the issue raised by hon. Okello-Okello about the cheques can be handled. If a cheque is made payable to you and you are a member of a cooperative, you can take that cheque onto your account and the cooperative will take the cheque and collect the money from the respective bank before depositing it onto your account. There is no problem. However, if you are not a member of the cooperative, you definitely are not allowed and it is illegal. It is illegal for savings and credit cooperative societies to accept deposits of non-members.

The record, Mr Speaker, is that poor people can save -(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Mr Speaker, when the minister says non-members are not expected to deposit, I do not understand him. I think he has to be clear. Is he talking about shareholders? I am saying this because we have been told that in cooperatives, people can register under these three types of accounts: a savings account, a shares account and a loans account. There are many people who belong to cooperative societies but they do not have shares there even though they might have been saving with those cooperatives. So, when you talk about members, better be clear so that those people who do not have shares know where they stand.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. The issue of bonna bagagawale is becoming controversial. With the little Luganda I know, in my understanding “bonna” means “all” –(Interjection)

THE SPAEKER: Your Luganda is not little, as I know.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I think there is some controversy between “bonna bagagawale” and “members bagagawale” according to the explanation that the honourable member is giving us. I am saying this because according to the honourable member who interacted with the sector minister, there is going to be selective “bagagawale” —(Interruption)- let me complete this. This is the confusion that we, Members of Parliament, are raising. I want to say that there is much more confusion out there than this. I suggest that apart from relying on the newspaper, which is reported speech, the minister concerned should be told to come to this House and make a clarification between “abamu bagagawale” and “bonna bagagawale”. Otherwise, we are trying to play on the people’s psychology when the truth of the matter is not bonna bagagawale.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I am the minister concerned and I want to clarify this matter once and for all - I hope. Let me start with the first issue about who a member is. The procedure is that people come together freely under the cooperative law and decide to form a cooperative society, and they decide how they are going to run that cooperative. Normally they would pay an entrance fee, which they would decide, and then the share fee or the cost of a share, at least one share. They also decide how much a share should be. So, once you pay the entrance fee and you buy a share, you become a member of the cooperative. That means this is clear in the cooperatives law and in cooperative procedures, which we have taught all the chiefs to explain to the people. 

About the issue of an account; you may decide to open an account on which you will save your money. This is where one can normally deposit his or her money from time to time according to his or her wishes, and you can deposit and withdraw according to your agreed programme in the cooperatives. So, there should be no confusion. If you have not paid entrance fee and you have not bought a share, you are not a member of the cooperative and you cannot deposit money there. This is critical because – (Interjection)- please, allow me to clarify this point because it is a critical point. It is a critical point and I want honourable members to be patient. The window in the law that we have exploited in order to allow Ugandans to have financial institutions is that –(Interruption)  

MS FLORENCE EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What we are hearing from the Minister is just for a very small margin of the Ugandan population. One time the issue of bonna bagagawale was questioned greatly; this House would have felt happier to see the Minister in Charge of Micro-Finance explaining this. At this point we clearly and kindly request that you come up with a policy. Whatever you are explaining here is what should be explained to our electorate and the common man in the countryside. It should not only be confined to this House. So, unless you come up with a policy to explain this to the local man, we feel you have not yet –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to criticise me for answering a question, which was put to me by another Member of the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see there are a number of issues that have come up from one issue, which was raised by hon. Arumadri. The Member was concerned with the statement, which was made by the minister. Certainly, I would also be confused if what was reported in the media is what he said because it was selective. The import of the statement was to be selective in that bonna bagagawale is not for everybody when “bonna bagagawale” means even those who have been poor should become prosperous. 

The other issue is the law, which you are explaining. I think you are right that for you to enjoy the facilities of a cooperative you must be a member of the cooperative. However, some Members are saying that in their areas even those who are not in the cooperatives are enjoying these facilities. Yes, they could be enjoying the facilities but he is telling you the legal position. The legal position is that first of all you should become a member. I think we do not have to debate that. What is being done outside, as you are reporting, is illegal. This is what he is saying.

Honourable minister, the Members are saying up to now that no policy statement as to how this scheme is going to run has ever been made known to Parliament here. Since you are the boss, they want you or the Minister of State in Charge of Micro-Finance to come here and give details as to how this is going to be operationalised, so that when the representatives of the people go to the villages they are in a position to explain. These are the issues that have developed. 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is that at times it is we, the legislators who are supposed to educate the society, who have failed to do so. Initially, I am for that statement where he is saying it is for a few selected ones. How is it supposed to be assessed? As individuals in various capacities, we are supposed to form ourselves into groups and identify what we are supposed to do. After identifying what we are supposed to do, we have to be pushed so that we achieve our major objectives. It is not that Bakkabulindi will wake up one morning and go to the minister and say, “I am poor, I want to do something, please give me money.” I think if we legislators could go back and mobilise our people in such groups and identify what they are supposed to do, there will not be any confusion because we are also interacting with our colleagues. 

THE SPEAKER: It is a Pandora’s Box. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek this clarification from the Minister of Sports. Initially there were cooperatives that used to exist in primary societies. Were those primary societies formed by Members of Parliament or by individuals in the village? 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My friend, hon. Bakkabulindi, the Minister of State for Sports, alluded to the fact that it is we, the people’s representatives, who are failing in our duties to explain this government programme to the people. In as far as my experience in government is concerned, before a programme is implemented, it rests on the policy that will be a guiding light. Whoever is going to implement that programme uses the whole policy surrounding that programme as the yardstick and a torch. 

Here is a programme, which has been brought to Parliament and sold to the public. One year down the road, there is no written policy document whatsoever. How do you expect both the bureaucrats in the ministries and the people’s representatives in Parliament to go out and explain without that first primary responsibility on the part of government?

MR ODONGA OTTO: In line with a written policy document, we have a case where one Member of Parliament here was given a bounced cheque by the same architects of the bonna bagagawale scheme. This goes a long way to explain what is happening. Hon. Kabakumba’s group was given a bounced cheque under the licence of bonna bagagawale. (Laughter) We have the copy.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I think we are diluting the level of this institution. I do not know whether Members are just interested in talking to be heard. Hon. Okupa has written to me a note seeking information whether –(Interjections)- I am giving a background to my point of order. He was asking whether the women in my constituency were given a cheque from the bonna bagagawale scheme or whether it was a dummy cheque. I was replying to give him the facts. The facts are as follows:

During the launch of the micro-finance component in Masindi District, a dummy cheque was given to Turihamu SACCO –(Interjections)- Yes; at all these functions, these huge cheques you see being handed over are not the real cheques, and it is a common practice. Turihamu SACCO happens to be in my constituency. I know that when you go to the bank you do not present this dummy cheque. I can tell you that money was processed through Post Bank and Turihamu has accessed the Shs 50 million that was allocated to it. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Odonga Otto not to seek correct information from the concerned Member of Parliament or even government because the minister in charge is here? Is he in order to just come and express his ignorance and put this House to ridicule? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, now you have given him the details of what actually happened. He might have thought that the dummy cheque was the one to be taken to the bank -(Laughter)- but now that it is clear –(Laughter) 

Honourable members, I think this matter is important. The Minister has tried his best to assure us that bonna bagagawale will be meant for everybody provided certain steps are taken. However, this should not be a substitute for a general statement to Parliament on this policy. As representatives of the people we can then use it to explain how this is going to operate and to reassure them that what was said in the media about bonna bagagawale being for the rich was not correct. It is for everybody, but this can cause confusion.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was responding to a question raised for clarification on this point. I will be very happy to bring a detailed statement of this policy because it exists. I want to say the policy is based on the cooperatives law. It was not necessary to make a new law because we are simply implementing the savings and credit institutions under the current law. Although later on we will be seeking regulations and new laws to strengthen the regulation of these institutions, there is a very comprehensive, detailed policy statement on what we are doing. I will be happy to share the details with this Parliament at an appropriate time. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is the Minister of Finance in order to pocket when talking to us? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: To do what? (Laughter) No. Hon. Arumadri, from the explanation by the Minister, what you can do is to continue to mobilise your people for these SACCOs, which you have been doing, and a detailed statement will be given to us so that people do not get discouraged simply because they are poor. The policy is to help them to rise from poverty to prosperity.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the explanation I also got from the Government Chief Whip, I learnt that some people or some groups have already accessed this selective bonna bagagawale funds. I would like to have this clarified by the Minister, probably when he comes back or even now. As much as we are wondering how we should all access this selective bonna bagagawale, others have managed to do it. How was it done and how soon shall it also be given to us? The House is saying we do not have a policy statement but some have been very smart and have already accessed the money. We are wondering how they accessed it and how soon we should also access it through the same member.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I thank you and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The question being asked is a very pertinent one; when Lubaga North sought to get money for bonna bagagawale, we were informed that a policy had not been brought to Parliament and therefore we were not given the money. The Minister of State for Micro-Finance had actually agreed and promised to give them this money and was going to do so at a function that was organised for the following day. The Minister and Members here informed me that a policy had not been brought to Parliament and approved therefore Lubaga North could not get bonna bagagawale funds. That is the information. I am wondering whether the Government Chief Whip’s constituency has a special arrangement with the minister, in which case we would like to know it because we can also still pursue that special arrangement and get a share for Lubaga North.

THE SPEAKER: But didn’t last financial year include money for bonna bagagawale? –(Interruptions)- It did.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, the reason we were given was not because money was not there. The reason we were given was that the policy had not been brought to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Yes. This is a fact.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, bonna bagagawale could be changing names but we know in the 2001/2002 budget each parish was supposed to have got Shs 10 million, which means we had in the budget Shs 50 billion. We have been having this money but the only thing that has changed is the name. Instead of giving it away a long time ago, it is changing names to bonna bagagawale. I am worried. World over, even in UK and America, there are poor people. I do not know how Uganda is going to make sure everybody is rich.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we end this matter by asking the Minister of Finance to give us that policy statement maybe within ten days or so?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I would have wished the minister to clarify under what circumstances others got these bonna bagagawale funds while the policy in place was not here. Thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, the issue of bonna bagagawale should not be played alone by the minister because they took all the sub-county chiefs for training in order to form SACCOs in each sub-county. We thought they would go back home, as they are doing, to make sure that each sub-county equally gets a certain portion of bonna bagagawale funds. However, whoever invites the minister for bonna bagagawale gets some money and others do not. This means there is unequal treatment to Ugandans - (Applause)- and that is what we would want the minister to make very clear, that bonna Bagagawale is for special people and not for all Ugandans. That is what we want, Mr Minister.

DR SURUMA: If the honourable members could allow me to clarify, I will. In the policy statement that we will bring here, it will be clear to everyone that we have three types of actions that we are doing in every sub-county. Every sub-county will have at least one savings and credit cooperative society. If there is any sub-county that does not have one, it will be started with the assistance of government, particularly in the provision of safe filing cabinets and other necessary furniture as well as training. That is what will be done for those sub-counties, which do not have any SACCO.

Where a SACCO already exists, the policy is to strengthen those SACCOs that are already in existence. If the SACCOs are not very strong, they have to be brought to a certain defined standard.

Finally, where the SACCO is already strong, the policy is to provide credit to those SACCOs because they are already in a position to receive credit from Post Bank and pass on the money to borrowers. So, this is the basic principle: if your SACCO is not yet formed, you cannot get money from government because the SACCO is not in a position to handle that money. However, I will bring the policy and explain all this in detail. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, let us wait for that statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.45
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the statement is ready but it is being run. I will be ready with it within one hour. I thought I would present it in the afternoon and not this morning.

THE SPEAKER:  It is okay.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/08.

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know my reservations. We are not on time with this matter and the Business Committee, as I told you before, had expected these reports to be ready by 16th July so that by the time we started the general debate on the motion, we would have benefited from the reports. However, these reports were not there but I understand that the committees have now finished their work. I am expecting them to lay their reports on the Table and give us summaries of what their reports are about so that we can continue with the process. 

I also understand that the Presidential Affairs Committee wants to lay before us their report. Hon. Tuma, are you ready? We shall follow that order so that if possible, we receive all of them today.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, these reports that Members are going to lay on the Table are very good. Even if they are not read out, are they going to form part of our record in Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Once they are laid on the Table, they will be part of the documents of Parliament. That is what we precisely want. I understand that honourable members have got copies of these reports. If you do not have, copies will be given to you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Will they be part of the Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, when we ended the week on Thursday we were having a general debate and my understanding was that we had not concluded the general debate. I thought that we were going to continue.

THE SPEAKER: As I told you earlier, when the Business Committee met, we agreed that in handling this budget process the committees should finish their work and have the reports in by 16th July and that Members would get copies of these reports so that in making their contributions to the general debate, they would be benefiting from what various committees would have found. Unfortunately, this was not possible and it was a handicap to the Members when they were making contributions. Now that these reports are ready, let the Members use them so that we can see how to proceed.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, on the Order Paper there is an item that says: “Brief by the Chairperson of the Committee on the Budget on the motion that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply” and it is followed by (b). It looks like we have skipped that one. It should be put on record that we are skipping it.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, item (b) should have preceded the debate. Unfortunately, because of the delays in the committees it was not possible. Let us get the report and you will make your statement before we pronounce ourselves on the motion to resolve into a Committee of Supply. I do not know what has happened because last year we were new in Parliament and we were able to finish the work on time. With experience of one year now, we have been bogged down with I do not know what.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, my observation is that the problem was at your level. As a committee, our report was ready by Thursday the other week so we are not the problem. The problem is the re-arrangement of the presentation.

THE SPEAKER: No, we had a roll call here and only two committees had finished their reports. The others said that they would be through in a week’s time or so. That is the position. There has been a delay anyway.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, my worry under this arrangement is that our committee has very many difficult issues and if we just present them, government will ignore them and we will have wasted our time.

THE SPEAKER: The problems of your committee are not only handled at the budget stage. Your committee is supposed to present problems to Parliament if they need a solution. We do not find solutions to problems by finishing the budget process. If you present your report and think that there are matters of policy that need to be debated, we shall definitely give you the time to debate these issues. Otherwise, if we have to deal with your policy problems, we shall end in November.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the second session of Parliament has not been able to match up with our experience in the first session. Having said that and knowing very well that we are now time barred, is it possible for us to pick on a specified number of committees that we feel are very critical in terms of resource allocations and policies so that we can have those reports presented and debated while the rest are laid on the Table, to ease the process? The debate can be after the appropriation. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This is a policy, which is followed in many Parliaments. They select those votes that they think are very critical and deal with them in detail and others are just passed, although I think each committee is interested in having its report debated. (Laughter) However, the policy of selection is what is followed in a number of Parliaments. They may choose two or three votes to deal with. They may decide that they want to consider Defence, Agriculture or education and they leave out the others. It used to be done here in the past. 

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, while I agree that committees could have delayed, I would like the Prime Minister to urge the ministers, for example the policy statement for the Ministry of Defence appeared on the shelves about two weeks ago. If we could have these policy statements and the chief whips get committees constituted in time, we would do work. Ministers are duplicating most of the work and I do not know why it should take them long. So, if they can do their work, Members will be willing to do their work as well so that in the next financial year we are on the dot. Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Budget was read we hoped that we would contribute to it. This is a very important process in Parliament and whenever we want to contribute, you say “No, there is another stage.” I do not think it is in order for reports to come and be laid on the Table without our contributions. 

THE SPEAKER: What does the Budget Act say?

MR MUTULUUZA: I know the cycle but –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Please, can you read the Budget Act? What does it say about the budgeting process? Please use the Budget Act; it is a public document. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, we are supposed to end the budget cycle by 31 August but –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: What is the date today? (Laughter)

MR MUTULUUZA: I know, but I am concerned. All the work of government rotates around the Budget and my work as a Member of Parliament is to contribute to the budget process. If I do not get a chance to –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mutuluuza, who says that you do not contribute within the law? What does the Budget Act say? 

MRS TUMA: Mr Speaker, I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee. My chairperson has gone to the west to assist in the burial of the father of hon. Margaret Muhanga.

THE SPEAKER: But I see that the Member of Parliament for Mawokota North is uneasy. What does the law say and what do you expect us to do?

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, the Budget was read in May.

THE SPEAKER: No, it was read in June.

MR MUTULUUZA: I am Sorry, it was June –(Laughter)- and we were supposed to start the process. I think that we should maximise our time and use it efficiently but this question of just passing money without debating –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are right, we should use our time efficiently; but how and when?

MR NYOMBI TEMBO: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to give my colleague information. His concerns may be valid but the Speaker said right at the beginning that we should lay these reports on Table. If there are policy issues, where of course we always contribute, we shall get the appropriate time to contribute to these issues but after beating the deadline. So, I think that the concerns of my colleague will be catered for during that time when we discuss the requisite policy issues. Thank you.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I have something small to say. First of all, I want to support what the Opposition Chief Whip has said. I want to beg this House that among those committees that are to be prioritised, you should look at the Public Service Committee and the Local Government Committee. We have a situation where 20 percent of the national budget is going to local governments and 80 percent is remaining here yet all of us come from local governments. It is good for the ministers, including the Government Chief Whip, to see this position because at the end of it we will all be in that position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a suggestion was made by hon. Wadri that since we have many committees and many reports, we should get the reports but select some areas for serious debate. This is done in other Parliaments; they do not deal with all the Votes but they choose a Vote and discuss it in-depth. This was a suggestion and it is being backed up by the other, that should we pass it as a policy that the chief whips will sit and decide on the Votes that they want debated so that we can deal with those. 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I hope I am not being off-line when I revert to hon. Mutuluuza’s concern, which we are all talking about. While we all admit that we are running out of time and we must operate within the law, which allows us to debate this until 31st August, hon. Mutuluuza’s concern is a concern of many of us. You said that last year the process was managed more efficiently than this year. I remember we spent almost a whole month this year without the State of the Nation address. We sat for a month waiting for it and when it came, our colleagues on the other side took off a whole week to go to Kyankwanzi to do party business. 

It seems as if, with due respect, that it is the Executive and the ruling party that are managing Parliament’s time. I think that Parliament should assert itself to have its time managed by Parliament rather than be managed by the Executive and the ruling party. While we cannot change what is happening this year, next year and in future Parliament’s time should be managed by Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you saying that it took you a month to get copies of the State of the Nation Address? Should Parliament manufacture the State of the Nation Address and give you copies when it is the Executive that handles the State of the Nation address? How would you handle that?

MS KAMYA: I think that the Executive should be encouraged to perform within time. If it means writing letters to them and reminding them that we must debate, then we should do so. What hon. Mutuluuza is saying, and we all agree, is that we need to debate these matters. If we are going to take off a whole month waiting for the State of the Nation Address, then it should be brought to the notice of the Chief Executive that Parliament cannot afford to lose one month or else we should change the law so that our time begins when the Executive brings the State of the Nation Address. We really need to manage this thing, Mr Speaker. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, I raised this issue because of what you said that the Business Committee decided that we bring reports and just lay them on the Table and we pass the budget. That is why I got concerned. Since you have the mandate to extend the period, why can’t we do it and debate these policy statements? Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Section 22 of the Budget Act states: “The Speaker may extend any period provided under this Act for a reasonable period.” I still think you have a lot of discretion –(Laughter)- and you should exercise it accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: And what is “a reasonable period” if I have to invoke Section 22? There are many things you have to take into account. The Vote-on-Account works for a limited period of time. Suppose I extend and the Vote-on-Account expires, what happens? So, it should not be that because the Speaker can extend, therefore, let us do it. I think we have to explore the reasons why there has been a delay and find a solution to it. I buy the suggestion of hon. Wadri that we sit and select a few of these reports for extensive debate rather than debating all of them.

MR WOPUWA: I just want to ask the Government Chief Whip a question: does State House lack officers or staff to produce the State of the Nation Address in time? Just producing copies! 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the dilemma we are in. Apportioning blame at this moment is not going to help us in this particular session; we can only learn for the coming sessions. You have heard that the committees were supposed to finish by 16th August, which they did not manage to do, maybe we would have had more time. 

Laying reports on the Table is not a new thing in this House especially when we are caught up by time. It was done in the Sixth Parliament, Seventh Parliament and now we are in the Eighth Parliament. Those who finished first used to have the opportunity of their reports being debated in detail. Those who were caught up with time had their reports just laid on the Table. Following your guidance – the Opposition Chief Whip is distracting you - I have no problem in having one or two committee reports debated in detail so long as we have time. 

Honourable members, we do make resolutions and agree on how to move but it is you who break these very agreements or resolutions. Today we were supposed to start at 10.30 a.m. but we started beyond 11.00 a.m. and today is just one sitting. The main point is, how much time are we left with and how much can we cover? I have no problem in covering all the reports so long as Members will sit here; even if it means going up to midnight, some of us are ready. I always see many of you get tired and just walk out leaving the Speaker in the Chair. So, what is the way forward? Somebody is suggesting Saturday and Sunday. 

Mr Speaker, I request you to use your discretion, we determine which committee reports we want to discuss in detail and then we debate the others after we have finished the appropriation process.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Where this is done, the people to exercise that right are the Opposition. They decide the Votes to be debated in detail. Hon. Wadri, is your side in a position to suggest four committee reports that you think we should extensively debate?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the Opposition had already proposed six committees but now that you have reduced it to four -(Interruption)- my colleague, the Government Chief Whip, do not put words into the mouth of the Speaker. The Speaker said four and the four will be as follows, in line with the amount of money that is being injected into the ministries: 

We feel that the Social Services Committee, which caters for the ministries of Education and Health and which is very crucial, should be considered; the Ministry of Local Government and Public Service, which provides for 20 percent of the budget should be catered for; the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, which is the backbone of this economy and the country; and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because of CHOGM. We had proposed that we have roads but when we talk about CHOGM, the issue of roads will come up. Yesterday Parliament saw what happened; Shs 153 billion was already injected there so all those will come under CHOGM. Thank you.

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, it is okay with us.

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall extensively deal with these four committees. Let us have the reports.  

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

12.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Ruth Tuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee sends her apologies. She has gone to represent our committee at the burial of Margaret Muhanga’s father –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: I was told that copies were given to you, honourable members.

MRS TUMA: Yes, the reports were put in the pigeonholes last week.

In accordance with rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the provisions of Article 90 of the Constitution, the Committee on Presidential Affairs examined the recurrent and development estimates of Vote 001 – Office of the President; Vote 002 – State House; Vote 003 – Office of the Prime Minister; Vote 107 – Uganda Aids Commission; and Vote 159 – External Security Organisation for the financial year 2007/2008. 

The committee further examined the mandate of these departments, the policies they are implementing to fulfil their mandate and the administrative institutional setup in place to actualise their vision, mission and goals. 

Honourable members, the committee now wishes to report on its observations, findings and recommendations: 

The committee held meetings with the political and technical leadership of the Office of the President, State House and the Office of the Prime Minister. The Minister in Charge of the Presidency led the team of technical staff from the President’s office, and the Third Deputy Prime Minister led a team of ministers and technical staff from the Office of the Prime Minister. During these meetings, the respective policy statements were discussed, first by presentation and then followed by question and answer approach. 

The committee also studied various previous ministerial policy statements and parliamentary reports on the sectors. 

The committee also referred to the report of the Auditor-General on the accounts of the votes supervised by the committee to appreciate the level of financial accountability and effective management of resources and other assets by the sectors. 

The committee carried out field inspection visits to some parts of the country to have live coverage of some programmes and projects being implemented by the Office of the Prime Minister in order to ascertain value for money. 

In the interest of time, I will read the sub-headings of the votes. 

On page two, there is Vote 001, Office of the President: 
2.1 - Performance of the previous budget 2006/07.
2.1.1 - Key planned programmes and activities for the year 2006/2007. They are recurrent activities. 
2.1.2 - Development and capital activities.
2.1.3 - Projects and other special activities and programmes.
2.2.1 - The amount of funds appropriated for 2006 -(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, a short while ago I thought we agreed that the reports, including this one which is being read, will simply be laid on Table and the four which have been chosen will be read exhaustively and debated. Is my colleague, the chairperson, proceeding in the right manner?

THE SPEAKER: You have been told that the honourable member has been requested by hon. Okurut who has gone for burial to represent her and present this report. She had not made a summary herself so she is using the report to give us a summary. I think you see the handicap the honourable member has. Would you please present your report? What you can do is look at the votes, the allocations as made and agree or disapprove.

MRS TUMA: That is what I was doing. 
2.2.3 - Achievements of vote 001 during the year 2006/07. 

On page four we have: 

2.2.4 - Pending or ongoing activities and programmes for vote 001 for 2006/07

On page five: 
Section B - planned and proposed activities and programmes for vote 001 for 2007/08. They are recurrent activities. 

On page six we have development/capital activities. On page seven we have projects and/or other special programmes; amounts of funds requested for the Office of the President.

Section C - Observations and Recommendations. Those are many, I will not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Since you have mentioned the votes, what you can say is that “we looked at the allocations to various votes under our committee, we have reservations on this or we do not have reservations on this and we recommend the approval of these votes.” This is the report. If you think in future we should debate policies of your sectors, you can indicate it so that in future we can give you time.  

MRS TUMA: Mr Speaker, these recommendations are many, can I read the conclusion?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS TUMA: The committee would like to appeal to the House to understand the complex nature of activities the Presidency and the Office of the Prime Minister implement. Some are contingencies and some are disaster responses. It is therefore most likely that these sectors will be coming to this House for supplementary funding in the course of the financial year.

In conclusion, I move and request that Parliament approves the following estimates to the ministries and departments for the financial year 2007/08 including arrears and taxes as follows: 

Office of the President - Vote 001: 
Recurrent expenditure; Shs34,082,266,000. 
Development expenditure; Shs7,213,920,000.

State House - Vote 002: 
Recurrent expenditure; Shs36,503,822,000. 
Development expenditure; Shs14,169,783,000.

Office of the Prime Minister - Vote 003: 
Recurrent expenditure; Shs6,659,725,000 
Development expenditure; Shs80,758,860,100

Uganda Aids Commission - Vote 107: 
Recurrent expenditure; Shs 1,322,346,296 
Development expenditure; Shs 3,138,634,000.

External Security Organisation – Vote 159: 
Recurrent expenditure; Shs 9,483,800
Development expenditure; Shs 400,040,000

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, and where is the report being laid on the Table? 

12.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Loi Kiryapawo): I formally lay the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us get Information and Communication Technology.

12.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Edward Baliddawa): Mr Speaker, my summary is ready I am just waiting for my report to be run off the machine. So, it should be ready in 30 minutes. 

12.26
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Mudimi Wamakuyu): Mr Speaker, the summary is ready but the report will be ready tomorrow morning. The copies will be ready tomorrow morning; they are being processed. 

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, I thought that ours is to come later as it is to be debated.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, in light of the fact that all those committees that you have read are not ready with their reports and bearing in mind that we have limited time, can we, therefore, ask those other committees, including those whose reports were to be debated indepth, who are ready to present so that we do not waste any more time? I beg for your advice. 

12.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Loi Kiryapawo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to present the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2007/08. I am seeking for your guidance on whether I have to present it and the report to be debated or I am just laying it on the Table.

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate sessional committees –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But this is a 39-paged report, how are you going to present it? I think you summarise it and then we debate it.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you, Sir. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate sessional committees to critically examine government recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations thereto. In accordance with the stated documents, the Committee on Foreign Affairs considered Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs and Votes 201-229, Missions Abroad.

Methodology

The committee visited the premises of both ministries on the 24th and 27th of July this year. The purpose was to:

· Assess the extent to which the ministries had complied to and implemented the previous committee recommendations regarding the weaknesses in the building of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;

· Assess the budgetary implications of office accommodation shortage as reported by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs;

· Generally carry out an on-spot check of the working conditions and operations of the ministries. 

The committee then critically examined the policy statements from both ministries and raised issues for response from the respective ministries. 

The committee proceeded to hold meetings with both ministries. We had meetings with the Ministry of East African Community on 31st of July and with Foreign Affairs on 9th August this year, to discuss the respective ministerial policy statements and the matters incidental thereto. It is from these discussions that the committee compiled this report that it now wishes to present for debate to this august House and its consideration.

In summary, there is Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We had to go through the performance of the previous year and these are under key planned programmes, which are on page 3, as Members can see, recurrent activities and development activities. For development activities, I want to mention here that the ministry purchased four vehicles, computers and furniture and acquired some properties abroad and these properties were acquired in Mombasa, Kigali and Juba.  

When you go to page 4, that is, the amount of funds appropriated for the previous financial year, which in total at headquarters was Shs 73,130,400,000. For missions abroad the total that includes recurrent and development was Shs 28,300,830,000. The money was not enough; the ministry and the missions came back and asked for a supplementary and the headquarters was given a supplementary totalling to Shs 15,150,288,000 - that one includes CHOGM. The missions abroad were given a supplementary of Shs 15,122,205,000. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, when you look at page 5, you see the amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The totals are: 

· Headquarters received Shs 88,253,667,000;
· Missions abroad received Shs 31,423,035,000. 

There were achievements made by the ministry but I will not go through them. Members can read them on page 6 and even the pending or ongoing activities. And here the main programme is: CHOGM 2007 preparations.

Section (b), these are planned activities for this current year and as I have said before, the current activities are not different from those of previous year except for bullet 8 on page 7, procurement of goods and services. And for development activities, there is remedial work on the headquarters buildings; there is renovation on missions’ properties and these renovations are taking place in Brussels, London and New York. Other property renovations are in the preparatory stages.

Mr Speaker, on page 8, the amount of funds requested for this financial year:

· Headquarters’ total is Shs 60,963,033,000;
· For missions abroad it totals to Shs 32,584,366,000. 

After going through all those, the committee had some recommendations to these activities of the ministries. And when you look at page 9, there was the issue of categorization of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs where the committee was looking at it and recommending that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions abroad should be moved from the public administration sector to the economic sector. But it is still reflected under the former despite its substantial contribution of NTR of Shs 6.52 billion annually to the Consolidated Fund. The committee reiterated this recommendation. However, the response from the Ministry of Finance was that categorization of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under the public administration sector follows international classification, which the Government of Uganda has adopted. But the committee observed that Uganda should not just be dogmatic and adopt positions that do not favour her because other countries have adopted the same position. 

Different countries have different needs, for example, Uganda’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs is supposed to cause the country to develop through attracting tourism, trade and investment. Yet the same ministry in other countries serves purposes of propaganda and public relations. The same ministry in the different countries cannot, therefore, be categorised similarly. 

The committee now recommends that given the important role played by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, it should be transferred from the public administration sector to economic sector so that its budget is not subjected to frequent cuts that hamper the development of the ministry’s activities. This will enable the country to maximise its benefits from this ministry. I am mentioning that because there is a budgetary implication and that is why I have to say it aloud.   
 
The other issue we looked at was CHOGM and Members’ comments were on the advertisements of CHOGM where you find that there are personalities but not what Uganda can offer especially during this period.  

When you look at page 17, contribution towards CHOGM, there was a donation from the Government of India of US $2.0 million but this was in kind. So, that one does not appear in the CHOGM budget. And as I speak, nothing has yet come. But the Uganda Government has decided that if the Government of India honours its pledge, that money would purchase buses, fire fighting trucks and garbage collection trucks but the pledge is not yet with us. 

Another thing, which we looked at, was release of funds for CHOGM this financial year and I think for CHOGM some of these issues are what we dealt with yesterday. However, Members were wondering about the quality of work done for CHOGM and their comments are found on page 18. And also there are suggestions from the public but they are saying that they do not have a desk where they can take their suggestions to give some ideas on how CHOGM preparations can go on. 

We had another issue concerning protocols and treaties to which Uganda is a signatory. There are many protocols and treaties but we were informed that all protocols and treaties do not fall under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Each treaty and protocol is directly with the ministry, which is responsible for that subject. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, being the custodian of all matters that are foreign, should compile all the lists of treaties and protocols to which Uganda is a signatory and brief Parliament on their status; and should accordingly see to it that those, which are to be rectified, are rectified. 

We were also briefed about Southern Sudan. The committee observed that the Juba Peace Talks have been going on for sometime but Parliament has never been briefed about the progress. So, there is a recommendation that there should be periodical briefs on the progress of the talks. 

Also if you look at page 19(8) concerning the African Union peacekeeping team in Somalia, since our sons and daughters went to Somalia, those other countries, which had pledged to take their soldiers have not acted as of now. Therefore, we are suggesting that in future the African Union should move together as a team instead of individual countries moving on their own. That way we will realise unity.

Concerning the drug smugglers who were arrested in China, the committee recommends that these people be sentenced to life imprisonment and that they serve their terms, but not in China. Already one has been given the death penalty. 

Mr Speaker, when we look at Uganda’s properties abroad, that is on page 22; we all know that these properties are not being well maintained. Therefore, the committee recommends, and we are in agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that they be allowed to retain 70 percent of the Non Tax Revenue (NTR) that they collect so that they use that money to maintain those buildings. 

Another issue was that of facilitation of Uganda’s missions abroad. The people who work in these missions are not facilitated to carry out their duties outside the offices. As a result, they simply sit in their offices yet there are activities, which should be done. 

On page 24 there were reports in the newspapers about the remains of a Ugandan that have been in the London mission since 1969. We were informed that the mission in London is now going through the processes stipulated in the British legal system to dispose of them. The body was cremated. 

Page 25 deals with the Ministry for East African Community Affairs. You will note that planned programmes under the recurrent expenditure were maintained. Concerning development activities, I will mention that during the previous financial year, they managed to purchase five vehicles, 12 computers and accessories, furniture and other office equipment. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as regards the amount of funds appropriated for the previous financial year for this ministry, when you put together recurrent expenditure, development expenditure and domestic arrears it totalled to Shs 9,730,518,000. They asked for supplementary appropriations, which amounted to Shs 2,713,442,000. However, the amount, which was released to the ministry, was Shs 12,386,960,000. 

This ministry also has some achievements, which were registered during the previous year. Because of time, these achievements run from pages 28 to 29. 

Ongoing activities for the previous year are on page 30. The planned activities for this year are not different from those of last year. 

As regards development activities for this financial year, the ministry plans to procure the following: three vehicles of capacity between 1500 and 2000 cc, four desktop computers, one light duty photocopier and one heavy duty photocopier with sorting and stapling facilities. Mr Speaker, they do not have projects or other activities.

Amounts requested for this financial year total to Shs 8,079,300,000. 

The committee recommends that government looks into contributions to the East African Community budget. Before they were under the Prime Minister’s Office but now they have a Vote of 021.

The committee made some comments concerning implementation of ongoing sector policies for this financial year. They argued that there should be harmonisation of membership to regional blocks by partner states. There are situations where some members of the community are members of the COMESA while others belong to SADC. For example, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi are members of COMESA while Tanzania belongs to SADC. We are saying that there should be harmonisation of membership.

There is also the issue of East African passports, which are not internationally recognised. We recommend that heads of government see to it that this is sorted out so that these passports are meaningful.

Concerning harmonisation of the education system in the East African Community, the committee agreed that the education system needs harmonisation, as Members will read on page 35. 

The committee also felt that partner states should have been involved in the preparations for CHOGM. We also need guidance as we noted that as we aim at promoting the East African Community, during the last NCC activity of fast tracking, Members of Parliament, religious leaders and other stakeholders were not involved. The committee recommends that these people be brought on board.

The Swahili language was also an issue and I am glad Members know that in Parliament this programme is ongoing. Some of us have registered for it because we believe that we must have a common language as an East African Community partner state. 

As regards Swahili in schools, we were informed that the Minister of Education and Sports is working to see how Swahili can be made compulsory in primary schools.

Concerning residences for the Ministers of the East African Community in Arusha, according to the Wako report, it is recommended that Ministers of the East African Community reside in Arusha. There have been some constraints and we are saying that if this is to be the case, then Ministers of the East African Community should not be elected Members of Parliament as this jeopardises one’s work in their constituency especially if one is from Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda or Burundi. If you are from these countries and you have a constituency and you are told to go and reside in Arusha, you would be too far away from your constituency.

Concerning admission of new members, we looked into this. Also concerning gender sensitivity in the East African Community, on page 39 we agreed that all countries should work towards ensuring that gender sensitivity is a high priority among the partner states. In some countries this is not taken as a priority and that is why the committee is requesting for this.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends to Parliament the approval of the following for the financial year 2007/08:

· Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Shs 60,091,158,000 for recurrent expenditure and Shs 871,872,033 for development expenditure.

· Vote 021 - Ministry for East African Community Affairs: for recurrent expenditure Shs 7,829,300,000 and for development expenditure Shs 250,000,000.

· Votes 201-229 - Missions abroad: for recurrent expenditure Shs 31,584,366,000 and for development expenditure Shs 1,000,000,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the chairperson and the Members of the committee, for the report.

12.52
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for this work; and the Members. I have a few comments to make on this report. The first one is about categorisation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The biggest problem that we have in government is that the Ministry of Finance and government generally does not strongly recognise the role of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or the role that it is playing. They think that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is basically responsible for public administration, which is not so. 

Most of the activities, including investment and the image of our country, are the work of Foreign Affairs. Therefore, the ministry should not be relegated as one that is not of importance. That is why I feel that it should get adequate funding to enable it carry out its activities. For example, most of our missions abroad cannot even host cocktail parties to celebrate our independence yet all our ambassadors abroad are quick to attend celebrations in other missions. (Laughter) This is shameful! In some missions abroad, some of our ambassadors are not -(Interruption)

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you may realise, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of East African Affairs are not here due to some unavoidable circumstances. We note that the issues that are being raised by Members are very important and should get substantive answers from the ministers in those two sectors. As you may realise, due to some problems, the two ministers are not here. By the time I left Cabinet they were still there. We are trying to make contacts to ensure that they are here. I am seeking for your guidance that since this is a priority sector, which has been chosen by our colleagues for in-depth discussion, we request that Members raise issues when the ministers are around so that they can respond to them because we take this to be very vital. Our request as government would be that we wait for the ministers before discussions can take place. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Leader of Government Business was informed yesterday that Parliament was going to proceed with its budgeting process and he is aware of this. Therefore, if the Minister of Foreign Affairs or that of state is not here, we must proceed because they are aware that we are proceeding. The service that you can do for them is to take notes so that should he have an opportunity at one time to reply, he will do so.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Speaker, the Minister of State for Regional Co-operation, hon. Musumba, was here and he asked me for the report, which I gave to him.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I was talking about facilitation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is not surprising that two of the current ministers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs were once in the Ministry of Finance. We thought that they would be more responsible and fight for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to get the facilitation that they require. It is very embarrassing that in some of our missions abroad, ambassadors do not have transport. Others have very old transport, which cannot transport them. When they are invited to some of these functions, they are forced to hire vehicles. I thought that this is not fair.


MR PEREZA AHABWE: Thank you very much, hon. Okumu for giving me this opportunity to give information. Mr Speaker, I am told that actually our ambassadors are given one return ticket for the entire period that they are in their embassies. In other words, they are given a ticket to go stay for the period they are supposed to stay there, never to return for any holiday until they are recalled and the air tickets do not involve their families; the wives and children. So what you are saying actually is more pathetic than people think about these Excellencies. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you. So the situation abroad is bad, generally speaking. Some of our missions are located in very bad – the buildings are in a very bad shape where some of our missions are. I visited Uganda House in the UK in London myself; it is in very bad shape. The Ambassador’s residence has been condemned. Some of our properties in Brussels have also been condemned and yet these are properties for our missions abroad, because we cannot maintain them. We cannot keep them in good shape and I think this is extremely embarrassing. I would really appeal to government that the categorization of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should attract great attention because that is the image of the nation abroad and they have a duty and responsibility to pursue.  

Mr Speaker, about our role in Somalia, I would like to say that as the Opposition, we were in support of the deployment of our troops in Somalia but with some conditions. This morning I read that the advance team of the Burundi troops was now arriving in Mogadishu to prepare running grounds. But this is months later and I think in future we should not always hurry as ring leaders to show that the entire responsibility of the African people -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. The information I want to give is that our troops in Somalia had not been paid for two months as of yesterday. They have spent two months without getting their salaries and I think this is information, which would be very important for anyone to know.

THE SPEAKER: Does it fall in the portfolio of Ministry of Foreign Affairs to pay these troops in Somalia?

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, the local salaries of our troops have been paid but they are supposed to get an additional allowance from the African Union and that is probably the proportion, which they have not received. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the allowances in Somalia have only been paid for two months since our troops left; that was the first two months. Yesterday, together with the next of kin of one of the deceased soldiers who died in Somalia, we received the first two months’ payment, which was given to our troops abroad. So, in future my request to government would be that we should not appear to be in the forefront in everything, putting our country in danger in a difficult situation. We had already expressed the will and intent to be part and parcel of the Somali process, and it was incumbent upon the other African countries; and I think the Minister of Foreign Affairs should from time to time be able to update us on the other countries when they are coming; what have been their problems, and all this kind of thing that has been lacking.

On our properties abroad, I visited a number of our properties abroad. In Mombasa we have over 22 properties, in Nairobi – those are the properties we have identified, there are others we have not been able to identify. There are some properties in Nairobi. Most of the Ugandan properties abroad are being managed under the Uganda Property Holdings, which is under the Ministry of Finance. Unfortunately, since Ugandan Property Holdings took over the responsibility of managing most of these properties, seven years going now, not even a single coin –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, the properties abroad have now reverted to Foreign Affairs. They are no longer under Ministry of Finance. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, this is really shifting goal posts because it is just a few weeks ago that Uganda Property Holdings led us around in Mombasa and in London to show us the properties they are managing and this is what I am raising; that for the last seven years Uganda Property Holdings did not even send any single coin to the Consolidated Fund. Allegedly, most of the rent was being ploughed back into maintenance and this is extremely unfortunate. I think even if now government or the Ministry of Finance has relinquished this responsibility, the Ministry of Finance must come to this House and explain to us where these funds were being used. 

I was saying that the properties abroad were under two managements; there are those under Ministry of Foreign Affairs, then there are those under Uganda Property Holdings. But even those under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are in an extremely poor shape - in a very bad condition. I want to give you an example of our properties in Nairobi - Uganda House in Nairobi, which is a five-storey building, is under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and it is under our missions there. The entire building is being rented out but it is not worth the value. The money that is being remitted to the Consolidated Fund is not worth the value and I even doubt if the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - unless they restructure - will have the capacity to manage most of these properties abroad. It is of a big concern and I think Parliament needs to take keen interest in this because it is not just a matter of shifting management from here to there. We should really focus and critically identify this area.

I am also concerned that the general foreign policy matters of this country sometimes are casually handled. There is very little involvement of key players and sometimes career diplomats are ignored in preference for political appointees. As I speak now, most of our staff in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the career diplomats and in our foreign missions, are demoralised because if you get a political appointee; an ambassador who does not recognise you, that ambassador will not even report to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the way it should be. They report to the appointing authority. 

There are some ambassadors who actually ignore the Minister of Affairs because they know where the appointing authority is and that is all. This makes the work of our people, especially the heads of departments in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, very difficult. There are ambassadors who are career diplomats and then there are those who are political appointees. Some have become supper ambassadors because they do not recognise that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is there to serve the interests of their being ambassadors and that they in turn are supposed to serve the ministry by informing them adequately. But they mind about their jobs and I think this is quite discouraging. We have very many Ugandans who are trained; they are career diplomats; they have all the competence and they should be able to take over the mantle of this responsibility to keep our image abroad intact. 

That explains that even at home here, we have had a lot of problems. Sometimes we have problems with our neighbouring countries but the way we respond to them is quite discouraging. You will hear an army spokesman making a statement on a matter that he should not even be speaking about and he is not trained to speak on. On a more serious note, a matter of foreign relations must be handled with the diplomacy it deserves. Here recently we had a minor problem with Congo along the border and I thought that the matter would be left to the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make public statements, but everybody was outside there making statements - the Army spokesman - and this can endanger our country. I wish that the other government departments, when it comes to the matters of Foreign Affairs, they should channel all the information to Foreign Affairs because it is only Foreign Affairs staff who are polished enough to speak on foreign matters not anybody else. These are people who are trained and exposed and I wish they should work. 

Finally, I want to give a quick comment on the East African Community. The biggest problem is that it looks like we are just extremely excited and following the East African Community blindly. If you asked yourself what Uganda’s interest in all this matter is; is our interest political? We seem to focus more on the political interest than other things. If you ask Kenyans – both the government and the people of Kenya - they are interested in the East African Community because of business. They want to make money. So, what is our interest as a country? We cannot just walk blindly into the East African Community for the sake of it. We are a sovereign nation and if we are going to enter into a national integration, we must have an interest and put it forward. I get disturbed when I see the whole Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs is just making a statement in the media that the matter of political federation is now irreversible. Is that our interest? Is that why we are joining the East African Community? 

I would like to appeal to government that they should make the Minister responsible for the East African Affairs more responsible. This ministry should not be person-to-holder. I know the circumstances under which this ministry was created and the manner in which it is being handled is as if it is person-to-holder. I thought that government departments are not person-to-holder and, therefore, my appeal is that we should take keen interest in finding out and putting our interests as a country so that as we move on, we know where we are going; what we want and what our people and citizens are going to benefit from this.

With these few remarks, Mr Speaker, I would like to support the committee and – I am a member of the committee though I am also the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs. My final appeal is that Foreign Affairs should be taken more seriously than it is being taken by government. Our ambassadors abroad who are political appointees should not think of their jobs; if you are taken on as a political appointee, you should carry on the mantle of diplomacy. That is the challenge. You should not think of the appointing authority.

1.10
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to commend the committee for the very detailed report and for a job well done. I would like to add my voice to that one of my brother, hon. Reagan Okumu, in expressing concern about the state of our missions. When we go out and interact with embassy staff, you feel sorry for them. The cry is the state in which they are operating. I will give just one example. Our Embassy in Kinshasha; there are no words to express the state in which it is. We are busy renting property and yet we have some extremely ramshackle building, but if it were renovated - I have not got the figures off hand but the figures are manageable. If it were renovated, we would be able to earn quite a bit of money because it is a very big property. What beats my understanding is that we have insisted year in and year out to rent yet we could have renovated ours, settled there and even rented out parts of that building -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: My sister, I just want to inform you that even about rent, we have been the greatest defaulters. Our mission in Cairo; we were evicted because we had defaulted on paying rent. But because of the Egyptian law, we were evicted but eventually compensated and as a result of that we used that little money to acquire another property at a distant place to accommodate us.

MRS LAGADA: Thank you for that information. The second issue I would like to comment on is this question of payments of our obligation to international bodies. What happens is that when you have not paid, then even the rest of Ugandans who are otherwise qualified to compete for jobs in those positions when they fall vacant are eliminated. There is no way you are going to compete for a job in a body to which you belong when you have not paid up. We really suffer as Ugandans because we are not able to pay our obligations. 

For me these embassies are supposed to ensure that Uganda as a country gets the benefit of their relations with that country in which we have missions; otherwise why would the missions be there if we are not going to benefit? But because these missions are so poor and have no money to operate effectively, we are losing out. For example, China is a very huge country. We have an ambassador in Beijing, the capital. In all these other states, we do not even have consuls yet there are opportunities there. How is the ambassador who is in the capital expected to be able to know all the things that are going on in these different cities and states as it were?

One of the biggest commercial cities in China is Guangzhou; we have a young man there who is doing voluntary work of a consul when he is actually not appointed at all and not paid. But, he is a very young Ugandan who is very active. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Uganda, I understand, has been requested and has never responded. When we were there we discovered that these people do not even know that there is anything called Kampala. I mean we are talking of tourism and the other day we were told that Uganda is now a tourist destination for China and that we expect to have 1,000 Chinese - I do not know per what - to be coming to Uganda. But here was a commercial state with so many Chinese who do not know about Uganda! They do not even have mere – why doesn’t Ministry of Foreign Affairs give leaflets to these embassies so that they can give out and people get to know about Uganda? I think we are doing ourselves a disservice. 

My last comment is on the rehabilitation of Uganda; I see on page 20, Northern Uganda, that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with the Joint Military Council is helping the current resettlement process. I am yet to learn about exactly what they are doing to resettle the people of Northern Uganda but what I do know is that every time we raise the issue of resettling the people of Northern Uganda, we are referred to a document called a Marshal Plan for Resettlement, also known as PRDP. The other day in this House I remember asking the Minister of Education what the ministry’s plans were as far as rehabilitating those schools, which were destroyed during the insurgency but what did she tell me? She said, “The issues of Northern Uganda are being handled by the PRDP.”   

True, we are hopeful about to the end of this war, but there is bound to be a gap between the end of the war and the actualisation of the programmes for Northern Uganda. So, when exactly is this PRDP programme going to come to this House for debate? It is important that we get to know this because I think that document came out over a year ago but every time we talk about resettlement, we are only referred to it. The question is: where is the PRDP document? Is it with the Cabinet? When will it come to this House so that we can debate it to let the country know when this programme for my region will be starting? Mr Speaker, and honorable members, I thank you.

1.17
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to comment on an issue that featured on page 8, part 2.5 of the statement that was read by the chairperson. 

The statement reads: “The amount of funds requested for by the sector for the financial year 2007/2008 is for projects and/or other activities like CHOGM, giving an amount of Shs 55 billion.”  I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson on the difference between the amount, which we are about to approve on projects and all other activities of CHOGM, and the one, which we passed yesterday. It is important that he clarifies because just yesterday we passed a budget where CHOGM was given additional funds of Shs 9.248 billion. 

It is also important that he clarifies on this because according to the statement of the minister, CHOGM requires Shs 108.58 billion; that creates controversy between Shs 55 and 108 billion. Does it now mean that the amount that we are going to pass is not enough for CHOGM? Or does that mean that the statement that the minister presented to us contains a supplementary budget for the sector, with the original budget of Shs 55 billion and the outstanding budget Shs 108 billion? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.20
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee, particularly the chairperson, for presenting the report today. I also would like to thank the honourable members who have discussed this very important subject particularly the issues to do with the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

I think it would have been very useful for us to reflect on the past, present and the future as we discuss huge amounts of money like this. It should have been very useful if we reflected on the past as we discuss the present and the future. When I look at the budget, particularly the biggest item called CHOGM, what surprises me is that in the previous year this item was allocated Shs 80 billion, which was about 54 percent of the entire budget of the Ministry of Agriculture that stood at about Shs 146 billion. As we know, the Ministry of Agriculture holds the mantle of feeding 80 percent of the population of this country and it is also referred to as the engine of the economic growth for this country.

Yesterday we passed Shs 153 billion for this financial year, that is, 157 percent more than the total budget of the Ministry of Agriculture as of last financial year. It seems to me -(Interruptions)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, the budget for agriculture last financial year was Shs 146 billion while for this financial year, it is Shs 184 billion. So I think the calculations of the honorable member are not correct.

MS KAMYA: If the hon. Minister of Finance had been listening carefully, he would have noted that I said that in the last financial year, the budget for agriculture was Shs 148 billion. So, to get a whole Ministry of Agriculture, which includes NAADS and all those activities that reach every corner of this country and allocate it such little money and instead have CHOGM, which is supposed to take four days, take over 100 percent of the entire budget of last year -(Mr Musumba rose_)- I thank the minister for the information but the point still is that it is incredible in my mind.  

Mr Speaker, if I could be allowed to finish –(Interruptions)

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, hon. Beti Kamya is giving the impression that whereas a ministry’s budget was Shs 152 billion, CHOGM, which is only a four-day event, is taking the same amount of money or even more. I just want to clarify that the investment we are putting in CHOGM is not only for four days. This investment that is being made to ensure that we have a good CHOGM is investment in infrastructure, which will remain in this country for the next very many years to come. Therefore, it is erroneous for the honorable minister in the Shadow Government to give the impression that an event of four days is taking more money than what the ministry takes for one year. I just wanted to correct that impression.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way.  The information I want to give is in form of a question. I wonder if the minister who has just taken his seat could tell us what the Shs 6.8 billion under CHOGM has to do with transport in Bank of Uganda. What has transport in Bank of Uganda - against which we have allocated Shs 6.8 billion – got to do with CHOGM?

Secondly, I have noticed that the Chief Logistics Officer of CHOGM, hon. Kizige is just a former MP; he is not a civil servant; he is not a recruited civil servant yet he has positioned himself there. My concern is, under what circumstances can an ordinary Uganda just emerge and start handling such big monies yet he is not in the routine civil service? This is some of the information I wanted to give; it is to show that the problem is not just the figures but that even those who are handling the money are people who have been rejected by their people in a popular election; what are you talking about? (Ms Kamya rose_)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Beti Kamya. CHOGM money is not being allocated only to one ministry. CHOGM money is spread around many ministries. Can I inform this House, Mr Speaker, that the Uganda Police is harvesting very beautifully from their CHOGM money -(Laughter)

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, I want possibly on this very note to get much more clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. There is this CHOGM police station at Kabalagala. I would basically like to know from the honourable minister, how much of this CHOGM money has been allocated to this police station. This is important because if there is any mistake at Munyonyo, Bunga, and all those other places, the best place to handle such matters will be Kabalagala police station but everybody knows how this police station looks like. Since the mister says he has the money, can this Parliament know whether there is some money in place, under CHOGM, for Kabalagala Police Station? (Laughter) I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. As my colleague is already alluding, I would also like to draw the attention of the minister and the House at large to a police post, which is located at Kololo airstrip. Actually it is only that I did not prepare myself but I should have brought here a photograph of that police post, which I took; it is in a very appalling state and yet it is at Kololo airstrip. Can the honourable minister take it into account that that police post is also shaming? (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues, I am very impressed by the concern of this House about the affairs of the police. However, if I had to get all the police stations that are in and around Kampala into what I would call a presentable shape, I would definitely have asked for far more money. So, I want to say that we have been selective in refurbishing these police stations because the budget could not allow; we have been selective of the police stations to renovate. The first one is Kibuye; definitely if you go to Kibuye you will see that it is no longer the same. The other one is Entebbe Police air wing, the police station at the Airport. We are also renovating Central Police Station, Kampala. So, we could not have the money to have all the police stations renovated. 

With Kololo, we do not think that there will be many visitors going there, anyway -(Laughter)- but the issue is that our CHOGM budget is so small that if we had to renovate all the police stations in and around Kampala, then I would have asked for far much more money. Anyway, I want to report to this Parliament that the money that has been given to us for the Police is already being utilised; we have now got modern gadgets and we can now monitor movements of wrong doers; we have bought vehicles that will be patrolling the town to make sure wrongdoers are apprehended as and when they commit acts. So, we could not be able to handle each and every aspect of police but I want to confirm that definitely the Police is one of the beneficiaries of this CHOGM money. Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank all the honourable members who have given information and any other useful interjections. Anyway, my point that a lot of money is being spent on CHOGM has been made and if you want me to give you information –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But I think CHOGM is an event that has prompted us to work on a number of things that could have been delayed. It is, therefore, an investment; it is not recurrent expenditure; it is a capital development and a capital development that will remain after the four days.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I think that it is not entirely true that we are getting real value for CHOGM even if there are development projects. I have a vivid example of the CHOGM budget of Shs 5.6 billion allocated to media and publicity. I have been in the media and publicity business for a long time and I know that the biggest advertisers in this country, MTN and Uganda Breweries only have a budget of about Shs 5 billion for marketing and publicity and yet they are on every media doing promotions, everyday; they are on billboards; they give out cars and they are in every part of the country. Anyway, it is unfortunate that it was not possible for us to debate this CHOGM thing yesterday otherwise we have a lot of information but now that we have been given opportunity, we should look at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ budget carefully because we are looking at government expenditure in the ministry - (Mr Musumba rose_) I would rather finish this -(Laughter)- because I think that the information is not very useful. 

The point I am making is that it is a pity that we cannot debate most of these budgets in detail otherwise a lot of overpriced, shoddy work is loaded in taxpayer’s money; a lot of overpriced work but in the interest of getting away with CHOGM, we are closing our eyes and passing everything. That is why I said that it would be nice to see a year without CHOGM.

DR SURUMA: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to make sweeping statements about shoddy work without giving proof of such shoddy work?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I can substantiate if you give me the whole day because I have all the information. But in one minute I want to say that the whole country is up in arms; there is a whole public outcry over those billboards, which are not related to CHOGM. They show us, “I am ready for CHOGM.” They also show us the beautiful face of Dr Maggie Kigozi and so on but the whole country is asking, “Is that value for money?” I have just told you that we are using a budget of Shs 5 billion, which is equivalent to that of one of the biggest advertisers in the country, which is not viable for us as Ugandans. I think that we really need to investigate the amount of money that is being spent on CHOGM.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to give each Member who contributes only five minutes because I have noticed that you have made the debate open-ended and we might not end. So, any contribution coming up from now on will only last for five minutes.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give information. I know that part of the CHOGM project is to plant grass and trees on the road reserve between Entebbe and Kampala. However, when you drive along there, you will see the kind of shoddy work we are talking about; some of the grass has been washed away by running water; some of it has dried up; it is a total disaster -(Laughter)- maybe we need to call the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to help.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, in summary and in the interest of time, I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to page 6, where we have achievements of the sector during the previous financial year. Having satisfied myself that the point on CHOGM is made, when you read of things like achievements - let us begin at the bottom where they say they coordinated CHOGM 2007 preparations, and it is listed as an achievement. Coordinated! This is a Ministry of Foreign Affairs achievement, “coordinated CHOGM 2007 activities”. And another achievement, “provided protocol and consular services” and another achievement, “sourced for training opportunities abroad”. We discussed this some time last year. If these are listed - because when we allocate money for activities we expect achievements out of those activities - now if you are going to justify the spending of money by telling me that you coordinated CHOGM activities when I know that each activity was allocated a sum of money, it beats my understanding of “achievement”. In general, we need achievements that show value for money, that show expectations out of the money that we spend. 

We discussed this last year I think with the Minister of Finance. We were then discussing the report of the Ministry of Agriculture and I was informed that this is a standard format of reporting. I still maintain that it cannot be an achievement to do your work. An achievement can only be what you get out of your work. What was your expectation out of your work? But when you report your work for which you are paid and for which money is allocated as an achievement, I think we need to redefine the word “achievement”. 

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, an achievement is attainment of an objective. If you have an objective and you achieve it; that is what an achievement is.

MS KAMYA: I am very uncomfortable if the objective of the ministry was to coordinate CHOGM activities. Is that an objective, surely? Mr Speaker, an objective –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: An objective could be just to attain peace in the region. That could be an achievement. Another objective could be to construct roads. The achievements of these ministries are not the same. If you secure peace in the region it is an achievement. You may not see it, it is not tangible but if the circumstances are that peace has been obtained, it is an achievement. 

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I am giving my view and my views are that these achievements are not good enough for the money that we put into them. Not being a member of this committee in my lay position I could not have written this page of achievements: we promoted peace, we sourced training, and we coordinated activities. This is not a technical statement from a technical committee. I could have written this from my membership as a Member of the Committee on Agriculture. So, really I expect a committee to give us a more specific record of achievements, not a broad record, which everybody knows.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is a question of opinion. It is really an opinion; whether it is an achievement is an opinion really, but it depends on your assignment. If you have obtained the goals of your assignment it is an achievement. If people go to Juba and try to persuade Kony to come back, it is an achievement. They might have spent money but if Kony ceases to fight that is an achievement.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. However, I think that my role is to get value for money for the people of Uganda. If they set themselves very low objectives, it is my right and responsibility, my duty as a Member of Parliament for the people of Lubaga North to say, “Your objectives are too low for the money and the effort that I put in.” I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see, we can never agree on this. It is a personal assessment. It is a personal opinion and I think one is entitled to hold their opinion.

1.41
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the members of the committee for raising very important issues under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. However, I would love in future the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but preferably government to come up clearly to set the policy concerning Ugandan missions abroad. At one time, it was a deliberate government policy to phase down most of the missions abroad. In fact in many countries the ambassadors were recalled and missions were closed. At this time this mission was contrary to the objectives that government was promoting the image of the country abroad. I do not know what exactly the policy is now. Are we still constricting on the number of missions or it is now an open policy to go as much as possible in many countries?

Secondly, there is this issue of foreign properties. I had an opportunity to serve on the Public Accounts Committee in the last Parliament. What came to our knowledge when we had an opportunity to go to various missions abroad was very appalling. For instance, in the Embassy in Brussels the Ministry of Finance was supposed to provide about Euros 500 per month for heating. The Ministry of Finance failed to provide those funds but because of failure to provide the money over a year, the heating was not provided and the building was condemned. Government is now required to pay even more money to break down the building and also to make the place more habitable because the neighbours’ properties were under-valued because of being in neighbourhood with a poor property that was infested and the pool had various insects.  

Mr Speaker, this was very appalling when we failed to find out what the priorities of the Ministry of Finance are. Failure to provide little money in order –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs gives its budget to this House and this House approves the budget and the Ministry spends accordingly and allocates the money to various missions abroad. Is it in order for the honourable member to keep saying that the Ministry of Finance failed to pay a mission when it is not the work of the Ministry of Finance to allocate money to missions abroad?

THE SPEAKER: No. I think there is inadequate funding. The Ministry of Finance is the one, which presents the budget for the entire country, including budgets for ministries.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, you might have wanted to add for him that the Ministry of Finance reads a budget, which is prepared by His Excellency the President and this budget is inadequate, as far as these facilities are concerned.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Uganda Mission in Cairo was evicted because of the many difficulties they had, the Egyptian law was that they had to be paid off to leave the house. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs at that time in their wisdom wanted to immediately use that money to acquire another property but they met with stiff resistance from the Ministry of Finance who actually directed that that money be deposited to the Consolidated Fund. According to the law, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs could have used that money and asked for it.  

Secondly, most of our missions abroad especially in countries where there is winter are extremely affected and they spend little time in offices because there are no heating systems in these offices. So, during winter time you expect low returns from our missions abroad. They work less hours because they cannot sit in the cold in those offices.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The most important contradiction I would like to raise is that the failure to provide adequate funds causes a bigger problem and in the end government pays colossal sums of money. This is very unfortunate. I wish the Minister of Foreign Affairs could get all these details and give better information.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter of properties abroad, their maintenance and state seems to be coming up every time a Member stands up to say something. We want to agree that there is need to maintain the properties abroad. I just want to inform this House that the cause of debate should change now because page 58 of our ministerial policy statement says as follows: “All Uganda’s properties abroad are now undergoing a process of transfer from Uganda Property Holdings to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for management.” It is true that Cabinet has directed that the process of management of properties abroad now goes to Foreign Affairs. We believe that this will enable us to pay more and particular attention to these matters. So, the lamentations can come to an end now and look unto us to see how we will best utilise this new directive. I thank you.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I would have loved –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the lamentation is about inadequate funding. Even if they are under Foreign Affairs, if you do not have sufficient funds you will not make miracles. So what they are doing, they are fighting for you [Mr Dombo: “Absolutely”.] They are saying more funds should be allocated for the purpose. Hon. Dombo, please wind up.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I am very surprised because I thought the honourable minister would have sat back so that we try to do his work, which he has failed to do in the past as a Minister. I want this house to note that this is a reversal in policy. These properties were in the hands of Ministry of Foreign Affairs and because the ministry was not providing sufficient funds for managing these properties that is why they were reverted to property holdings. This is basically reversal and if there is a reversal without provision of sufficient funds, the situation will not be helped.

I will give an example. A similar problem is cropping up in many ministries. Right now in the Ministry of Energy we have discovered that it pays a lot of money in rent to Amber House Ltd. Amber House Ltd belongs to government but nobody knows who its shareholders are - we know it is government but who the directors and managers are, nobody knows. There is a lot of money collected from both government and other private people renting the property of Amber House. The Committee on Commissions and Statutory Enterprises has directed the ministry to do further investigations to find out exactly what is happening. There is a bigger problem than meets the eye in our policy statements.

Finally, recently it was reported in the media that Uganda is paying up to Shs 2 billion if not more to private firms to do publicity on behalf of the Government of Uganda and also to draft letters despite the many professors of English we have here and the career diplomats that we have in the country. When I read this in the public media I felt this was a little bit unfortunate, if it is true, because up to now nobody has refuted it. I have to debate on the basis that there could be some grain of truth in this. If we must engage consultancies, we must not diminish the role of our embassies abroad. I have been to a number of countries but you find many embassies’ officers lamenting yet we can conveniently pay money to Gifted by Nature and “destroyed by the people”? (Laughter) We pay money to some private firms, they to do public relations on behalf of the people of Uganda, when we have career diplomats in embassies who are not facilitated? This is a contradiction, which I would rather the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance helped us cure, and as a Parliament to approve on behalf of the people of Uganda. I thank you. (Dr Suruma rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: No, he has finished but -(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell him that I know who the directors of Amber House are. I will be happy to provide him with the list.

THE SPEAKER: Could you give us the names? (Laughter)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, for example the Chairman of the Board is hon. Steven Bamwanga who is a renowned estate value surveyor [Hon. Members: “Who are the others?”] (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Could the Ministry of Foreign Affairs respond to queries raised?

1.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable members. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and her committee for a job well done. I just want to respond to some of the concerns that have been raised and I will start with the ones from Okumu Regan, Minister of Foreign Affairs in the shadow government. (Laughter) 

We did make the presentation, which is the case for transferring the services of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs from classification or categorisation as that one of public affairs to that one of economic affairs and we would like to enjoy the support of the whole House for this noble cause.

On the properties abroad, I have already made the intervention that we are engaging each other to see that this matter is resolved in a sustainable way. Improvements will be made on these properties in due course after we have finalised the engagement within government.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking a very minor clarification from the Minister because the impression he is giving to this House is as if all properties abroad were all under the management of Uganda Property Holdings. There is an internal engagement to get these properties to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; however, earlier on I had indicated that actually some of these properties as I speak now, have been managed. They have not been transferred to Uganda Property Holdings. They have been under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. And even so, the management of these properties under the Ministry has not been adequate. I gave the example of Uganda House on Kenyatta Avenue in a very prime area, Uganda House in the UK, and others. The clarification is, what have you done with those ones you have been managing, now that you want more?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, when I said we are engaging each other in government to resolve this problem, one of the things that we are engaging ourselves in is to ensure that we retain some of the proceeds from these properties and have a free hand in the decision to repair and acquire. I would invite the minister in the shadow government to look at page 58 of the policy statement, which lays out all the things that we are trying to do to ensure that is addressed.

There has been a lot about CHOGM. A lot has been said, most of which is evidently based on absence of sufficient information about exactly what is happening. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, because we would like to have an opportunity to educate the Members of the Opposition in detail; on what is happening and how CHOGM is being coordinated, what will happen and what will continue happening so that this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not Members of the Opposition; it should be Members of Parliament and you should constantly brief the committees, which were set up so that we get informed. So, it is not only the Opposition, it could even be the people on your side; some of them may not be aware of what is happening.

MR KATURAMU: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker. I feel that what I have to raise is an important matter. I did not get the opportunity but –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, we finished the debate.

MR KATURAMU: So, let me raise it to the minister.

THE SPEAKER: If it is a clarification, you can.

MR KATURAMU: Yes, I seek clarification. In this report it is stated that the Government of Uganda streamlined the membership for which it must affiliate to international organisations and they have been clearly put down. However, there is one organisation that I do not see here but which is of significance and one where our country must retain membership and subscription; it is the World Trade Organisation. Since 2005 Uganda has not subscribed to this organisation.

THE SPEAKER: Is it not the Ministry of Trade concerned with that?

MR KATURAMU: Yes, Mr Speaker. The reason why I brought up this matter is because the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - for instance, if you talk about membership to these organisations where Uganda must show its priority and the foreign missions we have abroad, one of the objectives and responsibilities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, what we are saying is this: there are other international organisations that relate with the ministry concerned. I would have thought that WTO is for the Ministry of Trade and not all the organisations. For instance, Parliament has this organisation, we do not go to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but we handle it ourselves. So, if you want to deal with the World Trade Organisation, you should consult hon. Ahabwe and hon. Janat Mukwaya.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, page 15 of this report had alluded that tourism is one of the priorities, which our foreign missions must promote. There is no way you can talk about tourism and ought not to talk about our subscription [Mr Ahabwe: “Information to him”.] to WTO.

THE SPEAKER: No, please, let the Minister of Foreign Affairs answer the query. Otherwise, we are really expanding the debate.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, on the point of WTO and our membership, it is true that the Government of Uganda is and continues to be a member of the World Trade Organisation and it is captured in the report on page 12. If I will be allowed to continue –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You may take information from the Chairman of the Committee on Trade.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, hon. Musumba for giving way and thank you hon. Hood Katuramu, for bringing that issue. The organisation that has been deregistered is actually the World Tourism Organisation and not the World Trade Organisation; they are both abbreviated as WTO. That is the correction I wanted to make. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on CHOGM because we have information and we are ready to inform the Parliament any time. We have written to them that we are ready –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You will suffocate us with information. 

MR MUSUMBA: Okay Sir, we shall suffocate you with the information and we will start tomorrow. This is in response to hon. Beti Kamya’s view of achievements. The primary assignment for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to engage countries outside Uganda in promoting peace as a first priority and avoid war –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, while I appreciate the minister’s clarification on the primary responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I think that I sit or we sit in this House as representatives of the people who are the final supervisors of what is being done. What I said here was that if your target is too low and as you supervise, it is my right to say that that target is too low, or that it is not worth my money. Washing clothes is an activity; the achievement is washed clothes, and not the action of washing. So, coordination is an activity and we want achievements out of the activity. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is a personal view. She has a personal view and you too have a personal view; do not labour too much to convince each other –(Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that there was a definition of objectivity in these matters, but I will proceed. The other issue that was raised was the Shs 6.8 billion for transport from Bank of Uganda. Money was borrowed from Bank of Uganda to the tune of Shs 6.8 billion to open letters of credit to procure cars for the heads of state, and that was in anticipation that when we get more money, we will be able to replace this money because we were running out of time to order for these cars. The Shs 6.8 billion, therefore, was to replace the letters of credit that were opened by Bank of Uganda to procure these vehicles. 

A name of a gentleman who has been employed by the secretariat as a logistics officer has been brought to this House. I want to respond as follows: 

This is a position that is in compliance with what the secretariat in London required. The Commonwealth Secretariat did say that as part of those things that you must have in place in order to host CHOGM, you must have an officer who ensures that the timelines that have been established, the things that must be done in whatever period of time and by who, are done and reported to London. His sourcing and employment, therefore, is in response to that requirement. We are happy with his work and I pray that the hon. Members of Parliament allow us to continue ensuring that we deliver the work of CHOGM in time.

There is also information that came in from hon. Beti Kamya, which we shall clarify, which gave an impression that the budget for MTN is Shs 5 billion. Mr Speaker, there is an international component of this media and publicity exercise, which includes all the main TVs in the world. If heads of state are coming here, definitely we expect that Uganda will be put in the spotlight and we want to be able to maximize what the people out there in the world see about Uganda at the time when the various heads of state will be here. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister, for trying to clarify to us that you have international media bodies where you are advertising and publicising Uganda. However, we do watch and read from these international media and I have not seen anything about Uganda in the last six months. I can give you an example of where most people advertise, such as in the premiership. We saw Raila Odinga advertising himself there. These are the types of media programmes where you should advertise CHOGM; where we will be able to see the value for money, unless you have advertised in the media organisations that we do not watch. We watch Al Jazeera, CNN, MTV, ITV, but we have not seen anything there. We have only seen billboards in Kampala, like that of the Kyabazinga smiling that he is ready for CHOGM -(Laughter)- yet there is nothing for him.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am also seeking additional clarification from the minister. I do not know the criteria they used to identify some of these personalities appearing on the billboards. If it is institutional, then I looked around and did not see our Speaker -(Applause)- heeding that Parliament is ready for CHOGM. I have not seen the President, the Chief Justice or even the boss of Uganda Tourism Board ready for CHOGM, nor have I seen the Minister of Defence ready for CHOGM (Laughter) What criteria did they use to come up with Maggie Kigozi?

THE SPEAKER: But Margaret Kigozi is in charge of investment. (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for that clarification. I just want to add that the media strategy and its implementation have been contracted to the people who are most experienced in media affairs. Hon. Okupa says that he has not seen anything in the international media but the fact of the matter is that there is a programme that involves timelines and I think the international aspect is yet to come so that the things that are put out there are already in place or defined for that purpose. It will come and it will be there.

Finally, hon. Reagan Okumu wondered what we are doing and whether we are the only ones in Somalia. I want to say that we are doing a good job in Somalia; Uganda is proud to be in Somalia and we want to thank the Parliament for their authorisation. Burundi has come, and others will come.

THE SPEAKER: You should comment on something raised by hon. Dombo about the Shs 2 billion being spent on drafting letters; that is something that was in the papers. 

MR MUSUMBA: Hon. Dombo did ask whether we are paying Shs 2 billion to draft letters and carry out PR for Uganda. First of all, it is true that we are engaging some people by way of consultancy abroad, but to say that theirs is to draft letters is an insult to the many capable people that the Government of Uganda employs both within Uganda and abroad on a regular basis. Of course newspapers can write whatever they want; our work here is to clarify and say that the Shs 2 billion is not being paid to people to draft letters.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the comments and I now put the question that we adopt the report. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have been here up to now, 2.00 p.m., and it is time to suspend the proceedings so that you can go for your lunch. I think an hour is enough, so that we resume at 3.00 p.m. and the Minister of Internal Affairs will make his statement then we will continue with another committee and see how to proceed. 

(The House was suspended at 2.11 p.m._, on resumption at 3.30 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Before we get another report, let us get a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am responding to a directive this House gave me last Thursday to bring a statement to this honourable House and answer the questions on how the exercise of recruiting cadet assistant superintendents of police was carried out.

On Thursday, 23 August 2007, Parliament questioned the manner in which cadet assistant superintendents of police were recently recruited into the Uganda Police Force. There was a suggestion that as many as 40 percent of the recruits were from one district. This is not true.

Mr Speaker, recruitment of cadet assistant superintendents of police follows the normal established Public Service procedure. The procedure involves receiving authority from the Minister of Public Service to recruit; then the Public Service Commission advertises the jobs and the processing of these applications is done.

In the recent case of the cadet superintendent of police, we received an overwhelming number of applications, which amounted to more than 5,000 in total. In order to give equal opportunity to all these candidates, we had to first of all make sure that they had the minimum qualification, that is, a university degree. In order to help us sieve the capable ones from the incapable ones, they were all invited for an aptitude test, which was set and conducted again by the Public Service Commission. Results of the aptitude test were used to generate a shortlist of those who were invited for oral interviews.

The selection of the successful candidates was based on the results of the above procedure and on references provided by the candidates in their applications. In total, 350 candidates were selected for recruitment and they are due to start training on 01 September 2007.

I have included a table in this report, which shows the candidates that were recruited, by district. The table indicates that it is not true that 40 percent of those recruited are from any one given district, but I must also sadly say that there are seven districts, which are not represented because, to quote the recruiting panels: “Despite the recruitment committee’s desire to ensure that the cadets are recruited from every district in the country, the committee was not able to find suitable candidates from the following districts: Kotido, Kitgum, Moroto, Kabong, Amuru, Bukwo and Nakapiripirit. We think this could have been as a result of people not receiving sufficient information.”

The committee has recommended that in future, and as you know, every year we are allowed by Public Service to recruit a number of officers to replace those that are dying off or who are leaving the Force and to cater for the expansion of the force. In future, Mr Speaker, it was agreed that we should be able to advertise even on local radios. In that case, we may be able to attract applications from those disadvantaged districts.

I am laying on the Table the complete list of all those people that we have recruited. This list indicates the names of the candidates and their respective districts of origin. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.36
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Permit me to salute the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for the report he has just presented to Parliament. As the representative of youth of Northern Uganda in Parliament, and taking into consideration the fact that the North stretches from West Nile through Acholi, Lango up to Karamoja, you will realise that out of 350 recruits that the minister has just presented before Parliament, only 37 are from the four sub-regions that I have read to this House that constitute Northern region. 

Mr Speaker, Section 11 of the Police Act, Chapter 303 as amended, and Section 11(1)(i) says that the function of the Police Council is to ensure that the Force is of national character and composition.

Looking at this list, I feel shocked as a representative of the youth of Northern Uganda. I feel moved; I feel aggrieved and I want to plead to Parliament; I want to plead to the Ministry of Internal Affairs that let us be fair to Ugandans. Let us take into consideration all the regions that we have in this country. Looking at the situation where out of 350, we are only 37 on the list, and this is not a regular police force, these are three-star cadets, where after one or two years –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have to debate while taking into account the facts as given to you. 5,000 people applied and they must have had a bachelor’s degree. They were subjected to an aptitude test and 350 came out; I think you have to argue that maybe some were not tested.  

MR OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honestly, I do not doubt the human resource that we have in the North. When these things were advertised, our people came and did the interviews. Mr Speaker, permit me to quote Article 211 clause 3 of our Constitution. It says that the Uganda Police Force shall be nationalistic; that is what I want to emphasis. It should be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive and its members shall be citizens of Uganda of good character. Is the minister telling us that we do not have Ugandans of good character in the North? Do we not have nationalistic Ugandans in the North? I want to plead with the ministry to reconsider the region I represent in this Parliament and ensure that we also have representatives. I know that there are people who did these interviews; I need the support of this Parliament. That is my submission on this subject matter, and I would be one of the happiest Ugandans if my earnest and humble appeal to the ministry through Parliament is taken into consideration; taking into consideration West Nile, Lango, Acholi and Karamoja sub-regions. I would be the happiest.  I thank you.

MR KASAIJA: I would like to take this opportunity to give the guidelines that we gave to the interview panels so that when you are debating this matter, you debate it with this information at the back of your mind. 

The selection criteria for candidates by the recruitment committee:

1. The objectives of transparency and professionalism in the recruitment process must be observed. 

2. That the panel of interviewers as proposed for three boards was representative of key stakeholders.

3. That there is need to ensure that the cadets are recruited from every district of Uganda. 

4. That a scoring model based on fixed weights be utilised to bring out attributes of candidates. 

5. That there is no need to compromise quality in the recruitment exercise. 

6. That the candidates to be interviewed be only those that have passed the aptitude test administered by the Public Service Commission.
 
7. As an additional assessment tool, the need to ensure that cadets that are recruited from every district might be used to make a decision on candidates who are at par on interviews’ rating.
 
8. And this is the most important one. The selection of successful candidates should not only be based on scores alone but also on other factors, for example, districts, whether the candidate is gainfully employed or not, sex of the candidate, and representation of those regions already in the Police Force.

MR DOMBO: According to the minister’s submission you will recall that the day this question was asked, hon. Rukutana, who is a Member of Parliament and also a minister was present in this House. He gave very useful information to this House to the effect that press reports, which had suggested that the MP for Ruhama had caused the recruitment of about 50 members to the Police was actually erroneous, and he said that the MP of Ruhama caused the recruitment of only five people. I want to find out from the honourable minister, at what level did that happen from the criteria you are giving? The minister may have been out but hon. Rukutana told us that the press reports, which said that the MP for Ruhama had caused the recruitment of 50 constables was wrong; the number was only five. If that was the information, I want to find out, at what stage did these five come in from the criteria, which you are giving?   

Secondly, from this statement, would it be scientific proof that people from Bushenyi district; people from Kabale district; people from Ntungamo district; Kiruhura, Kisoro and Rukungiri, are more intelligent and have more prowess for them to have passed the aptitude test and all other tests better than other areas in the region? Would this statement prove that? I want to get that clarification from the honourable minister.

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister in his own words said that the recruitment into the Police Force was taking into consideration the district representations. When you go through this list, you cannot find Kitgum, you cannot find Amoro, Kotido, Nakapiripirit and others. Can the honourable minister clarify basing on his own statement, which he made today the 29th in this very august House this afternoon? Can you please clarify?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for having come out to show us the details of the officers recruited. I was watching the debate and when I heard how the numbers were spread out, I was saddened. I thank my brother representing the youth in the North for having highlighted the plight of our people.

You are quite aware that the North, the whole of it, is represented by three people from Gulu. It is the most vulnerable and it needs to engage most of its work force, including the youth. It is not true that Kitgum district, which I represent, has no single person to qualify to offer services to this country yet I am one of those who come from this district. It gives me more pain when the minister goes on to justify the procedure. I looked at one of those factors, which he pointed out that the representative should be one of the key stakeholders. I would like to challenge the minister, in reference to Kitgum and the North at large, who were these key stakeholders who could not have identified a representation from the whole region except three people to offer a service to our country? 

MR WOPUWA: I just want to inform my colleague that when these people are recruiting, they travel with people following them from Kampala. [Hon. Members: “Yes.”]  If you are to look at that list, you will find that a person said to be from Manafwa may not even be originating from Manafwa, and I am not surprised that the Police is the most corrupt institution in this country. (Laughter and Applause)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Mabira, for giving way. The chairperson of the recruitment committee is none other than Ambassador Mwaka. Ambassador Mwaka hails from Northern Uganda –(Laughter) you asked the question: who were these key stakeholders? In their report, they made it very clear that they received very few applications from Northern Uganda. Mr Speaker, if this House wishes, we can bring all these details here. 

THE SPEAKER: This is what we will do. You said 5,000; you will give us that list –(Applause)- and then 350 were short listed, you will give us that list too so that we can examine that because we are speculating on what happened. Let us get the original documents so that we may see the problem. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was the one who raised this matter. I want to make a correction from the preamble the minister gave that 40 percent were coming from one district. That was not the issue. The issue was that 40 percent of the cadet assistant superintendents of police recruits were coming from the West but the majority were coming from the three districts of Kiruhura, Ntungamo and Rukungiri; and this has been confirmed here as a fact.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, we have the list –(Interruption)- yes, I come from Kiruhura district. If you look at the list that the minister has given out, the biggest number comes from Ntungamo, followed by Bushenyi, followed by Kisoro, and probably Wakiso –(Laughter)- yes, so, is it in order for the Member to pick on Kiruhura as the district that has the highest number of recruits when we rank about the 10th?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is better that we see that list because as the minister said, the seven districts that he named maybe never applied, and that might have affected, especially the North, if it is true that the seven districts in the North did not apply; this might have affected the number. We should examine this if we are to satisfy ourselves.

MR OKUPA: I was only clarifying and reconfirming the nature of the question I put in and I said that to a great extent it goes with what we have seen here. I raised this matter because I got complaints from Teso; from the youth who went for recruitment when they were left out. They were over 200 degree holders from Teso. We went to the districts of Amuria, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Kumi, Pallisa, and the new district of Bukedea. It was based on this that I raised this matter. To our surprise, when you look at this, it is really disturbing. Soroti district, which is the mother district, has only two. It was based on those grounds that we brought this matter here because there were complaints from the youth who were left out when they went for recruitment. 

The issue, which hon. Wopuwa raised was one of the concerns that came up. There were people who were ferried from some districts to other districts and they got recruited from districts where they do not come from. So, I am not even surprised that instead of the honourable minister giving us the list with the names of the officers recruited and by district –(Interjection)- you have not done that! You only say that you are going to lay it on the Table. It would have been better if we had that list of the 350 people showing their names and districts of origin here. This report is incomplete.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi Mbaguta): thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give information on which the basis of a district is given. When advertising is done by the Public Service Commission or any other authority, individuals respond to that particular job, looking at the qualifications and other requirements for that job. On the applications, the individuals indicate their home districts. That is the format that is given for all national recruitment in the Public Service. The service commissions have no reason to doubt when an applicant says, “I come from Rukungiri,” – they have no reason to deny that. So, I am not very sure how the recruiting agent can tell that I am not from that particular district.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I wanted to give: I was talking to the area MP for Iganga and he told me that there was a Besigye even nominated for this interview from Iganga and as the local leaders, they put stern objections because they know from their sociological upbringing that that kind of name cannot emerge from that area.

Secondly, an MP from Karamoja also claimed that there was someone who submitted the name Karuhanga.  So, which other criteria does the minister have to determine the districts other than what people say?  Because at this rate, 127 people from one area, Western Uganda and then the balance is for the other three regions. The MP for Ruhama - what capacity does she have to influence recruitment in a national institution? Even if she just recommended half of a person, in what capacity?  In law there is what we call conflict of interest. Why do public leaders conduct themselves in such a tribalistic manner that even goes beyond conflict of interest? Honourable Minister, -(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much my honourable brother for giving way. If somebody really had listened to my statement carefully, we even talked about references. I am not denying that the First Lady did not recommend, and I used the words “recommended a few.”  But may I also reveal it that even other Members of Parliament sitting here - and I am seeing them - have been approaching me on this matter?

THE SPEAKER: But is there anything wrong for you, honourable members, to recommend anybody for recruitment? Is there anything to prevent you? For instance, I come from Masaka. I see a name here, Agaba Stephen Lugubwa. Can he not come from Masaka? Honourable members, it will depend on your understanding of the district of origin because somebody could say, my district of origin is different because his parents are living there.  Unless you have to go some generations back to say, “Where did they come from?”  But you will find that the parents of Agaba - because he was born in Masaka, he says, “My district of origin is Masaka.”  This is what is here.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I want to give this experience. I was recruiting mobilisers as many of you know when I was at the Movement Secretariat, and I got a candidate called Kayizzi from Kitgum. He is still there up to today. I asked him, “Are you are Acholi?”  He said, “Yes,” and he was an Acholi called Kayizzi. Some of these names people have acquired them because they have been under the influence of their guardians and they take Kinyoro, Kikiga or Acholi names when actually ethnically they may not be born from there.  

I want to give another piece of information. There have been two states of recruitment, because I am hearing some of you confusing one another. Can I use this opportunity also to clarify one issue? There have been two states of recruitment; there have been those of the Special Police Constables (SPCs) who are non-commissioned officers. Those we have been recruited moving from district to district. So please, let us not discuss that category. The category today,  which I was asked to present information about are police cadets whose number of jobs was advertised, people applied, selections were made, interviews were carried out -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the hon. Matia Kasaija. Mr Minister, you are my personal friend. I would not like to engage you in what I am going to engage you in but you have already forced me to come up and really engage you in what I want to ask you. The hon. Member representing the Youth, Northern Uganda, did cite a constitutional provision, which does not tally with my former senior bureaucrat, the hon. Minister of State for Public Service. These are two different institutions. The Army and the Police are very sensitive institutions which you cannot compare at par with the ordinary civil service provisions.  

It is for that reason that it is explicitly stated in the Constitution that recruitment of persons in the Police Force, which I believe is also applicable to the Army, must have regional character and representation. I do agree with you, if a person from Arua, a Lugbara by tribe is born in Kampala and he calls himself Mukasa, because Mukasa is a Catholic Christian name; if the interviewing panel is after regional representation, the panel should even be able go further ask this person, “Ngonia: where do you come from?” Because you are driving at the regional representation.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I have heard a number of colleagues discussing the recruitment of the cadets in the Police that it is done in favour of certain tribes and against some nationalities in the country. For sure and for certain, those of you who know some of us, I can never support such a thing. But is it in order for a whole national assembly to discuss an issue that can cause a lot of enmity, a lot of hatred and mostly in the countryside? Is it in order that such an issue, assuming that hon. Matia Kasaija, his elder brother hon. Rugunda and Gen. Kale Kayihura could have made a mistake, that the issue could be discussed through that back door? Is it in order on our part, as a national assembly to discuss before the entire country an issue here which can cause further divisions; which can cause further damage? Is it really in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think the appropriate question should have been, “Is it prudent?” As to the order, you see this debate was prompted by what was put in the newspapers and somebody raised it. He said this was the report and then the minister was required to make a statement. The minister has given his statement and that is how this debate has come up. Whether it is prudent, that is another matter but you see we are debating a statement, which a minister has made. But honourable members, as I said, we have also to be prudent when we are handling national matters. Therefore, we should find a way of finding out the facts and as I had suggested maybe let us get the list, which we requested for, then we shall get a committee to go through it and then advise us because there are emotions coming up in the debate. 

MR OKUPA: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker.

MR WADRI: I had not finished the point of clarification that I wanted to draw to the attention of my very good friend Matia. But of course, I want to thank you for your good interpretation and analysis of the issue. These are issues affecting institutions, which are clearly reflected in the national Constitution of this country. That is to show to us as a country that there are very important institutions, which affect the entire country. Therefore it is befitting that as a legislative arm of government, we discuss and resolve it because if at our level we cannot understand these issues, how about the ordinary person out there? I think we are even discussing it in a more friendly atmosphere otherwise in the public out there people are nearly plucking one another’s eyes in an attempt to drive home their points. 

So I think it is only in order that I accept this wise ruling you have made, Mr Speaker. Let us get more information on this matter and of course while we are doing that we were further made to understand that the training is supposed to commence on the 1st of next month. If that be the case, we should stay that commencement of training until when we have resolved this matter, otherwise we will be doing a postmortem. If the minister comes with that information after either a month or a week and the training has already commenced, of what use will it be to us to discuss? It is my intention and prayer that I move a motion to the effect that the training of the cadet officers recruited, which is scheduled to commence on the 1st of September 2007 be stayed until the Minister of Internal Affairs satisfies Parliament about the nature of the recruitment. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: But is it the last recruitment?  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I want to debate the motion.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I would like guidance on the motion on the Floor. To my knowledge recruitment is the function of the Executive. In that regard, is this motion competent? (Interjection)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the further information I want to give is that this exercise has not started today; it has been going on for the last eight months. Indeed were it not for the bureaucracy in government, these cadets ought to have started training sometime in October last year. But that could not happen because we had to go through the procedures. 

Two, I want to inform this House that the majority of these candidates have already even received their letters of appointment. (Interjections)

Three, by staying the starting day, it makes very serious financial implications -(Interjections)– Yes; I know what I am talking about. I know how much money we have already spent; I know how much money has already gone into payments that would start off these young men and women. Therefore, I will pray this House - your investigations can go on -(Interruption)- yes, they can go on even when these people are in their training. If there is any candidate who is not doing a good job, we dismiss him or her rather than holding the whole exercise. 

Time and again we are being crucified not only here but in the general public that the Police is inefficient. We are looking for a cadreship that can answer some of your concerns in the Police, which you are not seeing according to your satisfaction. Therefore, I will earnestly pray colleagues that you let us continue; you can direct whatever way you want to direct so that the exercise continues. Out of 350, even if I manage to graduate 300, I will have moved a step. Thank you very much.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament take oath to protect and defend the Constitution but the time I have spent in Parliament, the Ministers of Internal Affairs and the Prime Minister of Uganda have made two very important statements that I know on the issue of Police and criminality in Uganda. The first one was made by hon. Butime in the Sixth Parliament when he made a joking statement but which was factual and deliberate because as a Parliament, we had provided very little money for the Police Force, and everybody was condemning Police for failing to curb crime within the country. And he said, “If you give me 40 percent of the budget, I will provide 40 percent security.” That is on our Hansard as was stated by hon. Butime. If he were here he would prove it. 

The most recent one was a statement made by the Prime Minister of Uganda and the Leader of Government Business. He asked the Members of Parliament: “If we defer training, will the criminals also defer their activities?” (Laughter) I did listen specifically to these two provisions and I am one person who cannot easily be bent when it comes to issues of protecting and defending the Constitution especially when people in authority, who are supposed to do their duty, violate it. But Mr Speaker, we are talking about 350 people. I want to call on my dear colleagues, Members of Parliament that let us take the wise counsel of the Speaker. He did ask, “Is this the last recruitment?” (Interjection) This is deliberate. This is not the last recruitment and we are talking about 350 people. [Hon. Members: “No.”] 

There are so many positions if we talked of opening up which areas must be investigated and whether the recruitment is prudent and if we wanted to go a little bit further, we would have gone to so many areas. Mr Speaker, whereas we cannot prevent the members of the Executive from proceeding, you very well know that we vote money; we can stop a training if need be because we vote and appropriate money for all institutions of government. But given the activities for which these police cadets were recruited in preparation for CHOGM -(Interruption)– I would strongly recommend that the training goes ahead and Parliament does the investigations and if any member who applied in the Police Force is found to have falsified information, that becomes a criminal offence.

Also, if any Member is found to have violated or abused his authority that can also become an issue upon which Members of Parliament can make a recommendation. However, to continue straining because of 350 people, I find that we shall be failing on major issues that we must be preparing for. I thank you.

THE SPEKAER: Honourable member, let us be sober. These cadet officers must have got their appointments –(Interruption)- yes, trainees. They have got their appointment letters. Is it possible to cancel the appointment of these trainees? Is it possible to cancel them when they did not fail the exams? Can you now stop that appointment and say, “No, because we are going to – I suggest that we look at these facts, get the list, analyse it and see whether certain districts did not apply or applied. If we eventually find that there is imbalance, we can propose that they come in the next recruitment. But these are appointments. Can Parliament really cancel appointments, which have been validly issued by an appropriate authority? These are issues that we have to address. I think when you rise to speak, address the issue of whether you can cancel an appointment that has been made.

4.16
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As leaders of this country, we fully appreciate the sentiments that have come on the Floor of this House regarding this exercise.  It might be difficult to cancel or to stay the exercise as proposed by the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, but it will not be the first.  

Just a few weeks ago there was a crisis in MUBS concerning 100 students who were supposed to be paid for by the Government of Uganda. Because there is a problem, there is an impasse and we do not know what is going to happen to those students. It is not a good situation but for matters of setting the record straight, that situation pertains. Mr Speaker, before I go –(Interruption)

MR OPIO: I thank you very much for giving way.  I was not going to stand up because it was an issue of Internal Affairs but when hon. Kamya brought in an example of MUBS, I thought I would give an explanation.  

First of all, those students were admitted by UJAB, which admits students. Therefore, they are going to continue and nobody is going to stop them. For those students who applied directly to MUBS, contrary to what should have happened, government has come out and advised that they are going to look into the matter and those who applied for courses, which are there will be considered. It is only those who applied for courses, which are not there who will be advised to look for courses, which are there and they will be considered. Therefore, there is no issue of saying there is an impasse, government has taken this position and that is what I wanted to explain.

MS KAMYA: I thank the honourable minister for the information that he has given. The point I am trying to make was made by the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs who said that were it not for government bureaucracy, this exercise would have ended eight months ago. This means that government can still hold this for a few months so that we can get to the bottom of this. I want to ask a question: for how long are we going – if you have a jigger, there is only one way to remove it and that is to get to the bottom of it.  

This question is going to come up when you discuss almost every sector of our community, whether you look at the budget allocation or at Makerere. Therefore, if this is the opportunity to get to the bottom of this and put hon. Guma Gumisiriza’s misgivings at rest, we must do it now. I have no problem with government waiting for three months. If they have waited for eight months because of bureaucracy then can’t they wait for three months to solve a problem? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR TANNA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance. The honourable minister gave us details and said he is willing to avail us with information concerning the process of applications and how the vetting process took place. I would like to know what will happen after this information has gone to the relevant committee, in this case Internal Affairs and Defence and after they come out with recommendations. If we accept that the training should go on and later discover that there were faults in the system, what will happen thereafter? Hon. Dombo also made a submission where he was seeking for clarification as to whether –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, the recommendations must be practical and legal. The question of cancelling somebody’s appointment when it was not his fault may not be easy. I cannot speculate on the kind of recommendations that will be made but should a recommendation come that there was an imbalance and that it should be addressed then maybe they can recommend for another recruitment so that –(Interruption)- yes, they can recommend another recruitment to address the imbalance. However, they cannot recommend that somebody’s appointment be cancelled if it has been validly made.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance in relation to your last advice. I have seen several MPs losing their seats because the contract they entered into with Parliament was void. So, I want your guidance in this particular case. If the Uganda Police recruits and the people they have appointed have entered a contract, which is unconstitutional or contrary to Article 214(9)(c), what do we do in this case? As those who took an oath to protect and defend the Constitution, I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: If that contract exists and these recruits were not party to the fraud, they should not be affected.  Let me give you a practical example. If somebody steals your title and sells it to me, without my knowledge, that title is not stolen, I will continue with the interest I have acquired from you. In the same way, the 350 recruits had nothing to do with –(Interruption)- they cannot be made to suffer. However, those who made the mistake and did not follow the law can be punished. This is the answer to what you have asked. You are a lawyer; you know this. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, thank you for the advice. I am well aware that as regards fake land titles, the property or goods can pass from hand to hand. However, this is a case, which is contrary even to the national objectives of the country. We cannot come here and clap our hands when people are being recruited from one village. For heavens sake, unless I swore under a different Constitution!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate the motion and let us see how to proceed.

4.23
MR ABURA PIRIR (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from the heading of the statement, it is clearly stipulated that this recruitment of cadet assistants - these are the people who were recruited with Advanced Level certificates. This is not the general or regular policy; these people have either left the university or are A’ Level leavers. 

THE SPEAKER: They are university graduates.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Well, we are advancing in education. In the ‘60s, to be recruited at this level you needed an O’ Level certificate. Of course, now there is an influx of graduates everywhere. This is basically for the Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP), or in the Army they are called cadets at the captain level. Sincerely speaking this has been very unfair. It is stipulated clearly that in the entire region of Karamoja, only one –(Laughter)- yes, and I am suspicious that this single person might have been ferried by the team that came pretending that they were recruiting. 

I would like to say that you know very well that disarmament is going on in Karamoja and the youth are now redundant. Why couldn’t you co-opt these people into the Police because an idle mind is the devil’s mind? We are only enlightened with weapons. Why couldn’t you recruit Karimojong? 

On top of that, if I were the whole of this Parliament, this recruitment would be cancelled - (Interruption)- yes and this time we would even co-opt the members of defence and internal affairs to accompany them because this is clear corruption. How can you do this? Everybody is looking for a job, this is very wrong. You can say, “Order” but it is a fact.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, is my good friend the hon. Member of Parliament who has just been holding the Floor in order -(Laughter)- to impute and insinuate wrong motives on a committee that was composed of professional people who followed certain guidelines that have been well read out here, to say that the exercise should be cancelled? Is he in order to say that some districts were deliberately left out when I made it very clear that in some districts we received no applications, or if we received applications those candidates, unfortunately, were not suitable? Is he in order? I want you to guide me.

THE SPEAKER: When you see the trend of his contribution, you can conclude that he does not believe what you say. That is why he is saying what he is saying. However, you should appreciate that this is an emotionally charged debate and as such we might have problems. Do you, therefore, want me to put this to a vote? Do you want to continue with the debate?

4.28
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I have been listening to this debate with a very sad heart because it appears that honourable members are forgetting where we came from. One of the reasons why the Constitution was framed the way it was, was to correct old mistakes. The Article that has been quoted in respect of the Police Force was intended to correct that imbalance. Obviously, when you look at the report as given by the minister, the imbalance is there and the heat with which this matter is being debated now is a pointer that there is deep-seated dissatisfaction in the community. It is a matter that must be examined very carefully but it appears that we are losing track of that carefulness and emotions may take over. 

There is also the tendency to try to cover up. This is a matter that we should not cover up. We should go to the bottom of it if we are to solve the problem. This highlights something that is seriously wrong in our community. I, therefore, want to urge government to take responsibility as the managers of the state. Acknowledge that we are in a very deep problem concerning this issue, take responsibility and try to rectify it to the satisfaction of everybody and don’t try to cover it up. 

A motion on this matter would be of no use but I think it is possible, administratively, to handle this unfortunate situation. Instead of trying to protect itself, government should come up and say, “There is something wrong, we take responsibility to correct and examine this, and put it right to the satisfaction of everybody”. I don’t want the kind of debate that is going on.

MS MBAGUTA: Mr Speaker, I think the guidance that you gave this Parliament was in the right direction. You guided that we should look at the number of applicants to the tune of 5,000 because once you look at the applications it gives one a guide on how the response to the adverts was. It will also show the distribution before the competence test. After the competence test, because it is individuals responding to the questions, we can get the number of those who passed the test and qualified for oral interviews. I think that is the way we should approach this. 

I should also give this information that once the appointing authority has issued out the directive that someone is appointed and the letter of appointment has been issued, you cannot cancel that offer.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 166(2) provides as follows - it is my duty really to point out these things to you so that when you make the contribution you take into account other positions “In exercise of its function, the Public Service Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority; except that it shall take into account government policy relating to the public service.”  Yes, what I am just saying - this may be unfortunate; there may be imbalances but as we handle it we must also be cognizant of these positions.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, it is in light of all that that I am asking the managers to look at all this. The issue is that people are dissatisfied. Whether you go through your list of applications and what not, the fact of the matter is that the community is unhappy about the situation and it is no good just saying, “We shall come later and legalise it,” or anything. The issue is, please, go back and correct the situation with the satisfaction of the public and do not look like it is being covered up. 

That is why I thought the Prime Minister or somebody will tell us that there will be a deliberate move to correct this unhappy situation, which we are in now. If some pronouncement can be made, I am sure honourable members will be prepared to listen. Otherwise, this discussion will go on and on and we are going to get into deeper problems. I ask the Prime Minister to say something. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but he should be contributing on the motion. You will be contributing on the motion because we have a motion.

4.35
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I came late because when I chaired Cabinet, there were some urgent issues I had to get rid of. I found this matter being debated and, of course, I am interested in this issue because I am writing a book on problems and challenges of national integration. 

Obviously, allocation of scarce resources equitably has always been an issue; but the method of doing it also matters because with this you do not just pass a resolution. It will not be binding and it is going to cause friction between Parliament and government. So, why do you pass a resolution, which will not be binding? 

Let me inform you that there are some resolutions, which bind the Executive. For example, under Article 159 of the Constitution, we cannot borrow money until you have allowed us. But there are others where your resolutions simply indicate to us your wishes; we consider them; we may, or we may not accept and we explain to you. I put it to you that this is a case in point as you have been guided. 

So my advice is that we avoid making a resolution. The concerns of Parliament have been captured and obviously this is a critical matter, which we shall deal with not only in the Police because it is a wider issue. You see what I mean? Therefore, it requires deliberate and systematic addressing and government will not hesitate to handle these matters because we would like to have a higher level of national integration. Meanwhile, we have to recruit to the Police because, among other things, for example, in the North, we are now replacing the Army with the Police. [Hon. Anywar rose_] Please, hon. Anywar, I have been handling these matters personally, please.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, you said, with resettlement in the North, we are replacing the Army with the Police Force. Are you aware that there is no single person recruited from Kitgum; no single person recruited from Amuru District and no one person recruited from the entire Karamoja region? Why would you advocate for a police officer who would need a translator even in handling domestic issues in the North? (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, that was not the point I was making. The point I was making is that we are recruiting policemen to replace the Army. I was not dealing with the question of parity of treatment or parity of recruitment. When I gave that example - because it is a very important issue, but also there are certain tribes, which enjoy linguistic intelligibility. For example, people from Acholi can understand people from Lango; a Japadhola can also understand. So, it is possible to enjoy linguistic intelligibility and I shall be referring you to an article, which I wrote 30 years ago. I did address these things when I was a scholar. So, I would advise honourable Members of Parliament that we do not just vote because even the resolution may not go through. 

MR KIBANZANGA: I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, what we are discussing right now is a tip of an iceberg. These are the issues which some members of Parliament from Buganda are proposing to secede. Look at the Army, the top leaders; look at the government statutory authorities; look at the leaders; look at finance; now you are adding on the Police, and the Prime Minister is advising us, but he is not moving us towards national integration, and how we are going to reverse that imbalance. The clarification I am asking from the Prime Minister from Buganda where by the sentiments of seceding because of our insensitivity to deal with government and – how is he going to help us to champion this national integration? I thank you. (Laughter)  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you for raising that question. I think when hon. Kyanjo said that Buganda may secede he was addressing the issue of returning “ebyaffe” - our things. And, as you know, I was chief negotiator for returning Buganda’s things, in case you do not know. We, therefore, returned so many things including the palace, Lubiri, 350 square miles -(Interjection)– please, do not disturb the Member on the Floor. I am still clarifying and do not clarify on a clarification. They raised many issues, which in fact the Katikkiro has raised with me by the way. And I have given a written reply to the Katikkiro. They have raised, for example, the issue of 9,000 square miles and –(Interruption) 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to mislead this House to say that hon. Kyanjo was only demanding ebyaffe for Buganda when recently he was even on the radio and they gave a comprehensive list of these imbalances in all government departments? Records are there and people have been calling on these radios – is the Rt hon. Prime Minister in order to say that hon. Kyanjo was only on ebyaffe? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot rule on that one because I do not know what Kyanjo stated. (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: May the Almighty irrigate the Speaker with mercy. (Laughter) Now, I want to put it to you that any part of Uganda, which would like to secede, will not manage because in order to secede, you must have the capacity – the military capacity. No part of Uganda can secede –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I have decided to withdraw the point of order because I thought the Prime Minister was inciting violence but I have realised that he was talking of something different. (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, my academic son. (Laughter) Really, you know what happened in 1966 when people said we want to secede and so forth. What happened was that the Kabaka ran to our house – it was my house, where hid him and later he went to Britain. Then, I asked him where the people who said they would support him were, and he said they were telling lies.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we are being distracted. Let us be relevant on the subject of today. If you have no more submissions, then I put the question and we dispose of the item. We have to be relevant on the motion.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: So, in other words, those who have been asking questions, which tend to take us away although they are tangentially related to the question, I should now say that government will address the issue of parity of treatment; of course, you must, first of all, quantify the problem. You begin by quantifying the problem. 

Secondly, you must take the historical factors into account. 

Number three; you must take into account the willingness of people, for example, to join the Police and the Army and to stay. The capacity to stay – because some people join and then they leave -(Interjection)- let me complete. So, all those are important and then government will take affirmative action and the matters will be addressed. I thank you.

4.47
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. In my thinking, this motion will help the thinking outside there towards unity and nationalism. We have already seen imbalance and the means for addressing it is through this motion. For example, when we talk about recommending some of these officers, this has far reaching effects, because if you put a scenario where you say, His Excellency the President recommends the First Lady; two, a Member of Parliament; and then three, the honourable minister; if it comes to the death of the public service or those who are recruiting, you think a Member of Parliament will have a sense for one of his commanders to be approved. It will be impossible. Now, the Minister will take the third lead and we have seen this thing earlier. 

What we are trying to address is that prevention is better than cure and that is the purpose for this House and we must address this one now, not tomorrow. If we cannot see this, then we are taking a very big spear and drum and then we are dividing this country into sectors. This is a very clear and a very good presentation. This indicates that some parts of the country should be facilitated. If it is because of very low education; those people are not aware of those degrees. Now, what are we going to do with those areas where there are no people with degrees? Should we now set our hands and say, “Thank you; that is better?”     

MR ODIT: Thank you, hon. Gutomoi, for giving way. I think this is not a matter of education. We have three PhD holders from Lango who have been fired from government services; very qualified in this country. One of them was fired because they said he was over qualified. And, I can tell you; you can go and trace; he was Deputy Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. The fellow who has replaced him is not an engineer; he is an economist and now we are getting blue water and what not – here we are. (Laughter) The second one was a top agricultural scientist in this country. 

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I respect hon. Odit, but is he in order to insinuate that we are having the blue water because somebody was disqualified, implying that the people who are running the National Water and Sewerage Corporation are incompetent? Is he aware that whatever is happening is due to pollution as a result of degradation? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he did not have that information. (Laughter) But, honourable members, aren’t we taking long on this matter? After all, according to our Rules, we should spend not more than an hour dealing with a ministerial statement. There is a motion; should we vote on it? I put the question.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: those in favour of the motion are 36; those against the motion are 44, and abstentions are 5. The motion is lost.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have voted by show of hands, I know the Rules give you discretion on the method to use for voting.  But you need to guide us given the fact that most of the time we have been voting by other means and I think this has become a unique situation. Why the guidance is necessary is that it would look funny if tomorrow we begin voting using another means. For purpose of official record –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Have you been hurt by voting by a show of hands? Is it not fair that you see?

MR EKANYA: No, it is good, Mr Speaker, but I only wanted to say that we continue voting by show of hands.

THE SPEAKER: In this situation and according to the way I have seen it, this was the fairest way of doing it.   

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance.  Now that we have lost the motion, what happens to your earlier ruling in which you had asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring us the list and details of the 5000 people who applied to be recruited into the Uganda Police Force? I do not know where that ruling stands because –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, what I had said and which was the consensus, has nothing to do with the motion because we have to investigate this matter; and therefore, we require the list before we maybe set up an adhoc committee comprising members from both sides to examine it and advise us.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  It was not part of the motion.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much but I would like to caution the appointing authority to stop practicing segregation in this country because talking about segregation the way I am doing does not tantamount to being segregative; that is the little caution I wanted to give. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister said that he was laying the list with the names and the districts on the Table. Can we have at least a copy of the list laid on the Table? I am raising this because I am the one who put up the question. So, can I have that list so that members can also have the chance to examine it? Let him lay it because he, earlier on, had said that he would do so; can he lay it on Table for the record? 

THE SPEAKER: When it is tabled, it becomes a document of the Parliament; it is the Parliament to arrange to give it to you. But, honourable minister, the concern of the hon. Okupa is to see the list laid before us, not so? Otherwise, once it is laid before us, it becomes Parliament document; you can only get copies after requisitioning from the Clerk.

MR OKUPA: Let him lay the list on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: I think that matter has been finalised. If you want a copy you go to the Clerk. The document is here; it is of the 300 people; you can examine it later. We still have it because we need other documents for us to start examining this matter.

MR OKUPA: I had not seen it but now that I have confirmed, I will access its copy. Thank you.

MR OKELL-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, would it not be prudent to give a time frame to the minister as to when he should lay these papers on the Table?

THE SPEAKER: The papers are there.

MR OKELL-OKELLO: The one he is going to supply; I mean the one with the details of the 5,000 people.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I want to seek the indulgence of this House on two issues. One is that tomorrow, Thursday, I was supposed to make a statement as ordered by the Prime Minister about the pastoralists who moved from Apac to Masindi District. Tonight I must leave for Bujumbura to go and hand over the chairmanship of YAPCO so I will not be here tomorrow.  

Additionally, my senior minister, as I speak now is heading towards Eastern Uganda to go and consult the people there on the Juba peace talks.  So I am seeking the indulgence of this House to allow me present the statement on those pastoralists, next week on Tuesday. 

Secondly, I want to say that I have no problem with the laying of the list of all the applicants for recruitment into the Uganda Police Force; it is a big a problem because the whole thing is on the computer. However, I request that I also do submit it on Tuesday. Thank you.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Honourable members, you will recall that yesterday when I made a statement on the tragedy in which our troops were involved, I did indicate that Cabinet would today further discuss this issue. So I am here to inform Parliament that today Cabinet did consider this tragedy and noted with deep sorrow - Cabinet also did express its condolences to the Commander-in-Chief who is the President, the families of the soldiers and members of their families, who perished in the tragedy. Cabinet also indeed expressed condolences to the whole country.  

Cabinet further noted the fact that investigations into the tragedy were already underway and appealed to the public and leaders to exercise calmness and restraint as we await the results of this investigation.  

Cabinet, honourable colleagues, decided to declare national mourning for the persons who perished in that accident and accordingly have the National Flag fly at half-mast. I report that religious leaders will be requested to hold prayers in their respective places of prayer for our people who died.  

Cabinet also directed that the issue of compensation be handled within the legal framework but as quickly as possible. Mr Speaker and colleagues, this is the update that I requested to give to the honourable members of Parliament. I thank you. 

In terms of clarity and details, we are going to issue a clearer statement to the public, through the public media, so that they can get to know the specifics. However, in regard to the prayers, our request to the religious leaders is that as we move towards the end of this week, each denomination will hold prayers on the day that they normally do. For example, the Muslims will hold prayers on Friday, if they accept, the seventh day will do so on Saturday and the Christian faith will do so on Sunday. 

MS NAYIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many issues were raised in regard to the transportation of those officers and I just wanted to find out from the minister whether there was something said about the mode of transportation. If you were a parent to one of those officers, what do you think the mode of transport would have been? So, was something said about it because it was an area that concerned many of the members here. Putting the officers, their wives and innocent children and another vehicle on one truck is something that we are interested in.

MR OYET: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a practising Christian, we usually pray for the dead every Sunday. I wanted to find out from the Minister what significance and difference his statement will bring out now that he has said that to mourn for our gallant sons and daughters, prayers will be held on Sunday and not on any other days when Christians go to church? 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We learnt that this truck had civilians; the wives and children of these soldiers, and the minister has just told us that compensation for soldiers is being arranged. May I know whether the compensation for the women and children is also being arranged? 

THE SPEAKER: As I said in this statement, Cabinet has also directed that the matter of compensation be handled with a legal framework and as quickly as possible. It was not discriminative; this covers everybody who was injured and anyone who would have died in this accident. 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I think you need to hear me, not to see me. I need more clarification on my understanding of paragraph 2, that the matter of compensation be handled within the legal framework. Which legal framework? We have those who are insured, and in civil service when you have been confirmed and you have served for 45 years, you can get death gratuity. Some of these officers may be privates who have not finished their two years. What is the legal framework?

THE SPEAKER: I think that this one is also clear. If there are differences in the legal framework to apply, these different frameworks will be applied. 

MR AMURIAT: Related to the question that has just been asked and what hon. Kibanzanga noted, it would look like under any legal framework, the women and children may not be catered for. So the question of compensation for loss of life by children and women should be highlighted. This is conspicuously missing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat, they have said that there is a legal framework. Were these people trespassers? The civilians were permitted to ride on that vehicle and therefore, if it causes them any harm, they are entitled to payment. I think that this should be left to the lawyers to handle and I am sure that they will even secure compensation for the civilians.

MR AMURIAT: Much obliged. 

Secondly, as a catholic, we pray for the dead. This has been observed by hon. Oleny, who I assume is also a practising catholic. Normally on Sundays when a special tribute is being given to the dead in form of prayer, their names are mentioned. Up to now the names of the deceased have not been revealed and so I would like to find out from the Minister of Defence, how soon the list of those who passed away will be provided to this nation and therefore to the religious leaders, so that special mention is given of them, while we pray for their souls?

5.11
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As representatives of the people in this House, we did read this morning in the newspapers that the victims of this tragic incident had been listed according to districts and we have been receiving various calls from parents and relatives, trying to find out about this list yet I hear the list of these victims has not been released.

I would like to find out from the minister, how the relatives of these victims have come across this information. If at all the information they have is correct, how are we going to update them on what transpires in the Ministry of Defence? There is a time I went to Mbuya to get the dead body of my constituent and I was told that in the Ministry of Defence they cannot release a vehicle until they mobilise around eight or ten dead bodies.

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, what he is raising is a very pertinent issue. Yesterday I was actually asking the minister where my two fallen soldiers are, and I was sarcastically told that they were in the butchery -(Laughter)- whatever, I got it straight because I am still young enough to listen. 

But I had an opportunity to be in Gulu for a long time when the insurgency was at its peak. It is absolutely true that when you go to Mbuya to claim for your dead, they will first tell you that it is not economically viable to transport one body, yet the families are grieving, waiting for burial. You have to wait until a truck can be filled and the way these bodies are transported is in a very pathetic manner. 

First of all, the treatment itself is very bad. You see a truck that is going and flies are following it, and you cannot handle the stench. There was a truck that left Mbuya to distribute dead bodies from Madi-Okolo up to Koboko. By the time it came back, the people of Arua were filled with more grief. It had taken over three months for these bodies to be given to their families. 

This time round this incident occurred some time back, it is almost one week now. Mr minister, even if it were four days, who wants to be waiting for more than four days to receive their dead, and then be able to bury it let alone receive it in a very disgraceful manner? You receive a dead body; your very own child and you are not able to open the coffin because of the stench! Is the minister going to reverse the trend?  Honourable colleagues, is it not pertinent upon us to put him to account for this dead bodies since it is four days? Thank you.

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, honourable member, for spicing up my presentation. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, this House treats security with utmost esteem. We regard it so highly but it is quite disgraceful that when we lost these gallant soldiers, these sons and daughters of ours, we treat them in this kind of manner. I would have requested the ministry to actually regard their services and even when they are dead, especially in a tragic manner like this one, they should be handled - and in this case they should have been handled more expeditiously than it is being handled now. I feel that is a concern. 

As Members of Parliament from the respective areas, we should be updated because we are receiving calls from the relatives of these people, so that we can be able to update them and tell them how far the ministry has gone in as far as organising the transportation of these bodies is concerned.

Finally, I would like to clarify one small issue from the minister’s statement. He referred to Moslem prayers being held on Friday, then for Seventh Day on Saturday and Christians on Sunday. I would like him to take it very seriously that even Seventh Day Adventists are Christians. You cannot grade them with Moslems and you cannot say that they are neither. They are Christians; you should handle them as Christians and not take Seventh Day Adventists as an isolated group, which is not named. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

5.14
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking the Minister of Defence for this statement and clarification. I am grateful that there is an investigation going on into the conditions in which our armed forces and their families died. Even before the results of the investigation are out, I think that government needs to apologise to this country and members of the UPDF and their families for the conditions under which this tragedy occurred. I do not think that we have any doubt that these human beings were packed in trucks like goods; in trucks on which there was even another vehicle. If the information that is coming out is true, even from our colleagues who witnessed the incident, that more people were killed by a pick-up that was in the same truck with human beings. Surely, the conditions of the armed forces call for improvement. This is not only in terms of transportation, we move around this country and we see how these human beings are treated (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are we really not repeating the debate we had yesterday? We talked about this issue of transport yesterday. We said that they are going to investigate; I thought we should be   responding to issues raised by this statement, and that is burial.  

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise advice and ruling but if you can allow me to make my point because these are issues we watch every day.

THE SPEAKER: No, we are repeating. The procedure is that we should not repeat ourselves. This issue was discussed yesterday. The Leader of the Opposition also gave us information and we agreed. We do not have to repeat it. I think if you have to make a statement, make a statement on matters that have been raised today by the minister.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose, since I cannot continue with my submission that the Committee on Defence takes interest in investigating the conditions of the armed forces in this country and makes a report to Parliament so that then Parliament can debate it and make recommendations to government. As far as I am concerned, it is not only in terms of transportation, it is also living conditions; it is remuneration, and so many other things. It is common to find wives of armed forces scavenging around, even on top of Kololo, without electricity and looking for firewood. The living conditions of the armed forces - the way these people are being treated needs government intervention as soon as possible. I thank you. (Applause)

5.18
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to honestly thank the minister. He is one of the very few who are respectable and very honest. Looking at the statement, I think this statement was discussed by Cabinet and it was done in a rush. If you look at paragraph 2(i), the first line that says that Cabinet decided to declare national mourning for persons who perished in the accident; when will this declaration take effect? That is point number one.

Secondly, the first part of the second statement, accordingly, the national flag will be flown at half-mast.  Starting from when and for how long? Government has instructed some of us who are Christians to pray for the souls of the departed on Sunday; the Moslems on Friday and part of the Christian community on Saturday. Now, will this flag also be flown to coincide with these dates or we are yet to get another day? I want the minister to be explicit on this subject. Thank you very much.  

5.20
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, yesterday when the Minister of Defence issued a statement here, it occurred to everybody that the matter was very grave. The loss of about 73 people from one department was tragic. From what I am hearing now - I have been quietly listening, it appears that the way these people are being accorded respect is not in conformity with what the Whole House is thinking. I remember very well when we had a similar tragic accident, this time outside Uganda, in Rome, where I personally got involved, there was a day of national mourning declared here although I did not attend; I was still in bed. There was a day of mourning and a public holiday was declared where everybody was asked to pray for the souls of the deceased, at that time there were about 33 of us. I do not know whether Cabinet thought about this and they decided this way. You know if it is not so, then I think the country is waiting for that kind of news - actually from what I see here in the House. Thank you very much.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I also want to get a clarification from the Minister because yesterday when he made a statement, he told this House that the districts of origin of 80 of the soldiers who perished in that nasty accident had not yet been established.   May we find out from him whether the districts of origin of the 80 have been established?  Thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is paragraph 1(iii) where the Cabinet noted the fact that the investigations into the tragedy were already underway and Cabinet was unable to direct when the investigations should be concluded.  Usually when we are at the burial site, people are very attentive waiting to hear the cause of the death. Now what are we going to tell the relatives about- when will this be concluded in order to comfort them?

I witnessed a case where I was forced to go and carry a coffin from Bombo to Karuma, and then from Karuma to the burial place in Lira on my vehicle without the assistance of the ministry in charge except giving me the coffin and one blanket. Now I hope this kind of situation is being handled to the effect that the relatives of the deceased will not see that kind of thing. Otherwise it can give a wrong impression of this important institution, which is headed by an honourable minister. So, may I know whether the Cabinet has taken care of when this tragedy could be revealed finally to ease the tension in this country? Thank you very much.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reading section 2 of this statement, on decisions, my interpretation is that the Cabinet discussed the matter but did not take any decision because everything is left hanging. No decision was taken as to when the mourning will start; no decision was taken as to when the names should be released. I wonder, Mr Speaker, whether some key members of the Cabinet were not around. Who chaired this Cabinet today? (Laughter)  Really a national Cabinet cannot do this! I am suspicious that a very key member of the Cabinet was not there today. (Laughter) So, everything was left hanging until his opinion is sought. (Laughter) He is very unfortunate. (Laughter)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, on a very serious note, I had restrained myself from seeking this clarification but I thought that I will do a lot of injustice to the proceedings of this House if I did not.  Right now there are a number of UPDF officers under Court Martial, and one of the accusations is ghost soldiers. I would believe that every soldier in Uganda has a number and because of the number of the soldier, it would be very easy within the records of the Army to establish the origin of a soldier. Under what circumstances would we fail to identify the soldier when we knew the soldiers who were on the vehicle; we knew their numbers, under what circumstances would we fail to identify their districts of origin? Could this be the case why some soldiers are under the Court Martial because of ghost soldiers?  I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister.

5.26
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very sad story and I am surprised that the Minister would come to Parliament with this kind of statement. This is not the first tragedy that has been brought to the attention of Parliament. Mr Speaker, you remember when some of our gallant sons died in the helicopter tragedy, which also took the life of the President of Southern Sudan; there was a day of national mourning.   In this case, we have been told that the country is supposed to mourn but we have not been told where the venue of national mourning is going to be and what programme there is in place.

We cannot lose about 80 soldiers and we take it as a matter of no importance. There must be some specific decisions to be made. I do acknowledge the fact that there could have been some body very senior missing in the Cabinet but this is the supreme organ of the state, which is Parliament. So, let this Parliament now take a decision. I believe the only way we can calm down the nerves of the relatives is to comfort them by saying, look we stand with you during this difficult time. And it is important that government must come up with a programme; we all want to go there, whether these people are our relatives or not but they are the ones who are protecting our lives; and they have perished in a manner, which is uncalled for. So, I think it is important that the government comes up and declares a specific day or days of mourning. We also want to know the venue where we can gather and pray for the souls of the departed. And also to comfort the relatives of the departed; I think this is very important. 

Secondly, we have been told that investigations are underway and there have been several investigations, which have been underway for years. We would like to know what has been established about other investigations which have been going on so that we can get convinced that within a month or two, we shall have established facts behind the accident and actions will be taken. But what I am more concerned about as a Ugandan is that some of these soldiers who died have families. And some of their children are having their holidays, how will these children go back to school? I mean somebody must come up with an explanation. So, as leaders in this country, we should not only be excited about the people when they are alive. We should show concern when they die. And I am pleading with the Minister that we as a Parliament, we stand with you, but not just to speak, we stand with you to see some actions done. So that we know that you are concerned about what has happened. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please.

5.30
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, this is supplementary to what I said yesterday. I did make a commitment, Mr Speaker and honourable member that the issue of the inquiry will be complete and we will be back here within a month.  This is the commitment I made yesterday.

Secondly, definitely Cabinet made specific decisions although hon. Okello-Okello may have a different opinion. I think the fact that Cabinet decided that there should be a national mourning and that we should have prayers, that the issue of compensation should be given priority; these cannot be matters that could be put aside. I do admit that in terms of specificity the timing needs to be tied together. Why? When we get a mass tragedy, like this, the first responsibility is to ensure that those who have survived are cared for so that they can survive. Two, for those who have died, it is respect to them and their relatives that the first of kin are traced and informed so that they know their loved ones have passed away. 

The demand in the House, which has also been made by the newspapers that we should publicise these names now and here is incorrect. Yesterday, I gave a whole list of the districts from which people come, and within districts as you know, people come from villages and we are busy using the infrastructure of the Army to ensure that the first of kin get to know. Then, thereafter, there is no secret about the people we have lost; the list will be made public. 

The issue of identification, as I said yesterday, eight of the soldiers we had not matched the districts from which they came; but as I speak it has been done. I did not come with that additional information but I would like hon. Dombo and other colleagues to cast back what happens in an accident. You have people travelling; they are putting on their clothes; you get thrown or when you are picked and you are the injured, the clothes are removed when you are in hospital. So, it will take sometime for us to be able to trace who this particular individual is.  This should not be seen against the background or stories of ghost soldiers. 

I want to assure Members that the individual bodies of the deceased will be delivered by the institution of the Army to their particular homes. So, the idea of relatives going to collect bodies from the establishment of the Army is not an issue here. The issue of transportation you have answered, Mr Speaker. The body of inquiry will give us the full details and we should be patient. 

When we pray either on Friday or Saturday or Sunday - if I understood hon. Oleny very well, what is special? He says every time there is prayer to those who have passed away, I always remember. Well, this is a particular death; this is a national tragedy and our request is that in that regular prayer, the particular reference to this tragedy be made. That is where the difference would lie. 

Should we give names to the people who are going to conduct the prayers? If by that time we have traced all the relatives and given them the information that they have lost their loved ones, then we can do so. But as colleagues – you know honourable Oleny knows, sometimes I also go to church and there is no problem in church recognising people who have died. You really do not have to insist that you should have names before you pray for them.

The conditions of the Army and the difficulties, these are known to all of us and I think we continue to improve them. Parliament has just approved that we raise the salaries and we will continue to make efforts so that the conditions get even better for our sons and daughters in the Army.

For avoidance of doubt, finally, Mr Speaker, let me indicate that although there will be this national mourning, we are not going to have a public holiday for this specific purpose. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister and thank you very much honourable members. Well, it is now 5.30 p.m.  I do not think we can carry on with a serious business. But tomorrow we will be receiving a report on Local Government and Public Service, which will be followed by a report from the Committee on Agriculture. So the three committees: Local Government, Agriculture and Social Services should be ready so that we debate their reports if we can. It is true under the Act the Speaker may extend, but if I am to extend, it will not be more than a week and that is the period we are going to have the Committee of Supply. So, if we can have the committee reports tomorrow, then the other time we will be able to handle the business. So, with this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.36 p.m., and adjourned until Thursday, 30 August 2007 at 10.00 a.m.)


