Tuesday, 28 August 2007

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you back from the weekend and to this sitting. In the gallery this afternoon we have scouts and their teachers from Katali District, Western Kenya. You are most welcome to Uganda. (Applause)

Honourable members, I have very sad news, you must have heard on radio and newspapers, about the death of 72 members of the UPDF in Kapchorwa. This happened on Sunday. It is very sad indeed. Again, you must have read in the papers and I have been informed that our fellow honourable member, Margaret Muhanga, has lost a father, Phillip Muhangazima. The burial will take place tomorrow in Fort Portal.  

On Saturday, our fellow honourable member, the Minister of State for Agriculture, Rtd Maj. Bright Rwamirama, was involved in an accident along the Mbarara-Masaka road. I understand that he is currently in Ward 6C in Mulago Hospital. 

For all those who have died, we should observe a moment of silence in their memory.  

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Defence will give us a statement on this. 

Honourable members, I received four Members of Parliament from the DRC today. They came to see me and to convey to us a message that the Parliament of the DRC would like to work together with the Parliament of Uganda for peace and development. (Applause) I assured them that we are also interested in having a cordial relationship with the Parliament of the DRC and other agencies of government in the DRC for peace and development in our region. I thought this was a very good message, which everybody in Uganda, in particular Parliament, should support. These members are here up to Friday. They also thanked Uganda for hosting the refugees who ran away from the DRC. They are interested in meeting them and reassuring them that they are welcome back to their country. This is something good.

We shall adjust the Order Paper so that item No.6 becomes No.5 and No.5 becomes No.6.  

2.54
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising following your communication about the unfortunate accident that took place in Kapchorwa and about the accident that our colleague the minister was involved in. The people of Kapchorwa and Bukwo are very grieved upon the death of these soldiers. The soldiers of the 19th Battalion had been deployed in Bukwo District. As all Members know, Bukwo has been experiencing a lot of insecurity arising out of the attacks from Kenyan Pokot, so this Force has been there for almost a year. 

I want to express the condolences of the people of Bukwo because out of all the soldiers who were deployed in this area, this was a very special case. These soldiers worked very diligently; they were gallant, and very disciplined. We used to have soldiers who involved themselves in drinking, raping women and so forth. This group was a very special case. We worked very closely with them and their commanders.  

Arising from the intensive insecurity in the area, the UPDF and the Commander-in-Chief authorised that a new battalion be sent to Bukwo. So, over the weekend there was a process of transfer. The new battalion was taking up their positions in Kapchorwa and Bukwo, and this old lot was supposed to be returning - they were going back to their former battalion, Amudat. While on their way the soldiers together with their children and wives were involved in this accident. Seventy-two people have been confirmed dead. 

Then there are those who were injured. Just imagine this, all these people were in one vehicle. What type of vehicle was this one? It is very unfortunate; of course an accident is an accident.  We accept that accidents can happen but there must be an inquiry to find out what exactly was the cause of this? From what we hear, the lorry was overloaded. It was one trailer that was carrying all these people and pilling them up. The condition of the vehicle was also doubtful. I have also been informed that some of the soldiers had refused to use the vehicle because they knew it was not in very good mechanical condition -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, instead of speculating, it is better to request the Minister of Defence to give us the circumstances under which the 72 people of the UPDF met their death. This will give you an opportunity - because you are speculating - why don’t we request the minister to give us a statement?

MR TOSKIN: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bukwo and Kapchorwa District, we extend our condolences to the Government of Uganda, to the Commander-in-Chief and to this Parliament. Thank you very much.

MR OKOT OGONG: Over the weekend, we had a very tragic accident and 72 Ugandans died; 72 died in a tragic accident! We are expecting a statement from government. These people died on Sunday but no statement has been made -(Interruption)- because that is what we are expecting; we want a full statement now, not tomorrow, because these people died over the weekend. In other countries, it would have been declared a public holiday to mourn our gallant soldiers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we need a prepared statement, not an off the cuff statement. The Minister of Defence should prepare it for us. Let him prepare a statement and give it to us. This is a serious matter.

3.00
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the condolence message you have given to this House and the nation. This week has been a terrible week for the disability movement in Uganda because the disability movement in Uganda has lost its national chairman. The Chairman of the National Council of Disability also died on Wednesday evening in an accident in Mbarara. He was laid to rest on Friday in Kabale. I feel that this is also important information because the National Council on Disability was established under an Act of Parliament by this august House and its first Chairman, Mr Emmanuel Rutakyengerwa, perished on Wednesday evening in a car accident.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry about it. Let us observe a moment of silence.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.02
MR OWORI OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. On Sunday, a group of people am told are called Balaalo – I looked through the Constitution and I did not see that tribe, so I do not know who they are. A group of people called Balaalo were chased away from Lango and they crossed with a ferry to Masindi port side, which is my constituency. Up to yesterday, we noted that over 3,000 cattle that they had crossed with were under very high military police escort. 

I would like to read the names and the military number of those officers and the person commanding them to this House. When debate about the Balaalo was going on in this House, I was not here. I had sought leave of this House. I was disappointed to realise that the debate was being brought down to try and portray the leaders of Bunyoro as people who are not accommodative, which is not true. I would like any Member of this House to tell me one community of a rural setting, which is as cosmopolitan as Bunyoro is, just one. (Applause)  

I have realised that there is probably a strategic move by some people or some circles to try and bring our nationality or our patriotism to question and yet we, as Members of Parliament from Bunyoro, are nationalists, and we are very accommodative and there is evidence on the ground to show this.

The issue of Balaalo has caused animosity in this country. We thought that government would be sensitive to this matter. Just two days ago – as I have stated, they crossed with their cattle – I am requesting government to pronounce itself on just one matter because I am not ready to be reduced to a Member of Parliament who fights for a tribe or who fights for a constituency or who fights for a cause, which is not of a national character because I am a nationalist. I, therefore, want government to pronounce itself on the special status of the Balaalo so that we can rest our case; so that we can go back and explain to our people about these fellows and the entitlement that they have.

May I take the pleasure, Sir, to read the names of the MPPU? According to the information that I have, which is not speculative, I have information to the effect that Hassan Kasingye, received orders from the IGP to instruct the O/C MPPU, Mr Wakadubi, to command the following officers to escort these fellows: a one, Epson Penasio, from Military Police Patrol Unit No.36394; Arishaba No.34555; PC Katongole No. 34362; and Owekgiu John No. 30179 were ordered to escort these people and the O/C Mr Wakadubi put the ferry operator, one Oduk Geoffrey at gunpoint when he refused to transport these people today morning. He realised that –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much hon. Otada and Mr Speaker. The issue that we are talking about and the issue, which has taken the Ugandan scene for some months – you remember in the Seventh Parliament this issue of herdsmen crossing from Masindi to Apac - these people were not from Masindi but the people whom hon. Otada is talking about – these people have moved from Apac, Ibuye, Akokoro, and Kyawante. When they were leaving those places, for reasons I do not know, they were informing those people that they were going to Masindi Port and that that is where they have land. Half of Masindi Port sub-county belongs to Mukwano. I want the government to help us and tell the country who this people are and where they came from? 

We are handling this issue lightly but it will at one time explode and we shall have a problem in this country. We want to be told by the Executive who these people are and where they are coming from. Now that Army officers put the pilot of the ferry at gunpoint and these people are camped in Masindi port, the farmers are being scared and these people’s animals have started eating their crops. Really we need to be protected. Let the government tell this august House and the country who these people are and where they are coming from. Why cannot you assist us and handle these people? Thank you.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, let me say this in closing. Let me say that the writing is on the wall now, but maybe he will respond.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.10 p.m., on resumption at 3.24 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

3.24
MR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, hon. Bintu was asking who these people are. The other day I travelled to Adwali and on my way through Lira, Akaro, Aduku and Ibuje, things looked alright. But as soon as I got into Ibuje, Akokoro and Cyewente, I got the shock of my life. Hon. Bintu, these persons are Ugandans and with Ugandan cows with long horns. (Laughter) 

Then I came to the ferry and it occurred to me that it was the intention of the security forces to load about 500 animals on the ferry together with my vehicle and another lorry. I objected because I feared that these cows could cause chaos on the ferry. So, we had a long argument; then I sat down and talked to the security officers, the LCs and everybody else. Some of these Ugandans with the Ugandan cows told me that they have been living in Ibuje and Akokoro for about 20 years. Some told me that they have been there for ten years; some told me they have been there for two to five years. 

The most recent immigrants into that location of Akokoro, Ibuje and Cyewente are persons that were chased away from Mukwano land in Kiryandongo. Those are the most recent immigrants in that location. How did they get there? They went there and rented a piece of land from the locals with the good knowledge of the LC Is, LC IIs and LC IIIs. Now where is the problem coming from? I am told that the Members of Parliament and the higher echelons in Apac instigated the lower persons to rise up against these Ugandans and their Ugandan cows. Madam Bintu –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable minister, the matter then becomes controversial because when you make a statement that you heard this and the other, it is going to worsen the situation. What I think hon. Otada was reporting is what is happening in that some people are coming from one area to his area and are escorted and so forth. I think we need to investigate it. 

Then when hon. Odit was standing up he said the top politicians - is he the one being said to have been doing this? So, it is going to cause a controversy here on the Floor before we get to know the facts. No, because he said he heard. You know, somebody could have told him but we are saying that stating it now is going to cause a problem. 

MR KIBIRIGE SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, therefore, I have already written my report. I will present it to the Prime Minister and I will come back to this House. Thank you. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this matter came to this House some time back and your Chair directed the Minister of Internal Affairs who had brought a shallow report to go back, edit his report and submit a substantive report. But to this date, the Minister of Internal Affairs has not done so. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I think what was done then, the House having said that the report was not helpful was that there was a motion by hon. Epetait that a select committee be set up not only to investigate what is happening in Buliisa but all over Uganda, including Apac. And the setting up of the select committee is no longer the function of the Speaker. Select committees are set up by the Business Committee; my duty was to report to the Business Committee that there is need to set up a select committee. Maybe if it was with the Speaker, by now the select committee would have been functioning.

Then with the multi-party system we have, there are ways of sharing Members of these select committees and then they are brought back to the Business Committee to approve and get the chuff and that is where the problem is now. But we said the select committee should investigate about this particular problem. 

3.30
THE PRIME MINSITER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate this matter and report on Thursday -(Hon. Otada rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: No, the matter is going to be investigated hon. Otada. You have reported and now the government has to make a statement on this matter on Thursday. 

MR OTADA: It is important for me to conclude my submission, Mr Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay, the names. 

MR OTADA: No. I had finished with the names. I just wanted to conclude that this Parliament has a lot of work to do and some of us would not want it to spend most of its time on the issue of Balaalo; hon. Ecweru caning them in Teso; the Bagungu fighting them from I do not know where; and the people of Kibanda also doing something else. I would like to promise this House that I will not mobilise my people against these people. I want this government to deal with this matter. Thank you.

3.32
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to stand up and air out a national concern. 

THE SPEAKER: I have seen what you want to say -(Laughter)- but in compliancy with procedure, I was not in the office and she said she wanted to talk about Mabira, so I am aware. But my advice in this matter is that we are going to be bogged down by reports of newspapers. We handled this Mabira sometime ago and it seemed to have been settled. Yes, and then sometime ago in a newspaper they said the debate of Mabira is going to be revived. And yesterday in the media I saw your group saying, “We give government 20 days to make a statement on this matter, otherwise we going to demonstrate.” 

Today in the New Vision, just at the bottom corner there is a report about President Museveni saying that he has to protect forests. He has been quoted saying everything - forests have to be protected.  Therefore, if the President – assuming you believe what was quoted, he is going to protect all the forests. Forests are not trees; Mabira is the biggest forest we have in the country. Therefore, ma’am -(Laughter)- the best thing to do would be just to ask a question or to request the minister concerned to make a statement on the status of Mabira, other than you making a statement on Mabira. I think that will help us. Maybe you ask a question: “Has the status of Mabira changed?” Then the minister will answer. Otherwise, you make your statement.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Exactly that is what I actually came to ask the minister concerned. Because since the time you directed that the minister comes up and furnishes the House over Mabira, we have waited and a lot of contradictions are coming up in the press. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister and government: what is the position as far as Mabira give away is concerned? The public is concerned; we are all equally awaiting the final say over this issue. It has become so repetitive that instead of discussing other things, we are still on Mabira. I would really like to have a real and final position by the minister to this country, to this House and to the world that Mabira Forest will not be given away and we shall all be happy. 
 
THE SPEAKER: The question is clear; do we need to debate this?

MR OKOT OGONG: I am just giving her information. I think our friend, Maama Mabira -(Laughter)- you should not labour on this matter. The Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister, Henry Kajura represented government on the Floor here. He was seated there and he made a categorical statement that nothing will happen to Mabira. I think it is on the Hansard. He made a categorical statement on this Floor. So you should not labour on this matter because he made it clear that nothing will happen to Mabira and government will not give away Mabira.  So the matter is closed. (Laughter)  

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for the information. But I remember when the Second Deputy Prime Minister was making that statement, he directed that the minister concerned would come the following week, but now three weeks have elapsed and nothing has been done. May I take this opportunity to request the minister to furnish this House and the country with information concerning Mabira so that we are at par and we are not left hanging? 

In the same vein, I would like to take this opportunity to ask the minister to also furnish the House and the entire country with information regarding buveera. The ban on buveera is almost coming into effect and the question is: how shall we operationalise this ban? We would like the minister to guide us on this so that there is no lapse otherwise we shall not be able to put it in action. Those are my concerns and I hope my honourable colleague, the minister will come and help us out of this so that we are all at par.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, join me in welcoming to Parliament students and teachers from the debating club of Soroti Secondary School, which is represented by hon. Willy Ekemu. You are welcome to Kampala. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE AUDIT BILL, 2007

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Audit Bill, 2007 be read for the first time. Its policy and principle is to give the Office of the Auditor-General a meaningful degree of autonomy in the process of recruiting, promoting, disciplining staff and human resource development. It is also to help the office manage its own budgetary process and give the Auditor-General independent powers to appoint and pay staff, subject only to budgetary approval by the legislator.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the certificate?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, in compliance with Section 10 of the Budget Act, I beg to lay on table the Certificate of Financial Implications thereto. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and reporting.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BIIL, 2007

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2007 be read the first time.          

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, it is seconded.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I have complied with Section 10 of the Budget Act and I would like to lay on the table the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 2007

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Public Service Commission Bill, 2007 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I have complied with the Budget Act and I wish to lay on the table the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.43
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members will recall that I promised to bring a statement concerning the Electronic Funds Transfer issue over which Members expressed concern last week.  This statement should be circulated, or is being circulated; I beg to read it.

Mr Speaker, at its meeting of 06 May 2006, the Monetary Affairs Committee of the East African Community directed all the three East African countries to introduce limits on the amounts written on cheques. The directive was intended to strengthen the management of risk and enhance efficiency in the East African payment systems. 

In compliance with that directive, Bank of Uganda and commercial banks set the limit on cheque amounts to a maximum of Shs 20 million in September 2006. It was further agreed that with effect from 02 July 2007, all cheque payments with amounts exceeding Shs 20 million will not be accepted in the Clearing House. The Government of Uganda was subsequently advised to use their Real Time Growth Settlement (RTGS) System or the Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) for all payments above Shs 20 million.

It is against this background that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commenced the process of implementing EFT as the principal method for effecting government payments. The principal payment instrument in Uganda is still a paper cheque. Cheques, however, have several limitations and these include:
a) High cost of printing and handling cheques. The volume and amounts of government payments by cheque are usually high and given a limit of Shs 20 million for cheque payments, government would require more cheques to effect payments. In the financial year 2006/7 alone, government spent Shs 100 million to print cheques.  

b) Handling of physical cheques. The process of handling cheques from printing to the final beneficiaries is prone to abuse. It has been observed that some government officers hide cheques to attract suppliers’ attention. This inconveniences suppliers and has led to the accumulation of unnecessary domestic arrears.  

c) Monetary/fiscal policy planning. The cheque float arising from the inefficiencies of the cheque payment method presents challenges in the implementation of the monetary and fiscal policy. Spending is sometimes restricted to a ceiling computed using inaccurate figures due to the cheque float. In case of revenue collection, cheques take longer to be realised compared to EFT.

d) Susceptibility to Fraud. Although this has significantly reduced due to the implementation of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), a few cases of cheques being defaced or diverted still exist. You may recall a case where a cheque in the names of Uganda Revenue Authority was altered to read Uganda Revolutionary Authors and subsequently banked. (Laughter)

e) Wastage of Management Time. Mr Speaker, a lot of management time is spent on signing cheques of amounts as little as Shs 10,000. It is envisaged that with the implementation of EFT, management will focus more on strategic issues that affect government business. 

EFT is a fast, secure and a more efficient payment method compared to cheques. It is gradually gaining ground as can be illustrated in the table shown in the document you have, which shows that volume has gone from under 2,000 to over 11,000 in February this year and values have gone from Shs 4 billion to Shs 38 billion. 

The specific benefits of EFT include: 

a) Efficient and highly dependable method that improves service delivery to recipients by providing timely payments. 

b) Increases security by eliminating lost, forged or stolen cheques.

c) Eliminates the cost of printing and handling of physical paper cheques.

d) Improves cash forecasting owing to the elimination of the cheque float.

e) Streamlines operations by reducing paperwork and reconciliation.

Who will be using EFT?

All government ministries, agencies, local governments, projects, non-governmental organisations and individuals without exception will be using EFT or RTGS to effect payments above Shs 20 million. However, for central government ministries and agencies, all payments including those under Shs 20 million will be paid using EFT.

Planning and EFT Implementation:
Go-live of the EFT was preceded by a comprehensive planning process. Below are highlights of the activities that were undertaken by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure a smooth transition:

a) Setup of a technical committee comprising of members from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Office of the Auditor General, Ministry of Local Government and Bank of Uganda to study the Government of Uganda payment processes, identify the requirements for EFT and fast-track the implementation.

b) Embarked on the collection and capture of bank accounts’ information of all government suppliers and employees.

c) A technical team was sent to South Africa to get a practical demonstration of the EFT operations, share experiences and challenges and draw lessons in the implementation of EFT in central government ministries, agencies and local governments.

d) In concert with Bank of Uganda, commercial banks and Ministry of Local Government, conducted extensive awareness campaigns to explain to all the stakeholders how EFT will operate. 

e) Piloted the processing of payments using EFT in June 2007 for the following ministries and agencies to confirm readiness to go live in July 2007; the ministries where this was done are indicated.

Overview of the EFT payment method

The current payment processes for ministries, agencies and local governments will largely remain unchanged. Central government votes will initiate and submit requests for payment to the Treasury after obtaining all the necessary approvals. Instead of printing cheques, the Treasury will generate and transmit payment instructions to Bank of Uganda using secure communication links to effect payments. For local governments and projects, payment instructions will be sent directly to the commercial banks to effect payments.

Challenges

A reform process such as the implementation of EFT typically entails technical, procedural, institutional and behavioural adjustments. Inevitably, some lapses were experienced in the initial phase and were mainly caused by the following:

a) Data formats

Some bank account numbers contained alpha-numeric characters, that is a mixture of the alphabet and numerical characters, which are incompatible with Bank of Uganda Clearing House requirements. Payments to such accounts were rejected by the systems. The affected banks have since resolved this matter and payments were thereafter effected.

b) Feedback on process flows

As in any new system implementation, feedback mechanisms have to be designed and anticipated. Appropriate response has been given to all issues as they arise. It should be emphasised, however, that once an EFT transaction is submitted to the banks, it takes 48 hours for the beneficiary’s account to be credited.

c) Volumes

All stakeholders were initially overwhelmed by the volume of EFTs processed. This was particularly serious as all votes were in the process of re-aligning their operations for the requirements of the commencement of the EFT. However, this has now been overcome as banks have invested in robust software to handle varying volumes.

d) Incorrect account details

Many employees and suppliers originally submitted incorrect details at the time of data entry. These were rejected by either the Clearing House System or the commercial banks. The incidence has significantly reduced and special teams will continue to review the bank account information and provide appropriate quality assurance.

e) Learning process

Any change in activity involves gradual acceptance of new procedures and processes. This affected payees as well as users of the EFT. The mindset for cheques presented serious challenges in appreciating and tracking the invisible transactions surrounding EFTs. Employees and suppliers were initially slow in sending their bank details and in some cases others were not willing to disclose account information. This change management challenge is being managed by the improvement of communication within and among the players in the payment process. You will find copies of the EFT Frequently Asked Questions brochure in your pigeon holes for your further information and education.

f) Timing of implementation

The Bank of Uganda mandatory cap of Shs 20 million on cheques also took effect on 2 July 2007, which coincided with the beginning of the financial year. The beginning of the financial year usually presents unique challenges. This in part involves processes related to closing and opening of financial year transaction processing activities. Some delays could not be avoided. Some local governments, for example, did not open new general accounts until August 2007. This meant that Treasury could not transfer funds to these local governments. This had nothing to do with EFT. However, these issues have been overcome. Normal business processing has resumed and all August payments should be effected within the established framework.

Way forward and Conclusion

There is every reason to support the anticipated changes in so far as they will lead to improvement in service delivery. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wishes to assure the public and the honourable members that the EFT payment system is gradually stabilising. I urge all stakeholders and the general public to support the implementation, especially in so far as it promises a more secure and efficient payment system which is conducive for stronger economic performance. Government will continue to address any emerging issues expeditiously. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this statement.

3.57
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Minister for giving the statement. Last week we had asked if the local government staff had been paid and I still want to find out from you if they have been paid. Hon. Dombo said that they had stayed for up to two months without getting their salaries. I think it would be a good opportunity to find out if they have been paid their salaries. I have seen it is not one of the frequently asked questions in your brochure on EFT, so I can just ask. Thank you.

3.58
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I want to ask one question to do with what this new system seeks to overcome. On Page 2, in (d) the Minister states that cheques are susceptible to fraud and I agree with him. He also goes on say, on Page 4 under Section 5.0: “Instead of printing cheques, the Treasury will generate and transmit electronic payment instructions to Bank of Uganda using secure communication links to effect payments.” I wish to underline the phrase, “secure communication links” and to find out from the minister what he considers as secure. 

I am asking this knowing that today there is a lot of fraud even on the internet. There are a lot of people who are learning new tricks and no doubt this new system will come under attack by fraudsters. So, I want you to assure the country and assure this House that the links that you are using or intend to use are first of all absolutely secure, and that you will continue upgrading these links in order to beat fraudsters who are becoming more and more cheeky and tricky every other day. Thank you.

MR BARTILLE TOSKIN: Mr Speaker, I just want some small clarification. The explanation given by the minister seems to be clear on government transactions. How about at individual level? I want to pay Shs 30 million to my colleague with a cheque; how does the system work here?  

4.01
MR NATHAN NANDALA (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister. This is a very good move. The only question I have is - how is it going to reduce domestic arrears? The moment the cheque is issued, that means you have reduced on the payment. How does it come to reduce domestic arrears? There is no way a cheque, if it has not been collected, can reduce domestic arrears. I do not understand that.

Secondly, I think you are right it is not only writing forged names, even recently we got pension payments to a tune of almost a billion shillings that had not been paid and cheques had gone stale. I think this would not have happened. I can enter two shillings when I am supposed to pay one. How are you going to deal with the controls, which Members are asking for? If you never did pre-testing, don’t you think we are going to have those problems?

Thirdly, I do not think it is EFT, which delayed payments; it should have been the ministry itself. It should have been known earlier that payments are going to be made, so there must be other reasons.

How are you going to help local governments? The salary payments for local governments are very far and you are saying they are not; you are saying it is 48 hours. We know that with EFTs the world over, you just click and within about six hours money is on the account. For somebody to delay with somebody’s money for 48 hours is a lot of time. Why don’t you reduce on the time from 48 hours to maybe 12 hours so that this money is on the account? Thank you.

4.03
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The EFT is highly appreciated and I am glad that it has come through. However, I have my reservations, most especially when it comes to paying government departments. 

It says here that revenue will be recognised on the basis of the advice issued by the bank. The reservation is that in the past there have been cases where there have been forgeries. Would it not be wise that the receiving bank issues this advice rather than the remittance bank, most especially for government? With URA, for example, somebody comes and says, “I have remitted” and by the time the URA department reconciles that they have received the money, this guy would have gone away with his goods. It is just an issue on which I hold some reservations. Thank you.

4.04
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would just like to request the minister to give me clarification on why we have Shs 20 million and not Shs 10 million or Shs 30 million. What is the rationale for picking on Shs 20 million? Thank you. 

4.04
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the clarification and I would like to make two requests. First, to urge government to bring a law that governs electronic data transfer and maybe data signatures. In case of denial, there could be a problem. That law has delayed on the shelves of government; it should come.

Again, it is good the minister has brought all this literature to us, but it was only after complaints. In as much as he has told us on page 4 that the commercial banks and the Ministry of Local Government conducted extensive awareness campaigns, most of us were not aware of these campaigns. However, thank you very much for this information. Also, in future we should focus before snapping. We should educate the masses before we start operating a policy. Thank you.  

4.06
MR OTADA OWORI (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you very much. On page 1, the minister says that he has observed some officers hide cheques to attract suppliers’ attention and this inconveniences suppliers and has led to the accumulation of domestic arrears. I have not understood that. I thought that probably it would lead to corruption.  

Also, one of our colleagues raised suspicion over a plot by some people in the Ministry of Finance who want to kill this project on account of what the minister has just said, which I have just quoted. I want him to help us allay our fears. Thank you very much.

4.07
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. We appreciate today that micro-finance companies are playing a big part in money transfers and in the economy. In this book where you show the frequently asked questions, under micro-finance firms we get to discover that they exploit a lot of money from our people. How is it going to be regulated? How is the EFT system going to work with the micro-finance companies? 

Secondly, in the usual questions asked, note question 12 - who bears the transfer fees? Is this going to be regulated? Commercial banks are basically out for businesses and also micro-finance companies, how is this going to be regulated so that persons using this system are not exploited? Thank you.

4.09
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In government when there is a ceiling on a voucher, there is usually a bureaucratic method of circumventing it. With this ceiling of Shs 20 million, somebody can write a cheque of Shs 19 million today and another Shs 19 million tomorrow until he writes ten such cheques amounting to about Shs 190 million. Is the ministry aware that this can be done? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please answer.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the concern about local government payments, all the local governments have been paid. The security of the communication system is a highly technical matter but electronic funds transfer is not new and there are ways of encrypting messages so that it is very difficult to break the codes. However, I do not think it would be proper for me to go into how this is done because it is supposed to be secret. The risks, in my opinion, are extremely low; they are not non-existent but they are extremely low. 

I did not quite understand the question about whether the system would apply if you are sending Shs 30 million. Even the Shs 20 million is an intermediate number. I think eventually we want to go to using electronic transfer for all levels but as an intermediate step, we could not go to total electronic transfer immediately. However, eventually this should be the means of transfer.

There was an issue raised about the impact on domestic arrears. Certainly, if somebody is manipulating cheques or holding them until they are stale, it means that people remain unpaid. The intended beneficiaries do not get their money and, therefore, this remains a claim and therefore an arrear.

The issue of 48 hours probably concerns the capacity of our banking system at present to process things quickly. As you know, even the cheque system we have has taken many years to reduce to where we are. It used to take a very long time to clear cheques. It is still long, it should be shorter, but I hope the Bank of Uganda will continue to put pressure on commercial banks to become more efficient. 

The issue of how either the bank or the recipient being the one to be recognised; I am not sure I can answer that question. It is a very technical question but I believe that the idea is that there should be a clear recognition of payment. If the bank issues a statement that it has paid, I hope that will constitute sufficient proof of payment. 

I already answered the question of the limit of Shs 20 million. That it is an intermediate number that will be changed later. 

On bringing a law that governs electronic transfer, we have made some amendments already in the law in order to make these electronic funds possible. If a law is necessary, then certainly we shall bring it as needed. 

I am sorry that the campaign on EFT was not adequate. We shall try to do better when we are introducing new systems so that more people are aware early. 

On the issue of people in the Ministry of Finance hiding cheques, I have not found any evidence to this effect. I think it is a suspicion and I think it is probably not a correct suspicion.  

The issue of how micro-finance companies will be affected by this; I think that once they have the proper computers and telecommunications, they should be able also to participate in this system. It will be our purpose to encourage such transfers. However, initially we recognise that they do not have the computers and telecommunication systems to participate fully in this system. I hope as the financial system improves, they will be able to take advantage of this system. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you expect anybody receiving payment from government to have a bank account? Suppose your payment to this person is a single payment and he never expects any other payments? Suppose it is a payment of half a million shillings and he does not expect any other payment, do you want him to open a bank account so that he can receive this money?

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, we hope and pray that all adult Ugandans will increasingly become participants in the banking system. It is in the interest of the country that all of us open bank accounts. The purpose of savings and credit cooperatives is to spread the infrastructure of the country so that as many Ugandans as possible have access. This is very important for the development of the country because it means that the money of the people is in the banking system and is available as capital for economic development. However, money which is in mattresses, roofs or under the ground is unfortunately outside the system and weakens our economic functioning. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The incidence I have, honourable minister, is that of this man who had his bicycle which was damaged by a government vehicle and that is the only property he had. You are paying compensation for damaging his bicycle, do you expect him to go and open a bank account to receive the payment? 

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I also get uncomfortable when the Minister keeps saying “I hope”, “I wish”; this is really not very convincing. Anyway, my point is that the minister should be aware that quite a number of Ugandans have lost colossal amounts of money with this kind of thing. I can give an example of the veterans, including those who were recruited by the Queen’s men. These people have been told to go and open bank accounts but the problem is that for you to open an account in these banks, you require close to Shs 100,000. As the payment delays, the bank keeps on deducting money from such an account and by the end of the year the account holder will have no money and the account can later on be closed. This is the biggest dilemma.

Secondly, when the honourable minister was asked to confirm the issues of hiding cheques, according to my recollection he said that he is not aware. However, it is evident on page 1, paragraph (b), which he read, that the process of handling cheques from printing to the final beneficiaries is abused. It has been observed by him that some government officers hide cheques to attract suppliers’ attention and this inconveniences suppliers and has led to accumulation of unnecessary domestic arrears. 

I am talking about this because I have seen quite a number of government officials handling documents, which they have not internalised. They just come here, read the documents and go away with them. This problem also surfaces during presentation of policy statements. You find a minister completely not aware of what he has signed. I think this should stop in order for Uganda to be serious and for people to value the leaders they have. Thank you very much.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you very much. The minister knows very well that this nation does not have a bank that belongs to government. There are areas, for example Ssese Islands, which comprise 84 islands but none of them has a bank. If a fisherman who lives on an island that is near Tanzania is to visit a bank in Masaka, he needs 200 litres of petrol. How would that fisherman be able to open a bank account in Masaka and how is he expected to do that when we have no national bank? 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am a bit surprised by the honourable Minister’s denial of his own statement. Hon. Ochieng has pointed out that matter, and to the best of my belief it is a very critical issue. This House is grappling with the issue of domestic arrears and the Minister’s report had attributed this to the hiding of cheques and other things, but he is beginning to deny that on the Floor when it is actually on Page 1 of his statement. I want clarification about that matter.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has not answered your question and I want to give further information. We really need an explanation or an answer to issues that relate to opening of accounts. I think there should be exceptions. 

I am currently grappling with an 80 year-old woman who lives deep in Kasilo. She has never gone to school yet she is supposed to get some money from the Administrator-General’s office following the death of her son. The Administrator-General’s office is saying, “We cannot give her cash; she must have an account.” How can an old woman of 80 years who does not know how to write and read own an account? This is the reason I am saying that there should be exceptions on how some of these people can access this money. You cannot ask all Ugandans to have accounts. In fact, that would be forced labour. So the issue the Rt Hon. Speaker raised is of serious concern and must be addressed.

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, there are some areas in this country that do not have any bank, just like the honourable member said. Sometime back the government talked of having Post Bank services extended to the people but up to now there is no policy on this.  As if that is not bad enough, even if these services had to reach these areas, people would find difficulties in accessing their finances because in some areas people have to go through about four districts before they can come across a bank ATM. By the time they reach there, even if it is as early as 6.00 a.m. they have to queue behind a long line of over 50 people. One ATM machine serves over five districts. What policy is the minister coming up with to help such people if they are to benefit from the electronic money transfers, which he is talking about?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us get the last question from the honourable member over there.

MR WASIKE MUGENI: Mr Speaker, when you look at page 10 of this statement, you realise that the frequently asked question will be, “who will be using EFT?” The answer provided is that it includes individuals without exception and they will be using EFT to effect payments of above Shs 20 million. That means that if I am going to buy a house and I have to pay Shs 125 million, I use EFT and write seven cheques or carry cash. Now, is such a policy in my interest because I am buying a house once –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see if you are paying URA and you are supposed to pay Shs 100 million, you write a cheque of that amount so that payment is not effected.

MR MUGENI: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that this policy is not serving the individuals.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to appeal to you to support EFT as an important contribution to the improvement of services to our people. It may not be a total solution, but certainly it will be helpful to us. I must say that I am a bit perturbed because while people have been taking a long time to receive their payments, and we have put in place a system that enables them to get their money quickly, they are now working against it. 

These are attempts to remove inefficiencies and inconveniencies, and people having to wait for their money when it is actually in a drawer of somebody who wants a bribe. That these efforts are being less than welcome is an idea that I would like to challenge because I believe that this is definitely a very important move on the banking system and it is aimed at improving the banking services to our people. So, I appeal to you to welcome and support it.

We recognise that the banking system does not reach all our people. This is why government is deliberately, systematically and vigorously pushing to expand the financial infrastructure of our country, which for a long time was neglected, so that rural areas can access banking services because majority of the people live there. I therefore urge you to support the building of the financial infrastructure of our country so that all our people access this financial system. It is in everybody’s interest that every person gets a bank account. 

I want to applaud some people who cannot read or write but have taken the effort to open bank accounts through other people who are willing to help them. They have tried their best to become members of the banking system and I want to applaud them. I urge members to support such people so that all of us can join the banking system. 

We are talking about safe transfer of funds for everyone; please support this. Even if you have a cheque, Mr Speaker, you still have to go to the bank. So, the fact that we have changed to EFT does not mean adding any extra charges. You still have to look for a bank no matter whether the money is coming by cheque or not. The difference here is that the money will come faster. You can get it quickly because this money will come specifically to you and not through someone else. This will help in cutting out the unnecessary medium.

The issue of ATMs and long lines is something that can be resolved by increasing services, banks and competition and we will continue to make sure that this is done. I therefore believe that this is an important step forward. It will extend services to our people including you who are concerned. I believe that in the end you will be beneficiaries of this system and will be able to save on the one-time payment. 

I want to inform the House that we will urge Bank of Uganda to reduce service charges so that people earn more savings rather than being charged for keeping money in the banks. I thank you, Sir.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.29
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. 

On Sunday 26 August, a truck carrying UPDF soldiers on transfer from Bukwo District to Nakapiripirit District on its way through Kapchorwa got a tragic accident, which involved 129 persons. The people directly affected by the accident included soldiers and some members of their families.

In regard to the death toll, Mr Speaker, as at close of yesterday, 27 August, a total of 73 people were confirmed dead. Two of these were officers in the army, one a Captain and the other a Lieutenant. The other 56 were of other ranks. Thirteen were wives of some of the soldiers who were involved in this accident while two were children.

I believe that it is of interest that colleagues get to know the rough distribution of the soldiers who passed away in this accident. In the statement, on page 2, I do give this distribution according to their districts of origin. 

In the distribution and according to our records, two of the soldiers were from Arua, one was from Bugiri, six from Bundibugyo, three from Bushenyi, one from Dokolo, one from Gulu, one from Isingiro, four from Kabale, one from Kanungu, three from Kasese, one from Kibaale, three from Kitgum, one from Luweero and one from Manafwa. The records further indicate that two were from Masaka, one from Masindi, three from Mbarara, one from Mukono, three from Nebbi, three from Ntungamo, two from Rakai, four from Rukungiri and one from Sironko. At the time this statement was written, eight of the soldiers had not been matched in as far as their districts of origin are concerned.

Honourable members, burial arrangements are being made using the regular procedure within the Army. The bodies have been identified and the next of kin are being informed. 

There are those who also survived the accident but sustained injuries, these totalled 56. Twenty-five of the soldiers are still being treated at Rubongi Health Centre in Tororo, a health centre that belongs to the army. Seventeen have been transferred to Mulago Hospital and two to Mbuya Military Hospital. That gives a total of 44 soldiers that were injured in this accident but survived.

Also, among those who sustained injuries were nine women believed to be wives of some of the soldiers. They are also being treated at Rubongi Health Centre. Two of the women were transferred and are being treated at Mulago Hospital and we also have one at Mbuya Military Hospital. This gives a total of 12 wives of some of the soldiers who also got injured in this accident.

Most of these injuries are fairly serious and include head injuries. One of the soldiers who sustained a head injury is right now in the intensive care unit of Mulago Hospital. Three of them, although not in the intensive care unit, are unconscious. One person sustained haemopneumothorax, that is to say, he has air and blood within his lungs. 

Two people sustained injuries on their spleens and one of them has had to lose his spleen; it has been removed. The other one has had his spleen repaired. Many of the other injured people sustained multiple fractures and other injuries referred to as soft tissue injuries.

As a follow-up in a broad way, Mr Speaker and honourable members, a body of inquiry has been instituted within the UPDF as a regular institutional mechanism to investigate the accident. This approach provides a basis for any action that will follow. Follow-up action could include but not be limited to punishments where an avoidable error was made up to perhaps institutional weaknesses, which once identified can then be corrected.

Once again, I would like to avail myself this opportunity to convey my deep feelings of condolences to the Commander-in-Chief, who is His Excellency the President, the Chief of Defence Forces, the entire fraternity of the army, the families of the deceased, the districts and communities from which they come, and indeed the whole country following this tragedy. 

Let me also commend the army leadership for the quick and professional response they have made to this tragedy. In the same way, I thank the staff of Mulago Hospital for the excellent care being given to the injured persons. Last but not least, I thank the Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa who happened to be in the district, and the local administration of Kapchorwa District who offered great assistance following this accident.

In concluding, I wish to say that these gallant sons of Uganda died in the course of duty. They have been protecting the people of Bukwo against raids from the Pokot of Kenya. The accident occurred as they were being transferred to Amudat in Nakapiripirit where their mother unit is. Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament rises and observes a moment of silence in honour of the gallant sons and daughters of Uganda who have passed away. I beg to move.   

(The members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

4.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament first of all to thank the Minister for formally putting the tragedy of our gallant soldiers before the House. However, more importantly, I rise to convey to the individual families of all the members who have died our sincere condolences and deep sympathy and to those who have been injured our sympathy and best wishes for a quick recovery. 

Mr Speaker, road accident tragedies have become a very serious aspect of our lives in Uganda. Many a time we have heard about accidents where many people perish in buses. When they happen, as Parliament we do two things: we recognise the tragedy and convey appropriate apologies; more importantly, as Parliament we use our oversight role to try and ask the basic questions: “What happened and why did it happen?” 

Honourable minister, I know this is probably a preliminary statement, but we will leave here wondering what really happened. For any death, the first question that people ask is, “what really happened?” If you had provided, for instance, the circumstances under which the accident occurred, the kind of vehicle that was being used, we would be able to make preliminary comments on how our soldiers ought to be managed. 

I have lived in Kenya, in Uganda and I have also lived outside Africa. What I see commonly in Kenya is when soldiers are on transfer, all the soldiers are seated on whatever truck they are being carried. Once the sitting capacity is met, no extra soldier stands in the truck or remains hanging. If you had told me the type of vehicle, I would do a quick calculation and know that it should have seated so many and asked why we have to carry our soldiers as if they are valueless luggage. This is important. 

Unless these hard questions are asked when things have just happened, once these soldiers are buried and their memory is lost, the necessity to force the state to do what is right for the people who serve them gets lost. Therefore, I would have wished that you had provided this. Hopefully, if you have to respond, you can give us some indication on what the circumstances were; was it a sharp corner? Were they coming down? Give us something like that so that we can make comments and logically tell the public that this is what happened. 

Otherwise, I am sincerely sorry that the people who have to be serving our country have lost their lives in such a tragic accident. We convey the sympathies of the Opposition to the leadership of the UPDF. I thank you.

4.41
DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister for his statement. I was in Kapchorwa town when that vehicle set off. I saw the vehicle before and I saw the victims and also attended to them in the hospital. 

On Sunday afternoon as I was at a roadside garage - as the Army always leave they go singing and cheering - they passed me by the roadside and the truck was going downhill. That was in the town but the speed at which they were travelling was very high. I think the vehicle they were using was not a suitable vehicle for that purpose. This was a semi-trailer with 18 tyres. You know how Army men sit - one leg in, one leg outside on top of the truck or vehicle. I could not even see the pick-up, which was inside because it was green all round the long trailer. I hear there was another truck inside; I even saw it when I passed yesterday. My observation is that it was not suitable for long trailers like that, when they are overloaded, to negotiate sharp and steep corners. 

Later on when I heard there was an accident, I was even requested to go to the hospital as a doctor. I joined the health workers in the hospital –(Applause)- but what was amazing is that we received over 60 severely injured people. The hospital, small as it is, could not cater for all that number. Unfortunately, Kapchorwa Hospital was built without a causality unit –(Interjection)- yes, up to today it has never been expanded. The only improvised area in the outside department is actually rooms but no facility for operating on anybody, and then the theatre has only one operational table. So these 60 cases were too many for this hospital to handle. 

At this time, I would like to thank the divisional commander together with the Kapchorwa local government, the police of Kapchorwa and the offices of the RDC and the DSO, who mobilised local transport available to evacuate them to Tororo. Otherwise I together with other doctors who were there, we just watched as ten people died in our hands. There was no blood, yet all these cases needed blood before they could be operated on. So, ten people died and we would tell that this one will die in the next ten minutes and indeed they died, because I stayed there for about three hours. Eventually we evacuated all of them. 

But the issue, which should be addressed, is the type of transport. I think we are being unfair to the UPDF. Why should we confine them to being transported on lorries? Can’t we afford to buy them buses so that they travel in buses instead of lorries? I heard that the police in charge of traffic harass civilians travelling on lorries; but when they see army men crowded on a lorry, they just wave to them. I think we are unfair in the way we handle the UPDF.

Then, the type of vehicles that were sent there – maybe we should have sent three TATA lorries to that particular place where that accident occurred because it is on tarmac, but that spot is steep and it has a bend. And there is even a road sign that as you descend down, you engage low gears. But the type of vehicle was not suitable. We were even informed that the driver had complained before they took off; he was given “Kiboko” until he succumbed to driving - that is reliable information.

Further, we urge the army to maintain their vehicles. This view of saying that we drive “Kigyeshi,” climb “Kigyeshi” and even seat “Kigyeshi” – Kigyeshi means driving anyhow – “Panda Kigyeshi, Endesha Kigyeshi – even the driver knew that the vehicle was in bad condition, but because he had to drive “Kigyeshi,” he had to take the risk.

The other comment that I want to make is to the Minister of Health. As I said, the Kapchorwa Hospital has only 60 beds. So, over 60 surgical emergencies were too much. The only thing we did was to keep them there as we arranged for their evacuation. So, I want to ask the Minister of Health, how prepared is the Ministry of Health in all other hospitals in the country with regard to emergency units? Because we did not have blood, no adequate fluids; we were about six doctors but there was nothing we could do because there was no blood available. As I said, all these cases needed to be resuscitated with blood or fluids before we could operate on them. So, how is the Ministry of Health handling emergency cases? Briefly those are the cases that I managed to observe when I was there. Thank you.

4.49
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I convey my deeply felt condolences to the families of the deceased. I would also like to thank hon. Dr Yekko for what he has just said; some of it is what I wanted to say. About the Ministry of Heath, I would propose that Parliament resolves to cut from different budgets in order to equip these health units all over the country. 

And for the Ministry of Works, true we have been told that the lorry was in a bad shape, but it could have been the road even if it is tarmacked. You see, I seat on the Committee on Infrastructure, and road safety is wanting in this country. This has come as an eye opener. We are all concerned citizens and these people come from all over Uganda. So, how could road safety be given priority? Even a minister is lying in hospital because of road accidents! There are so many things on our roads, black spots and others, which I think need more attention. So on this, I was thinking that we should learn a lesson from here and rectify problems where possible.

And on the Ministry of Defence, the budget of Defence is always one of the highest. So, could we buy buses out of these funds? Mr Minister, could you reallocate from buying guns to buying vehicles to transport your soldiers? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.52
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mid last week, I had an opportunity to visit the high command in Kimaka in Jinja. While there, I asked one question: “Do you feel that you are now a professional Army?” They were quick to say, “Yes”. I did not know that in a few days’ time, their colleagues would perish in such a tragic accident.

Given the high defence expenditure in this country for the last almost ten years, can you imagine that 110 people could be travelling in a state of apathy? The working conditions of our brothers are very appalling! When you see one man leave his household with his family on a truck and perishing in one accident, you imagine six or so coffins lying before you; and we still call ourselves a country that is eager to allocate money for CHOGM and care less for our own people!

There are Members of Parliament in this House who are interested in seeing things going well, but they do not have the heart to do so because they are having a loyalty, which mismatches their conscience. Mr Speaker, while I was in Kimaka, they told me one thing; even if you had an opportunity to retire given your age, you would not know which direction to follow. You would not even have any direction as to when and where you will get your benefits. Now that we have lost our brothers and sisters, could I know from the Minister of Defence how and when these families are getting compensation given the conditions under which these people were working and the burial arrangements you are talking about. In this country, even the highest of the highest at times get delayed burials. What about the person who is a private? Others have an opportunity to be evacuated as soon as possible, depending on their ranks. 

I would wish to know about my two soldiers from Arua, where are the bodies right now? (Interjection)- yes, they may be in the mortuary. This is very pathetic to imagine that my soldiers are in the mortuary and that is coming from the Minister of Defence. It is extremely appalling and it reflects the degree of heartlessness that our Members of Parliament leave alone ministers can have. Each one of us is going to leave this country in one way or the other. However, when we perish in conditions like the ones our soldiers did, and we still see a smile in the faces of persons who should have cared better, then we begin asking, what is the way forward in this country? Where are we heading? If a tragedy can cause laughter and reckless talk in Parliament, how can we be capable of sustaining a generation that will come with some degree of ethics in this country? 

My honest appeal to the Minister of Defence is, now that you have explained your budget expenses based on the unfortunate situation in the North, and now that there is some relative calm, can you please look into the issue of how our gallant sons are transported? In one way or the other, one day if there was an opportunity to invite hell on earth, I would ask God to do it now so that we see who will be burning quicker and faster. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): On Saturday morning I moved from Kapchorwa coming down to Kampala. I had visited my constituency. I got the message as soon as I arrived in Kampala. I tried to contact my district officials but could not get them and because this was a communication from my own people, I felt that maybe the people could be at the site. This was a place with no network. So, immediately I rang the Commander-in–Chief, Gen. Aronda and I must commend him before this –(Interjections)- the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF). Actually he responded immediately. He sent there a chopper, which rescued some of our brothers and sisters -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, there is a very serious error which is of constitutional nature. This has to be corrected from the Hansard because the Hansard is read worldwide. Is the Minister of State for Privatisation in order to declare the Army Commander, Gen. Nyakairima Aronda, as the Commander-in-Chief of UPDF yet it is commonly known that Gen. Aronda is the Chief of Defence Forces?

THE SPEAKER: You have helped the situation.  Continue, please. (Laughter)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you very much.  Actually I had corrected myself and I remember saying CDF. So, I must inform this august House that Gen. Aronda responded very fast and sent a chopper. I also rang the Speaker and then the Regional Commander Col Patrick Kankiriho. All these people immediately sent some vans to that place and I must send my condolences to the UPDF as a whole -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I heard the honourable minister holding the Floor inform this House that a military chopper was deployed to Kapchorwa.  Earlier on, during his submission, Dr Yekko told this House that they had to struggle to get every available vehicle to evacuate the injured soldiers who were eventually taken to Mbale and to Tororo.  I just want to be certain about what the minister holding the Floor is telling the House. What was the helicopter deployed for? Did it help in the evacuation of the injured troops? Did it come early enough to be of assistance to the injured? It is just that mix up that I wanted to get clarified.

THE SPEAKER: No. Do we have to go into these details? The honourable minister has said what she did. Are you really interested in how many people the helicopter took? She did what she did and what happened is really not necessary. Proceed.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think my intention was to show the august House that though I was in Kampala, I was in charge of my constituency. So, I had to respond from this side to take initiatives. Although I was here, I managed to get the regional commander who also went to help those people. The chopper helped to bring other people to Mulago and I think I did something that this august House should commend. (Applause)  

On that note, I want to convey condolences from the people of Kapchorwa to all the bereaved families, the UPDF soldiers and Uganda as a whole. Thank you very much. May their souls rest in eternal peace!

5.04
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for his statement. It is sad that in just one accident, we have lost so many lives. I would like to seek only one clarification from the minister. I used to work at the Army headquarters as a clerical officer. This was after my O’ and A’ Levels. There were policies of transporting troops; soldiers could not travel in the same vehicles with civilians. Even among the officers, an officer starting from 2nd lieutenant that would have a Land Rover of his own. Officers did not share vehicles. Armed soldiers would not be allowed on any civilian vehicles. 

However, these days, particularly where I come from, armed soldiers in their uniforms force themselves on these pick-ups that we use as transport. Therefore, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister is this. Do we have a policy of transporting our troops? It is sad to hear that in this particular incident, children, women, private soldiers and officers of various ranks were on one and the same vehicle. It is very sad, Mr Speaker.

In the past, even the number of soldiers on one truck was limited. No vehicle would carry more than a given number. So, in view of the fact that over the last 20 years we have been hearing about professionalising the Army, I wonder whether transportation is a component in that professionalisation? (Laughter) This is the only clarification I would like to seek from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I see, there is a statement, which the minister gave and part of it was to the effect that they have established an inquiry that will look into the details of what happened; were rules of transporting soldiers broken and so forth. Since it is a promised action taken, I will suggest that when the report is out we get this copy of the report so that we debate the circumstances under which this accident happened, including the rules of transporting the soldiers, how many should go on the vehicle, et cetera. I think this will come out in that report. The good thing we know is that this accident involved one vehicle and the number we know, therefore, we shall compare it with the rules and then debate it. But I think the point is taken.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, can we therefore give a timeframe to the minister, regarding when to bring that report here?

THE SPEAKER: Well, can you indicate to us when you expect a report? I am concluding this debate. Everybody is sending condolences to the families and also sympathies to the people who were injured. We are concerned and we want to know the facts so that we can continue debating the policy of transporting our troops. That will come after the inquiry has come but you can make your winding remarks.

5.07
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. Maybe if the minister could also comment on what we are going to do as of now. Are you declaring a day of national mourning? Are you ordering the flags to be flown at half-mast other than just us debating here and then we go home? Can you commit yourself to a serious political statement that tomorrow is a public holiday or that flags are going to be flown at half-mast, at least to show that it is a bad thing? So, can you commit yourself as a substantial Minister of Defence? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: This is an emotional statement, which you have made whether we are remembering this and the other. Suppose he has no mandate to do it? Then it will reflect on him as if he is not sensitive to this. While I see your intentions, you put him in a position, which may embarrass him. Will you, please –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, this is the least I can request for because we could also request for resignation. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: But maybe he is not the one – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: So, maybe he will tell us that he will communicate to the President and then bring the information back later. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. On behalf of the ministry, on behalf of the Army, I thank the Members for the sympathy and the concern that they have expressed over this tragedy. Mr Speaker, as you have said, this was a preliminary statement to Parliament so that Parliament does not depend on what is coming on the radio and in the public media. I have been very clear that we have put in place a board of inquiry to get more details as to the circumstances that led to this tragedy.

We expect that within a period of one month, we should be done and back here to give Parliament a little more detail as to what happened. But quickly as the honourable Leader of the Opposition asked - and in part, Mr Speaker, you have answered. This was a vehicle that overturned on the road. It did not collide with any other vehicle and obviously that is what led to the injuries and the deaths that I have reported.

When we return we will be able to give more details. However, let me say at this stage that the area of the 3rd Division, covering Karamoja and Kapchorwa, is one of the areas in which we have put more resources and more emphasis because of the operations taking place there. We have a number of vehicles there and it is also in our mind whether the appropriate vehicle was used for this purpose. The inquiry will bring out all these points.

In my recommendations I want to correct and add Kapchorwa Hospital as part of the staff, as you heard from hon. Yekko, who really helped in this situation to collect the injured from the site and try and help.

The evacuation of the people who died included everybody. The people that were evacuated with the chopper are of all ranks, privates and other ranks, because one colleague thought that the evacuation considers ranks. In fact, the two senior officers that were on the truck both of them died and it were those of other ranks that survived in this accident. 

As hon. Chekamondo said, a chopper was sent to go and evacuate causalities but unfortunately, it could not reach in the first round because the weather was very bad. So, it had to come back to the area after about three or four hours. We suffered that delay due to the weather conditions. 

I am surprised to hear from my good friend, hon. Okello-Okello and this is the first I am hearing it, that soldiers in Kitgum force themselves onto vehicles of the civilians with their arms. I beg, honourable members, that if such incidents occur, they should inform us. 

Regarding the policy of transportation, when we return, we will reply to that situation and indicate whether it was respected in this particular situation.

Finally, regarding my good friend hon. Otto, normally ministerial statements are made after we have been to Cabinet. Cabinet will sit tomorrow and we thought it would not be fair to keep Members of Parliament without some information. So, this matter will be fully discussed in the Cabinet tomorrow and I believe that an appropriate decision will be made. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I want to raise an issue on the Order Paper. Last week, I raised an issue and the Prime Minister directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a statement today in this House. I expected that statement to appear among these ministerial statements and unfortunately, I do not see the minister yet this was the issue regarding recruitment of cadets and assistant superintendents of police. So, I wonder what has happened because training is about to begin, on 1st September. We do not want to be pushed into putting a court injunction to this training. So, could the Prime Minister order the minister responsible to produce the statement? I thank you. 

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to apologize to this House that we have been unable to bring the statement this afternoon because one of my key officers, from whom I wanted to get a specific piece of information, happens to be outside Kampala. He will be returning tonight and I want to promise this House that we shall come with the statement tomorrow. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURE ON THE VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT TO FINANCE URGENT PREPARATION FOR CHOGM, 2007

5.18
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO SCRUTINISE A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO INCUR EXPENDITURE TO HANDLE EMERGENCY FUNDING OF CHOGM, 2007 ACTIVITIES (Mr William Okecho): Mr Speaker, I wish to report on the task that you gave to an ad hoc committee, which I chair. On the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to incur expenditure to handle emergency funding of CHOGM 2007 activities, there is a report, which I think has been circulated and this is the introduction. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present to you the report of the ad hoc committee, which was appointed to scrutinise the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to incur expenditure to handle the emergency funding of CHOGM 2007 activities. 

The said committee had membership of 14 Members: ten from the government side and four from the Opposition side. Reference is made to the list of signatures, which we have attached to the report.  Most of the Members attended the meeting, which scrutinised this request.  

The committee met with the Minister of State for Regional Affairs and his technical team, which clarified on the CHOGM 2007 activities and the budget. 

The committee took the resolution that was presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as the main document that was scrutinised. Other supporting documents were presented and analysed including the budget for the financial year 2006/07.  

Observations:

It is a constitutional requirement that all moneys from the Consolidated Fund have to be appropriated by Parliament. In the case of Vote-On-account, Article 154(4) states: “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year, will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to the provisions of this Article, authorise the issue of moneys from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier. 

(5) Any sum issued in any financial year from the Consolidated Fund Account under clause (4) in this article in respect of any service of the Government-
(a) Shall not exceed the amount shown as required on account in respect of that service in the vote on account provided by Parliament by resolution for that financial year; and

(b) Shall be set off against the amount provided in respect of that service in the Appropriation Act for that financial year when that law comes into operation.” 

This motion, therefore, is premised on this constitutional requirement for parliamentary approval. It is that provision that makes this motion tenable in Parliament now so that at least through it, we can approve this request. It is also important to appreciate that the need for funds referred to in this motion is of an emergency nature and it arises from the fact that: 

1.Various activities require additional and immediate funding to ensure sufficient funding for CHOGM 2007, which is due in November of this year;
 
2.The Shs 55 billion, which was provided under Vote 006 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to fund CHOGM 2007 activities did not put into account the full requirements for the activities, which stands at Shs 112,339,129,659;

3.There is an additional requirement for road repairs and improvements amounting to Shs 45.073 billion that is to be funded within the road maintenance budget under the Ministry of Works and Transport, and also a need to bring it forward to be provided immediately to enable roads to be repaired for CHOGM 2007;

4.There is additional need to accelerate the releases to state house by Shs 14 billion;

5.The full amounts under the CHOGM activity totalling to Shs153.08 billion are required and cannot therefore be tagged to the usual quarterly releases, which are awaiting the Appropriation Act. 

The motion is requesting this House to resolve as follows:

1. That Shs 45.07 billion under Vote 016 of the Ministry of Works and Transport be used to fund road contracts under CHOGM roads.

2. That Shs 14 billion under Vote 016 assigned to project 0936, Ministry of Works and Transport, be provided for development of the state house.

3. That under Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Shs 94.005 billion be provided. Thus, a total sum of Shs 153.08 billion be released.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the following was explained to the committee:

1. Shs 55 billion is provided for in the current financial year under Vote 006, of which Shs18.3 billion was provided on Vote on Account and an extra Shs 57.34 billion was required, giving a total of Shs 94.005 billion.

2. Under Vote 016 Project 0936, state house rehabilitation, the total budget was Shs21 billion, of which Shs7.0 billion was provided under Vote on Account, leaving a balance of Shs14 billion to be frontloaded.

3. Shs 45.07 billion is for running contracts on roads repairs and maintenance. No funds had been provided under this item for CHOGM so far.

The committee was informed that Uganda, as the host country, will foot the whole bill of the CHOGM activities without any financial assistance from the Commonwealth Secretariat. 

Recommendations

The committee is satisfied with the request of Shs153.08 billion as presented in the motion, but wishes to make the following recommendations to be followed up by the relevant committee of Parliament:

· The balances on the budget of the last financial year, which are due for presentation by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by 30 September 2007, should be used to compensate for the Shs45.07 billion that is being transferred from Vote 016, intended for upcountry road repairs and maintenance.
 
· The extra Shs 57.34 billion to be raised through suppression of some votes should be done in consultation with Parliament through the Budget Committee.

· The funds extended to private hotels to upgrade hotel facilities should be made recoverable, as these resources will be secured from the resource envelope.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee is satisfied with the motion as presented by the minister and recommends to this august House to adopt this report.

I beg to move. 

5.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the chairman of the select committee for the report that he has presented. I was not present when this committee sat but I was briefed on what transpired in as far as the debate on whether Parliament should support the requests of government for additional funds for CHOGM was made. My understanding of the committee that was established was to sort out the figures, the request, and to bring us a proposal with a satisfactory explanation as to why they recommend so in one way or the other.

Sitting here, I heard the chairman of this committee citing provisions in the Constitution that were never the basis of the motion, unless the motion that I saw was different. The motion that I saw did not justify why that motion itself should be brought to Parliament either by citing provisions of the Constitution or even our mere Rules of Procedure. We would like the country to know that we want the commonwealth conference to be held and to be successful because any failure will be a failure of all of us -(Applause)- but in doing so, we are governed by everything that we do, first of all by the Constitution. Given that, this committee was asked something else and they went and found the basis for justifying what they did in their interpretation of what is provided for in the Constitution something, which the Legal and Parliamentary Committee usually does.  

Secondly, after recognising that the matter of finance to a country is so important, the wise framers of our Constitution, some of whom are here, provided a whole Chapter 9 on Finance, which makes very specific provisions. I am at a loss in terms of procedure, although I think I am very clear on what the Constitution provides. So, what can I, as a Member of this Parliament, do? I am at a loss, Mr Speaker, as to what the consequences of this resolution are. What door is it supposed to lock? What mandate are we using to unlock that door? I am completely lost. 

If government wants money for CHOGM, it will get it but it must get that money through the established constitutional provisions and processes. I am convinced, after reading the chairman’s statement, that he has clearly misunderstood the Constitution. That is why the conclusion and the recommendations are based on invalid legal grounds. I propose that this report goes back to the Legal Committee to pronounce itself on what we are doing. (Applause) You see, even the appropriation that he is talking about should be in conformity with an Act of Parliament and not a resolution. The Attorney General knows that an Act of Parliament and resolutions are two different things. 

Nowhere in Chapter 9 of this Constitution is anybody, whether an individual or an organ, like Parliament is empowered to appropriate money by resolutions. Therefore, we will be engaging in very serious illegalities unless we clearly define how to proceed.  So, I ask you, Mr Speaker, as a lawyer, and the Attorney-General, to give us guidance on this matter. Otherwise, there are processes by which government can make reallocations and that cannot be through a mere resolution. This is a resolution to appropriate, but the money we are talking about has not been appropriated. So, how do we appropriate what has not been appropriated? How do we allocate what has not been allocated? This becomes a mere political statement to lure us to support CHOGM. I can say that I support CHOGM, without recourse to that resolution. So, Mr Speaker, this, to us, is a very serious matter against which we need guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week when a motion was brought here to authorise this amount of money to be spent from the Consolidated Fund, the chief whips of both positions raised an issue which all of us agreed to. In essence, they said that they had not heard about this and what they knew was that the other side was privy to what was being asked and, therefore, that it was necessary that time is given to a committee to be set up to look into the merits of a resolution that was being brought. I personally appreciated this although there was a suggestion to have it referred to the normal committee on the budget. 

But because we had to address the concern of the Opposition and to accommodate their position so that they also could be privy to what is going on, we agreed to set up a committee of 14 Members of Parliament, four from the Opposition and ten from the government side. It was indicated to them that the matter was urgent and that we expected a report in respect of the resolution on Tuesday. And I imagine, what happened is that, the 14 people sat and looked into the merits and demerits of the resolution. 

What has happened today is, as I see it, that the report that has been given makes a legal justification by quoting Article 154(4) of the Constitution, which reads as follows: “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year, will not….” You see, you cannot read them together; the two are independent. There is that part which reads, “…has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year….” Of course, there is no doubt that there is no Appropriation Act as of now though the financial year has commenced, but the Article continues to say, “…the President may, subject to the provisions of this article, authorise the issue of moneys from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year….” Of course, the financial year began on 1st July and we are now in August, but the Article continues the say, “…or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier.” I think that is clear. 

Clause (5) of the same Article says: “Any sum issued in any financial year from the Consolidated Fund Account under clause (4) of this article in respect of any service of the Government- 
(a) shall not exceed the amount shown as required on account in respect of that service in the vote on account approved by Parliament by resolution for that financial year; and 
(b) shall be set off against the amount provided in respect of that service in the Appropriation Act for that financial year when that law comes into operation.” 

So, the two can move together but that means that should you agree, then you will have to deduct this sum eventually when we come to the Appropriation Act. That is my understanding –(Applause)- if the resolution does not set this out, our sub-committee has gone deeper by making the legal justification so that whatever decision we make is constitutionally backed. That is how I see it. Therefore, I think without backtracking, it is really an in argument which you did –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek guidance from the explanation you have so far given so that we move together –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  I have noticed that hon. Beatrice Lagada is shouting and ridiculing hon. Wadri. Is she in order to conduct herself in such a manner? I can also see that hon. Nankabirwa is doing the same thing right now. Are they all in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, that did not come to my notice but maybe I do not know the relationship between hon. Lagada and hon. Wadri. Maybe when she saw him, she was joyous –(Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you once again, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. As I said earlier on, I rise on a point of guidance because I believe it is very important that we move in tandem; and that we move in the interest of this country and CHOGM in particular. My attention is drawn, as it was in the committee’s report and later alluded to by you, Mr Speaker, to Article 154(4) and (5). My understanding is that Article 154(4) talks about making provisions in case Parliament has not resolved itself on the Vote-on-Account. Indeed on the 26th of last month we did pass the Vote-on-Account. It is only the amount that we voted on Vote-on-Account, which is supposed to be one-third of the overall government’s budget, which if there is anything that appropriations comes up into, that will be deducted from the overall. 

But here is a situation; we have already committed one-third of the national Budget through Vote-on-Account. Under normal circumstances, what we would have expected from government would not be a request for money from the Consolidated Fund or ask for additional money. We have already given you money for the next three months; it is in your hands. The practical aspect would be re-allocation in which case you should work hand in hand with the Secretary to the Treasury. It cannot come back to us because the money is already in your hands. Therefore, for us at this point to begin asking for money and yet we have not finally appropriated the overall envelop, is tantamount to amending the Constitution. 

My feeling would be that government should rather expedite the process of appropriation. Once we appropriate the overall budget envelop for this country, then you can be at liberty to come to us for a supplementary, and that would be in order. Otherwise, we are setting precedents, which precedents may not auger well with financial management in this country. I wish to be clarified so that we move in tandem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the bridgehead in this sub-clause is the Appropriations Act, that is, for you to move to operationalise Article 155(4), the bridgehead is the presence or absence of the Appropriations Act. In this particular case, there is the absence of the Appropriations Act because we have not passed it. We shall pass the Appropriations Act when we have gone through the estimates of various reports and approved them because the Appropriations Act is built by those votes that we pass. Therefore, the absence – yes there is absence of the Appropriations Act for this financial year. As to the existence of the Vote-on-Account, there is no doubt.

When you go to 5(a), it talks about Vote-on-Account but the bridgehead is the absence or presence of the Appropriations Act and I am saying that there is no Appropriations Act yet. Therefore, you can operationalise this particular provision of the Constitution. We are not amending any Constitution but we are just carrying out the provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, we certainly cannot do it.

Honourable members, you have heard the report of the committee and you have heard the resolution, which the minister wanted; it is my duty to put the question to the resolution to you.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the Committee of Supply.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, even the Article you have read states that the President “may”, and this requires a letter from the President among other requirements, which we do not have here. The provision you have read says that among other requirements, “the President may”. 

Mr Speaker, the framers of the Constitution knew that the President does not work alone; he works with ministers. They deliberately did not say that the President will direct the Minister of Finance but they said, “The President may issue”, and we do not even have this written authority from the President. Are we really moving according to the Constitution and according to procedure?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to take you to Article 155: “The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year - but the President has always been doing this through the Minister of Finance and there is no evidence to show that the President did not authorise the Minister of Finance to invoke this particular provision. (Applause)

Honestly, let us go through this exercise. In any case, I have said that the resolution has gone through but we should now go to the supply side. This is what we accepted and we wanted to work together, that is why we fought for that committee to be established. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Without any prejudice to the ruling that you have made, I think –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. There was no question of my ruling. As a layperson, I was just carrying you through the Article, and I said that as a layperson, I see that there is a basis for the resolution because I may not be competent to interpret the Constitution. My reading of the Article showed that it is well based in as far as the Constitution is concerned. If my interpretation is wrong, then the person to interpret that is a different one. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I earlier stood up here and asked the question as to what this resolution is supposed to achieve. You have referred us to the provision in the Constitution, Article 154(4). I have read this provision and I do not see where what we are doing fits. I do not see it -(Interjection)- I am talking about myself. What he has told me is what he sees. What I see is what I must tell you. You just read –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You can look at 5(a). 

PROF. LATIGO: If you can allow me, Mr Speaker, because your explanation was centered on 154(4) and 154(4) says that, “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriations Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to provisions of this Article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government until the expiration of four  months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriations Act, whichever is earlier.” In other words, the constitution has given the President power to authorise. 

My question was: what effect is this resolution supposed to have? To, “authorize the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act whichever is earlier …” the Speaker actually quoted this. If we have to say that the Constitution allows the President to do it to any amount then I do not see why Parliament should even be burdened to do what the Constitution authorises the President to do. In which case, I do not see why we should have a resolution authorising the President to –(Interruptions)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, rules of state interpretation are quite numerous depending on the desired result and of course considering the intention of the legislators at the time a provision is made. Certainly Article 154(4) should be read together with Article 154(5). Really the catch phrase in Article 154(4) is “for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation with the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier”. I want to start with that one. The emphasis is in the first four months of the financial year. We come here to pass a Vote-on-Account in accordance with Article 54(5)(a), which is done by resolution. You pass a Vote-on-Account for the services necessary to be carried out in the first four months. 

This is different from what we have under the Budget Act, Section 12, which provides that after you have passed the Appropriations Act, in order to raise a supplementary, that supplementary cannot exceed three percent of the budget unless you come to Parliament and seek its approval. Here, the catch phrase is the necessary services. This is where the CHOGM element comes in. This is why the last financial year we had a similar problem with the Foot and Mouth Disease. You may recall it was during the time we were considering the Vote-on-Account and there was an epidemic of Foot and Mouth Disease. We came here by resolution and passed an extra funding for that particular purpose. Certainly the legislators could not have intended an absurdity that for instance within the first four months after you have passed a Vote-on-Account and if anything happened, you cannot do anything unless maybe you go back to Parliament and amend the Constitution. It could not have attained that absurdity. Therefore –(Interjection)- let me finish my submission, I can even clarify later on. Once the Vote-on-Account is passed by resolution under (5)(a) of 154, you pass a Vote-on-Account, what if there is an error? 

For as long as - in my opinion - the procedure is well followed, for as long as the people or the body, which passed the Vote-on-Account is the same body to either make a correction or pass an emergency funding, which becomes part of that Vote-on-Account; and which you cannot exceed by three percent unless you follow the procedure under Article 154(5)(a). Even legislation or a Constitution can be amended for as long as you follow the correct procedure. Therefore, I am in total agreement with the submission made by the Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that we are going to back track, honourable member. The provision, which you have read, 154(4), takes into account that the Vote-on-Account has been dealt with. That is what you see in (50)(a) so the fact that you pass the Vote-on-Account does not mean you cannot operationalise this particular provision. This is what it means. But in any case the problem is - well, the Attorney-General has given his opinion, then who else has to make the interpretation? Maybe unless you say you are going to go to the Constitutional Court; it is your right. It is the Constitutional Court, which has the mandate to interpret the Constitution; to say you are right; he is wrong. How much time are you going to spend on this one? I think I have some knowledge about the Constitution! (Laughter) I think so.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all I want to thank the honourable members who have been bombarding me with missiles written on the way I presented myself today. And I want to assure them that I will be firmly seated in that place and waving to them. Having said that, I am seeking clarification on your explanation; well, I do not intend to go into the constitutional interpretation. I just wish to note that as you rightly said, the concern was raised on the minister’s motion by the Chief Whip. And if you take note of the report, none of the four members of the Opposition has signed it. 

The clarification I am seeking –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, to remind you, the concern was on the amount; the quantum. It was not on the legal basis. The concern was the quantum and on how you spend all this money within two months. Those were the reasons. So, it was not the constitutional issue but the quantum. And I think the committee, which we set up was going to look into the matter of the quantum being justifiable. That was the reason, but now it is transpiring to be a constitutional matter -(Interjection)- no, they just quoted it.

MR OKECHO: Point of information.

THE SPEAKER: Let her develop her point; then you can come in.

MR OKECHO: No, but I am just informing her that the Members of the Opposition she is talking about all attended our committee meeting and they were not available easily today for signing the agreement. They were not easily available today to sign the agreement but they signed against the attendance list.

MS KAMYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern, and the guidance I was seeking -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am a member of that committee. This matter was described as an emergency on Thursday. I had to put aside all my engagements for Friday, believing that we were coming here to work on this matter. I came here, sat in my office until past 10.00 a.m. but there was no communication from the chairman. I called him at about quarter to 11.00 a.m. only to find that he was in Tororo. I was very disappointed because the chairman told me that we could not meet until yesterday, Monday after having cancelled all my engagements. What is happening here right now is the same situation we faced in the committee yesterday. We tried very hard to move together, believing that where we had reached was a point of no return as far as CHOGM is concerned. However, CHOGM or no CHOGM, we have to do things according to the law, we have to do things properly. 

The motion -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us narrow the issue down because the concern of the hon. Member for Lubaga North was that there are no signatures. So I am asking you, did you participate in the deliberations of this ad hoc committee?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker – (Laughter)- yes, I am coming to that. We were supposed to look at this critically as the motion talks about the Constitution and the law without spelling out any Article of the Constitution. That is how the legal basis came about. The motion was talking about the Constitution and the law without specifying any Article. The Minister of State for Investment came, we asked him for the authority but he didn’t have any and he didn’t know. It took the chairman of the committee to come up with Article 154(4). The Minister had failed totally. We wanted this thing to be done properly. How the Minister came there, we didn’t know. We wanted him out, it was even put to a vote but we lost as the vote was seven to three. The Minister had to stay without being invited. 

We wanted to look at the justification for this amount but we were told that there was no time to look at the justification. Mr Speaker, personally where someone thinks that my presence is irrelevant, I don’t associate myself. That is why some of us refused to sign the report because this idea of using numbers to push our way through is not good for this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think then that what should have happened, if you had strong reservations as you have commented, was to file a minority report, which you have not done.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, in seeking this clarification, it is not my intention to challenge anything that has happened before but I am concerned. As I said, the Chief Whip raised a matter, which you considered of national concern and you gave way for it to be addressed through a committee. The committee then comes and as we note, all Members of the Opposition do not sign the report or endorse it. CHOGM is a very contentious issue and a matter of public outcry out there and the public has raised serious issues – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, a decision has been made that the motion be carried. What we are concerned with is to go into the details of supply and conclude business in respect of this matter.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Recurrent Expenditure:

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 94,005,000,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as additional Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2007/2008. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, development expenditure:

THE SPEAKER: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 59,073,000,000 under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport be provided for as additional Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for financial year 2007/2008.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.10
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.10
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Sir, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to incur expenditure to handle the emergency funding of CHOGM 2007 activities; Vote 016 Ministry of Works and Transport -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Mr Speaker, I just overheard the Minister saying “the Committee of the Whole House considered a Bill ….” Probably for the record the Minister may have to make it a resolution and not a Bill.

THE SPEAKER:  It is not a Bill.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the motion of Parliament to authorise Government to incur expenditure to handle the emergency funding of CHOGM 2007 activities: Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, road repairs Shs 45.073 billion; Vote 016, Project 0936, Ministry of Works and Transport, redevelopment of State House, Shs 14 billion; Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, CHOGM 2007, Shs 94.005 billion.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of Supply as earlier detailed by the Minister. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 36/08 TO THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

6.14
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): 
“a) Would the Minister appraise the House on the benefits that Uganda has enjoyed from its membership to the EU-ACP agreements?
b) Would the Minister appraise the House on the progress of the negotiations concerning EU-ACP EPAS (Economic Partnership Agreements)?
c) What will be the advantages and disadvantages of EPAs to Uganda?”

6.14 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Nelson Gagawala Wambuzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will go straight to question (a). The main benefits Uganda has got from membership and agreements is in form of trade preferences, that is, lower taxes on Uganda exports than what is charged on other countries’ exports extended by members of the European Union; and development assistance channelled under the European Development Fund (EDF). For example, under the EDF, the EU is funding reconstruction efforts in Northern Uganda, capacity building for trade policy institutions, and has funded the development of major infrastructure in the country like the road from Jinja to Bugiri.

The answer to question (b) is: Uganda has been negotiating under EPAS under the Eastern and Southern African configuration since 2004. The negotiations, covering six clusters, are scheduled to be concluded by 31 December 2007. To date the negotiating position exists in five of the six clusters as at Eastern and Southern Africa level though Uganda already has a study that points to positions in all the six clusters. In view of the fact that negotiations in all the six clusters may not be concluded by deadline, Uganda along with other Eastern and Southern African countries has agreed with the EU to front negotiation on the development corporation chapter and on market access. The reasoning behind this approach is that since it is not possible to conclude negotiations on all the clusters by the end of December 2007, it is important to focus on those areas that would ensure WTO compatibility within the timetable available. This would ensure predictability and transparency in the Uganda EU trade regime and no disruption in trade between the two blocks at the expiry of the current trading regime. Negotiations on the other clusters would continue even after December 2007. 

On question (c), the main advantage of EPAS to Uganda lies in improvement and preservation of preferential market access for Ugandan exports in the EU market, which remains our main export destination. The development component of the EPAS will assist us in addressing supply side constraints so that our private sector is in a better position to be competitive.  

On the other hand, some of the disadvantages include more reduction in tariff revenues and possible negative effects of increased competition of Ugandan industries. Measures are being inbuilt into the negotiations to mitigate such disadvantages through trade defence instruments and designation of certain sectors as sensitive.

Since 1975 African Caribbean and Pacific group (ACP) states have benefited from special economic relations with the European Union. This was embedded in the Rome Agreements of 1975 to 2000. Under the Rome Agreements, Uganda and other ACP countries were granted preferential access to the EU market. Additionally, the Rome Agreements also provided for development assistance through the European Investment Bank (EIB). Under the Development Finance Corporation chapter of the agreements Uganda continued to benefit from the European Development Fund, under which the European Union funds many development projects in areas such as infrastructure development, reconstruction and institution support. 

In the year 2000 the Rome Agreement was replaced by the ACP/EU partnership agreement that is commonly referred to as the Cotonou agreement signed in Cotonou the capital of Benin in 2000. Key pillars of this agreement are preferential trade and development finance. Under the agreement, the EU grants preferential market access, that is, lower tariffs than those charged to other trading partners. This is for up to 70 percent of exports from ACP, including Uganda. Virtually in all instances the tariff on ACP and EU exports is zero.  This kind of arrangement has been in place since 1975 under what was then called the Rome Convention.

The trade relations between Uganda and the EU are guided by the Economic and Corporation Chapter of ACP/EU Partnership Agreement. The agreement provides a non-reciprocal trading arrangement between the two blocks, that is, the ACP member states such as Uganda do not have to give something, for example by opening up our market with EU exports in return for the trade preferences we receive from the EU. For emphasis, we are saying that we as poor people do not have to surrender anything. We will still tax European commodities coming here but they are supposed to help us to trade without tariffs. This is in breach of WTO rules since EU discriminates amongst other trading partners in favour of EPA states such as Uganda. Actually this favour they are extending to us is in breach of the WTO rules; it discriminates in favour of us. 

The Rome Agreement provides for the negotiation of the new WTO compatible trade regime in form of Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs). International trade rules allow countries to charge exports from selected countries, tariffs lower than what they charge others provided the two countries or trading blocks enter a free trade arrangement and provided they do not raise tariffs on non-participating trading partners to levels higher than those previously applied. That is the only legal way that we can have current preferential treatment on EU market maintained to negotiate a WTO compatible agreement. Under the EPAs some element of reciprocity will be introduced into the ACP/Uganda EU trade regime.

The EU remains Uganda’s major export destination. In 2005, exports to EU accounted for 35.8 percent of the country’s exports. In 2006 exports to the EU grew to an account -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to use this opportunity to draw your attention to the manner of asking and answering questions in rule 38 (4): “The answer to any question shall be printed and a copy supplied to the Member asking it not less fifteen minutes before the time fixed for the sitting at which the question is to be answered.
5) The reply to a question shall be limited to three minutes. However, if the Speaker considers that the matter is of sufficient importance, up to an additional two minutes may be added to this time.
6) Without prejudice to the right to answer a question, no Member shall address the House upon any question ….” 

In other words, the answer should be very brief. At most you should take three minutes, but you may be given two extra minutes. It should not be more than five minutes. Your answers should be brief. But please, conclude.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, we have extended a full answer to hon. Ekanya and to the Clerk. There is also a full answer available in the library. This is a matter, which is very important and which must be concluded in favour of Uganda. That is why I was giving you a full blast answer so that no more -(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, given the fact that the answer is even lengthy and you wanted the House to contribute, even if the rule does not provide for this, we consider it right for him to have given us copies because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is for the future, honourable ministers. You should be brief in giving the answers because the time given to you is three or five minutes, at most six or seven. You should be brief. Any supplementary?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for responding to this question. However, I think the House has to look at that rule and make some adjustments on the time that people use to respond to the question. 

Number two, copies should be circulated to Members. It is unfortunate that most Members are not here but the major cause of poverty in Africa is the imbalanced global trade system yet we do not understand this. It is unfortunate and I will request that at an appropriate time a Member moves a motion so that this negotiation is delayed until there is consensus within the country. This is because the country is going to lose a lot of revenue in form of taxes. 

We had a meeting in Entebbe where the Minister of Trade, hon. Janat Mukwaya agreed with all the chairpersons that the government should not proceed to sign this agreement. It is unfortunate that the Minister of State who is answering this question is proceeding that the signing must go ahead. Therefore, we are finding very serious contradictions. The meeting which you opened Mr Speaker, in Entebbe agreed and developed this consensus but let me just add a supplementary question. Can the Minister clarify on one; how Uganda will be able to cope with the principle of reciprocity aware that under the old agreement of ACP/EU Rome Convention Uganda was granted a quota on sugar exports among others, but we could not even meet that quota? Instead, sugar manufacturers in this country used to import sugar from other countries. How shall the indigenous industries of Uganda meet the principle of reciprocity with EU goods, which are cheap and of standard quality?

Two, what capacity do we have in place to absorb EDF funds? Under this negotiation we are being promised that EU will double funding to third world countries to build technical capacity, to support industry and to meet international standards. What capacity do we have in place since for the last 15 years we have been under the ACP/EU agreement they have given us capacity but we have not been able to absorb funding?

According to the statement made by the Minister of Finance to this House, a substantial amount of money has not absorbed and is attracting a surcharge. So what capacity do we now have in place to absorb additional funding from the EU, apart from this funding destabilising the micro-economic policy in place?

Lastly, under the negotiations, are we negotiating as an East African block? You have stated that we are negotiating as EASA but you are aware honourable minister that Tanzania has disagreed with being in EASA. You are also aware that Kenya is not considered in least developed countries under the EU arrangement. So what will be the impact of us signing as EAC and EASA to our indigenous trade? Thank you.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Nelson Gagawala Wambuzi): These are substantive new issues raised (laughter) but to answer the first item, Mr Speaker, we should not renegade and fear negotiating with Europeans. If we do, our fish will not be exported any more and I will not urge this House to start engaging itself in pondering to stop negotiations and entering into an agreement. Moreover the agreement is saying we shall continue as we have been doing but we would like to change from the old regime to a new one by just saying we have started the negotiations. Therefore, the people will continue negotiating after they have agreed that we have started negotiating. So, economic partnership agreements are not going to be concluded in one day. The economic opportunity agreements are so important that if they are not there, it means the EU is going to give, we have to trade with them at per in terms of all laws. Therefore, an EPA negotiated for EASA countries is to make it soft. It is a soft landing for us. 

Therefore, for anybody to stand in this House and urge this House to decide to do away with EPAs, that we should now trade at equal terms with Europe, that is tantamount to forcing our traders to hell because the European Union is supposed to help us to trade because they know we are not ready to play the same game with the same function. Therefore, it is very important at this stage for all of us to agree that it is in our favour to negotiate an EPA, and it is in our favour to negotiate it under the East African Community. 

In fact, the Summit in Arusha last week did not say that Tanzania does not want to negotiate. The resolution there, which will be published later by the President, is such that we should try to see that we negotiate as an East African Community if possible, and the European Union has agreed to handle us as a block. We have been negotiating under ESA because we have similar things, but it does not stop us because they have got the Customs Union and we have got a CTE; it does not stop us from actually going on to address this matter.

The issue that Kenya will have advantages is not true; we are going to negotiate as the East African Community. Therefore, Kenya cannot have advantages because we are going to negotiate as one block of five countries and I think that that argument is not tenable. Therefore, it is very important as my friend is saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There are some Members who are going to Brussels; I think you will arrange another session to brief us. As for asking questions or answering them, it should not arise. Hon. Dombo, hon. Mugambe and hon. Betty Amongi, please arrange to brief us.

MR GAGAWALA: Therefore, I urge this House to resolve seriously that we should let the technocrats and the Executive go on with negotiating and developing a position. We have an Ambassador in Brussels and he is doing a very good job. We are doing well economically but without an EPA, it is as good as saying we have closed off our interests in the European Union. Therefore, I urge this House to allow the Executive to continue.  The Executive cannot cheat this country; the Executive is interested in the growth of trade. Therefore, the position that has been advanced is okay but I thank the hon. Member of Parliament for asking such a brilliant question. 



I am sure that from now onwards everybody in the economy will be alert that the country is going to move in another regime. The programme for Bonna bagagawale is geared towards trade in all countries in the world, including Europe. We should not block ourselves from trading with Europe and we can only do that if we have an agreement, an instrument we are trading with, and an understanding of who we are trading with. I beg to rest my case, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I did not state in my clarification or question that Uganda should trade at the same level with the European Union. I asked the question well aware that the President of this country has been advocating for trade with Europe under Everything But Arms, and that regime will continue whether we sign EPAs or not. This country has an advantage to trade as these developed countries in Everything But Arms.

THE SPEAKER: Since hon. Kibanzanga is not here, the other question will be aborted and I think it is the appropriate time to end the proceedings. But as I indicated to you last week, we should be sitting morning and afternoon to be able to deal with the Budget, which is a bit late. I will request the Prime Minister, since he is here, to schedule Cabinet meetings of tomorrow to some other time so that we transact business.  

6.34
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, there are urgent matters that we have to handle and when we have meetings in the evenings, colleagues will be very tired. So what I propose to do tomorrow is that the Minister of Finance, the princess who is the Government Chief Whip, and Ministers of State will come here. Other ministers are required to be in the Cabinet. That is how I should handle Wednesdays and we shall also discuss this matter in Cabinet. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is appropriate for us to adjourn until tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 August 2007, at 10.30 a.m.)




