Tuesday, 20 August 2002

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to announce the outcome of the elections for the newly created standing committees. I would like, on your behalf, to congratulate hon. Elioda Tumwesigye and Dr Bulamu, the chairperson and deputy chairperson respectively of the Committee on HIV/AIDS - (Applause)

I would like also to congratulate the hon. Patrick Amuriat and Dr Johnson Nkuuhe, chairperson and deputy chairperson respectively of the Committee on Science and Technology.  

The members of the Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities are reminded that the meeting to elect the chairperson and deputy chairperson will take place today after the plenary in the North Wing, Room 013.   

Honourable members, there will be a slight adjustment to the Order Paper. The Prime Minister has an announcement to make to the House. There will also be a very brief statement from the Uganda Bus Owners’ Association. There is a problem with the bus owners in this country. Those are the two amendments I am making to the Order Paper.  

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, it is with great sadness that I wish to announce officially, the tragic death of Brig. Gad Wilson Toko, who was Vice Chairman of the Military Council, and Mrs Kania, a Commissioner on the Constitutional Commission and a former Chief Magistrate. I am further saddened by the death of the two drivers namely, Ahmed Marijani Ndubuti and Vincent Kiwanjuka, who perished in the same accident.  

The late Brig. Toko will be accorded a state funeral and his body will lie in state at Parliament from Wednesday, 21 August 2002 to Thursday, 22 August 2002. A funeral service will be held on 22 August 2002 at 11.00a.m. at All Saints Cathedral. Burial will be on Saturday, 24 August 2002 at Mvara, Arua District. May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved!

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE COMMISSION BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the bill entitled “the Local Government Finance Commission Bill, 2002” for the first reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. It will be referred to the appropriate committee for further consideration on behalf of the House. 

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, rule 40(1)(b), I want to request your leave to request for an adjournment for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of public importance. The matter is about public transport in the country. I beg to move.

You may have heard or even seen the buses parked around Parliament. Owners, and especially the poor public, are bleeding. For the whole week, the buses have been parked because of some few mistakes that have not been addressed by the appropriate authorities namely, KCC. We have grievances; the time is short and I want to be very brief.  

Public transport has been paralysed because bus owners have not been accorded the necessary conducive environment to operate. Kampala City Council has awarded a fraudulent tender to one bus operator who has put many stringent operating guidelines that are making our operations difficult.  

Sometime back, bus owners were formed under a bus association, which later turned itself into a bus company. The rules of the game then were that after sitting, the executive committee members were elected to manage the affairs of the bus owners. They were entrusted with that responsibility. 

Over time, the executive committee of UBOA (Central) Ltd. –  and I am sure hon. Felix Okot has been inhibited because he has some buses and he knows the details –(Interjections)– no, he owns buses; he is a bus transporter! It is not bad for him as a minister to be in the transport business. I expect him to support this noble cause. 

The executive committee of UBOA (Central) Ltd. hoodwinked members and registered a different company, without the knowledge of the bus owners. That was at a time when Kampala City Council had advertised a tender for a company that would carry out the development of the bus park downtown in Nakivubo. We all kept quiet because we believed that the tender was going to be won by UBOA (Central) Limited. 

We knew UBOA (Central) Limited had put in its tender documents and that it would get the tender, because it was the only viable company then. Little did we know that the executive committee had formed another company called UBOA Investments Company and manipulated it! 

They went ahead and bribed left and right; even some members of KCC Tender Board had been given shares in UBOA Investments, like the chairman of the tender board then, Hajji Faisal Kasujja. He was a member of this company that wanted to be given the tender, and all this is in those documents, which we have circulated. If only you could get time and read them. 

They went ahead and gave it a tender and every member of the tender board had been bribed. Again, there is documentary proof. For example, on 29 May 2000, Shs 300,000 was taken by one Hajji Junju to Kampala City Council Tender Board. On 12 April 2000, Shs1.4 million was taken by AlHaji Asuman Junju to members of the Kampala City Council Tender Board. On 13 May 2000, the same gentleman took Shs900,000 to Kampala City Council Tender Board. There are many cases, but these are some of the few. 

On 1 April 2000, Shs800,000 was taken. Another Shs200,000 was taken but the date is not there. On 16 May, there was Shs350,000. On 13 May 2000 - Shs900,000; and Shs400,000 was also taken but the date is not indicated. All this money was being taken from UBOA (Central) Limited, a company bus owners knew, to this white house across, to the tender board committee members! 

To cut a long story short, the argument is that UBOA Investments Company was given the tender fraudulently and they are causing a lot of problems. We have parked our buses for about a week and the public is suffering. There is no bus at all on the eastern axis, because it has been under Gateway. From here to Kisoro, they are charging Shs25,000 and from here to Ibanda, Shs15,000. 

So, we think that as representatives of the people, these glaring facts should be brought to your attention and we pronounce ourselves and abhor the fraudulent manner in which this tender was given to the company. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.  

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification, and I would like the speaker who has left the Floor - ostensibly he could be a bus owner - to clarify to us some of these things. We have a booklet entitled “Associated Bus Owners (U) Ltd”, and their letter, bound and dated 19 August 2002. There is a signature at the end by the chairman, whose name is not known, but it is a very difficult signature to read. Who is that person? I would like to be clarified.  

Secondly, I know hon. Guma very well as very eloquent, a good speaker and a man with a high degree of balanced thinking, but I am having a bit of trouble. Associated Bus Owners (U) Ltd is a private company and there are rules that govern private companies. I think all that is written in the letter, whose letterhead is Associated Bus Owners (U) Limited, is what hon. Guma is telling us. 

I suppose if there was fraudulence, there are means of handling matters of that nature. We have commercial courts and the IGG. What will Parliament really do in handling this matter? I would like to be clarified. What can we do about private bus owners quarrelling about a bus park they want to develop? Fraudulence of a tender! Does Parliament have machinery at hand to handle this matter? There are institutions in Government, which can handle this matter. I thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not own any bus, but I am concerned about the strike, which has engulfed the city of Kampala. Whether the matter is seemingly private, it is a matter of public concern. For the entire city of Kampala to be engulfed with buses here and there causes concern for all of us as representatives of the people. Over 80 buses have spread here and there, and these are buses that serve the interests of the people of Uganda. 

You know very well that Uganda Transport Company (UTC) is no longer in existence. Under the liberalisation framework, Government must be concerned, because liberalisation is serving the people. These buses are a substitute to UTC; they give services to our people in various parts of the country. So, before we discuss the details of the status quo, it is important to ensure that the strike ends, even if it means making some recommendations. 

As an expert on strikes, I am concerned that the strike is taking so long when we have a living Parliament of representatives of the people. If KCC is not doing anything, it is important for the peoples’ representatives to act, even if it means making some recommendations so that we bring the matter to an end.  

The impression I have is that the complainants are not happy with the way a new company called UBOA Investments, which has taken the responsibility of the area where the buses were, was formed. They feel distanced from the investment, where they would probably have bought shares so that they are seen to be part of the new company. It is not new that members of establishments like UBOA get opportunities to invest in a new undertaking namely, UBOA Investments. 

I would like to urge the members to feel concerned about this strike. It is a strike of our people. We do not want to come in when things have gone sour. Let us make some recommendations even if it means urging KCC to do all it can to ensure that the people on strike are brought into the centre-line with the intention of bringing the strike to an end.  

I have talked to several drivers parked outside. You know that I am a man of the people, and being a Member of Parliament from Kampala, and Kampala is in the centre of this strike, I feel the strike should be brought to an end. I, therefore support the concern expressed by a member that something should be done so that the strike ends. It is a strike of our people and we cannot distance ourselves from it and from the problems of those people. Thank you. 

MR OTADA AMOOTI (Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity, and I would also like to thank my colleague who moved the motion. 

Madam Speaker, it is not a new thing that bus owners are striking. If I remember correctly, this is now the third time that bus operators are laying down their tools, and we believe that they need to be given a fair hearing. 

It is also true that the Committee of Works, Transport and Communications of the 6th Parliament did not come out with a comprehensive report about the complaints that engulfed the bus fraternity and UTODA. 

While it is true that bus owners are running some kind of profit making business, it is also true that we are rendering a very important service, and we are contributing in large sums to the economy of this country in form of taxes and other consumables.

My colleague has presented a case, and I would like to recap some of the issues, which he did not articulate very well. Uganda Bus Operators Association (Central) Ltd was an association formed by bus owners. It was formed with the intention of putting together the heads of bus owners so that they could decide on serious issues as local investors in this country. 

It is true that members of the executive were elected in an annual general meeting. As is the rule, board meetings and annual general meetings must be held regularly, but this was not done. That is point number one. 

Point number two, KCC indeed awarded the tender for the management of the Buganda Bus Park to a company, definitely which was for bus owners, with reasons which I think are obvious. All the revenues that they wanted as council were being collected from these buses, and also bus owners were expected to have more interest in the management of the affairs of that place.  

It is on record that the members who were charged with the responsibility of handling the affairs of bus owners were not transparent and accountable to bus owners. The Vice Chairman of the Movement was one of us in the business, his name was soiled in the papers, and I think he did not want to continue with that so he decided to sell the buses. 

It is true that in September 1999, with all the misgivings and the dishonesty of the members who were elected by the bus owners, Kampala City Council decided to advertise for serious investors to come and put up a bus terminal in the centre of Kampala City.  

It was a competitive bid; I remember there was a Saudi Arabian-based businessman who had come with a good proposal, but bus owners thought that a tender would be submitted in the names of UBOA (Central) Ltd, which was a company for bus owners. 

Within the month of September, the executive I have talked about formed a secret company with membership of a majority of non-bus owners. Bus owners were satisfied that this time they would get a home of their own, where they have a stake and where issues which need discussion would be arrived at with their participation. Unfortunately, within two months, in the month of November, the tender was pronounced and was won by the investments company, to the surprise of bus owners. 

We have on record a bribe, which was taken to KCC Tender Board so that they could not attach this entire document. We have on record communications from none other than Mr Fox Odoi from the President’s Office, instructing the Town Clerk to expedite their work. We have on record relevant documents, which I wish members could read at this point in time. I also apologise that we came in with this literature a little bit late.  

It is true that a lot of complaints were raised to the Mayor, but no comprehensive reports have been raised to the IGG. Bus owners have been complaining, but the general public, in my view, have just been having this perception that, these people are fighting for a tender. There is no fighting for a tender here, given the fact that the award was first of all fraudulent and given to one of our competitors. 

One of our members who operate the same business as us convinced these people that this company was for bus owners, yet it was for his private company. Now the tender has been given to him for development. We had a meeting with KCC at one time and they said that they should conclude the lease agreement with UBOA Investments, as alternative packing would be availed for buses to operate under acceptable conditions. 

With several meetings that were held and which were futile, on Thursday last week bus owners were told that finally the lease agreement was made and that the premises were going to be handed over to the would be investors, or constructors. 

You remember very well last year when there was a strike, bus owners sat down with KCC and agreed on how we could work together. The charge of 20,000/= was brought down to 10,000/=, and the collection of the dues was handed over to Kampala City Council.  

We have letters here on record showing that the people who were awarded the tender were not capable. There is a letter from the Town Clerk, which was giving an extension of 14 days for the winning company to pay the premium of one billion shillings, which was actually a prerequisite for him to take over the project. After some time, they failed to pay that money.

We have a letter cancelling the tender because they had failed to pay one billion shillings. Later on, we see a situation were these fellows, who failed to conform to all the legal requirements, being given the tender.  

We have on record returns of allotments of shares showing Faisal Kasujja with 10 percent of shares, and he was a member of the tender board. Faisal Kasujja was a member, by then, of Kampala City Tender Board. The chairman of UBOA Investments then was a councillor in KCC.  

Honourable members, Madam Speaker, there is conflict of interest and corruption in this case. There is an idea of putting in place somebody who is claiming that he is going to invest and build this terminal and at the same time risking the future of the businesses of other colleagues. 

What we are seeing in this situation is that this is one bus owner who has been given the award and now instead of constructing, he has gone ahead to levy charges. We have on record an advertisement which appeared in the New Vision the other day claiming a charge from 10,000/= per day, to 20,000/= and now to 50,000/=. This is impossible for people who operate buses!

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, we are simply saying that we need Parliament, or we are calling upon the powers that be to look at this kind of situation and actually pronounce themselves on whether this kind of situation is acceptable in our society –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We have just got this document and I have been scanning through it. On one of the pages, there is a letter from Associated Bus Owners signed by hon. Otada as chairman and hon. Guma Gumisiriza as vice-chairman. 

I believe the current speaker is hon. Otada.  If he is, will you please inform us whether you are here as a chairman of this association or as a Member of Parliament. If so, is this the right place to be discussing this kind of matter? I seek information.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, the mover moved this motion under rule 40. What we are discussing here is a matter of public concern. I am speaking as a Member of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure.  The mover moved a motion, it was seconded and the honourable member is supporting him. As you know, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications is responsible for the proper running of transport in this country. 

The motion was for the suspension of Parliament, but I move on a point of procedure that the ministry is doing something about this strike of buses. Therefore, I am prepared to inform the House on what the ministry is doing.  

Would it not be wiser for the House to listen to what the ministry is doing and then they can decide, because suspending the House as it is very costly. So, I was suggesting that the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications inform the House on what it is doing so that we don’t suspend the House. That would be much better.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was for suspension of the business, which is on the Order Paper but not the House. And when he finishes, I will come to you. Please wind up, hon. Otada. 

MR OTADA: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I was just trying to inform my honourable colleague that I am speaking as the chairman of city bus owners, elected by majority of bus owners to represent and discuss their views in an appropriate fora.  

I was just saying that we are not satisfied because this issue has dragged on for long. We are people who know which channels to follow and we have followed them, but we have not got any response whatsoever from anybody who feels that this issue is of concern to him or her. 

We thought that since this is a matter, which involves all our constituencies as Members of Parliament, it should be brought here, discussed and we see the way forward after we have substantiated on the issues which we have just raised. I thank you.

MR AWUZU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As I said, the Ministry of Works is interested in this strike because it is the ministry mandated to see that the transport operations in this country are efficient. 

I was aware of the impending strike. In fact, I was informed by the hon. Otada, I think it was on Tuesday last week, about this strike. I told him, and as you have heard from the statements of both of them, this strike is arising out of a tendering miscarriage or something like that and we in the ministry do not deal with tendering.  

In fact, I advised them that this is a Local Government affair, but if it fails, it will be an IGG affair. You will remember the earlier strike by taxi operators was something concerning a law which was passed by this Parliament that the Ministry of Works acted on -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way.  Madam Speaker, if we are in a situation of a strike, it is a strike, whether the buses’ venture is under Ministry of Works or not. Parliament, under emergency circumstances, cannot simply sit to see a crisis rising up. We are the people’s representatives and we have to take steps to stop a crisis.

MR AWUZU: Thank you for that information, which according to me does not seem to be relevant anyway. The Ministry of Works has not been sitting; we have taken action. I had informed hon. Otada that this was a matter for Local Government and probably IGG if Local Government fails. 

The ministry has got concerned because the buses have stopped operating and we want the buses to continue. In that light, yesterday afternoon we called a meeting with the Mayor, the Town Clerk and the town engineer in the ministry offices on Old Port Bell road. 

One of the things we were surprised to find out was that KCC had not even talked to the second group of bus owners, ABOL. If now they have done it, they can inform the House. Actually, we were very surprised that KCC did not talk to this group, because this is a group of people who have got a complaint and KCC as an authority should have talked to them and tried to make sure that the buses operate. But this is one thing we noted yesterday afternoon. 

I am disappointed to say that the Mayor himself was saying that this is a sort of sidelined group as if it was a group of bayayes.  But for us, we did not take them as such and we were not happy about that. At the end of the meeting, we advised KCC to make an effort to meet this group. Let them have a meeting and discuss the way forward. One of their points of argument is -(Interruption)

CAPT GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like some clarification from hon. Awuzu. If I heard hon. Awuzu very well, he said that while in their meeting yesterday with the KCC officials, they were simply dismissing us as bayaye. Capt. Guma being a muyaye, that one I am not very sure of! But for certain, I want hon. Awuzu to really impress upon me and honourable members here whether the same officials from KCC have hope to resolve this matter, in light of that statement that we are really a group of bayaye, when the entire country is paralysed. And as I talk now, there is no single bus on the eastern axis.

Secondly, it is not also correct to say that this matter was brought to the attention of the ministry officials just the other day by hon. Otada of Kibanda County. We wrote to the Minister of Local Government because we know the procedure. So, this matter has been really going on for a very long time.  But coming back to the first clarification, I want to know whether we think KCC, in light of what I saw in the meeting with them, will really resolve this matter. 

MR BAGALANA: Madam Speaker, according to our working procedure, the motion which is being brought, I believe, could be taken to an appropriate committee before consideration by this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us hear from all the stakeholders. It will not be worthwhile for us to listen only to one side and refer the matter to the committee without being properly informed. Let us hear from the minister of transport.

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On hon. Guma’s question, whether we believe that KCC can actually handle this situation, it is true we believe that under the direction of the ministry, KCC should be able to handle it, because this is what we proposed to them.  

First of all, it is true we agreed that the hiking of charges for buses daily from Shs10,000 to Shs20,000 - and I heard to Shs40,000 and now today we are being told Shs50,000 - is very unreasonable and yet KCC had agreed that the rates be reduced to Shs10,000. So, this is one agreement, which we have already got from KCC that from yesterday, the rates are to be reduced to Shs10, 000 –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable Minister for giving way. I am seeking information from the Minister regarding a regulatory body for transport. Do you have in your ministry or in this Government a regulatory body for transport that includes buses, taxis and boda boda where you are involved? Do you have any organization to regulate them at all?

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Yes, we do have a body; it is called the Transport Licensing Board. I told you we had a meeting yesterday afternoon between the ministry and KCC officials. In fact, the chairman of that board and its secretary were present in that meeting. I did not mention that because they are under the Ministry of Works, and if you remember, in the law we passed under the Traffic and Road Safety Act of 1998, it is very clear that the Transport Licensing Board is under the Ministry of Works and the ministry controls it. So, that board was in that meeting, they know what is happening and they are acting on our advice.

I used the word ‘bayaye’, but that was not the word which was being used by KCC; that was a short statement, which I put in place of the long statement they made. I can confirm that the KCC officials were dismissing this other group; they saw the people as not worth talking to. That much I can confirm. So, what the ministry informed them is that they should talk to this group. That is one big step, and that is why we think that this problem can be resolved. 

We told them that they should talk to this group and then they should reduce the charges on the buses. So, we believe that if KCC can talk to this group and reduce those charges, we want the buses to start operating. It is true that the tendering process smells of corruption -(Interruption)

MR BEN WACHA: Madam Speaker, it seems as if the final body which has a say in this matter, according to the Minister, is KCC.  Supposing KCC fails to do what has been directed of them to do, what other option does the ministry have?

MR AWUZU: Thank you, I was just coming to that, if you had been patient enough. As I said from the beginning in my statement, this was a question of a mess in the tendering process, assuming that the statements made by the mover and Mr Otada are true. The mess in tendering has brought about this problem, and as I had said, this matter should be handled by KCC. But if they fail, the IGG should handle it. 

It is not the ministry, which is the last step in this. If our request for a meeting between KCC and this second group fails and the buses fail to go on the road, then it should be the IGG who should investigate whether these people have a right, because it is the IGG which can annul that tender and restart the whole thing all over –(Interjection).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, how soon do you expect this meeting between KCC and the bus owners to take place?  

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: We requested KCC to have a meeting with them as soon as possible. And to the best of my timing abilities, I would have thought that by now the meeting should have been called already -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when hon. Guma moved this motion, he wanted us to abhor the manner in which the tender was given or the manner in which the affairs of the bus owners, users and drivers were being handled.  

The members who have spoken, who are stakeholders, are merely saying the same thing. They are saying that they are not satisfied with what went on in this process, but nobody has actually proposed what we should do. All we are saying is, “We are unhappy; we are unhappy and the public is not travelling”.  What do you want the House to do?  

MR AWUZU: I am concluding by saying that we requested KCC to hold the meeting with this group, failure of which, we will inform the IGG and an investigation will be made. And the IGG has got the right to cancel that tender. It is only the IGG who can actually cancel that tender; the Ministry of Works cannot.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Felix Okot): Madam Speaker, I want first of all to declare my interest because I own buses and I deal in the transport business. I urge Parliament and also advise that as Members of Parliament, we must save the image of Parliament. 

As an interested party, I did not want to engage in the debate on this matter. We have passed the Leadership Code of Conduct for a Member of Parliament not to use the forum of Parliament to advance personal interests. So, as a leader, that makes it improper. 

As a matter of integrity, I appeal to Parliament that we have set organs of government to deal with matters that reflect administration of this country.

As a Christian and as a leader of this country, I believe that the Members of Parliament who moved this motion are interested parties. I want to inform members that there are other groups outside Parliament which do not have the forum that we have today and they cannot advance their case to us. It would be improper for Members of Parliament – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs has made a grave mistake by stating that the movers of the motion are interested parties. I seconded this motion and it is on record that I do not own a bus anywhere. So, is it in order for the minister to make a general statement incriminating Ken Lukyamuzi as a possible interested party when I am only speaking because of a need to address a crisis in the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is proceeding under rule 63, so he is quite in order to make that submission.

MR OKOT: Madam Speaker, from the beginning I stated that the points I am making are to save the image of our Parliament, and not to allow any Member of Parliament or any Member of the Executive use their position to influence decisions of an organ of this nature. 

I am appealing to Members of Parliament that there are organs that have already been set, and for us to be transparent in this matter, let us allow this matter to be referred to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

If it is not going to be an appropriate committee of Parliament, let it be referred to the ministry responsible for handling transport administration in this country. After that ministry has looked into the matter, called all the parties involved and got them together, the minister will come back to Parliament and report and the matter will be debated transparently. What I want now is transparency. Let us be transparent in this matter, and I urge members not to allow – (Interruption)

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: I would like to move a motion that KCC stays the process of tender and all aspects that led to the strike and that the management of the park reverts to KCC until all Government institutions, the IGG, and ministers have finished investigations; and that the matter be referred to the relevant committee. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, how will you enforce that resolution on KCC?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, this Parliament, under its rules, has powers of a high court when the matter is in the committee. In order to avert the situation, this Parliament has the power to pass a resolution. And once the matter is referred to the committee, the committee can also make a resolution as provided for in our rules. Using that clause, which gives it the power of a high court, action can be taken in line with the motion. I move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed this way. This document arrived here about 2.00 o’clock this afternoon. I am not sure how many members have actually read it. Some of the allegations made are extremely serious, but the people against whom they were made are not members of this House and they cannot therefore come here to be heard. So, in the circumstances, I am proposing that this matter goes to our Committee on Works, Housing and Communications to examine it on our behalf and bring us recommendations about what to do. We have no capacity to take charge of KCC and run it. So, I would like us to proceed that way if members do not mind.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence and permission, I request the House to decide in the light of the information we have given and the manner in which the tender was given. Imagine the chairman of the tender board on a local authority being a shareholder of the company that is going to be given a tender! On page 23, it says the tender had even been cancelled by a letter signed by Justine Kasule on 5 May 2001. 

Madam Speaker, I request your indulgence that this House passes a resolution recommending that KCC, in spite of its autonomy, stays this tender until relevant organs of Government carry out exhaustive investigations. In the meantime, the buses can operate until information is brought very clearly. 

Can we be satisfied that the tender was properly or improperly given to this particular company? I request Members of Parliament, who represent the public which is suffering, that we resolve and recommend that KCC, if it wants, goes back and manages the park itself, because there are disagreements, until relevant organs of government, which hon. Okot is talking about, carry out exhaustive investigations and come out with a researched position that this side is right or wrong. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I said earlier, some of us have tried to scan through this document; it is a very interesting document but the conclusion you draw depends on how experienced you are in looking at figures and understanding them. One of the pages is headed ‘Bribery through City Council’. At the end of that page, you will find that a total of Shs 23,040,000 was given out in bribes. 

When you look at the various vouchers, you will find that some of them clearly show KCC tender committee’s part payment of arrears, which means there is a debt being paid. But according to the way the document has been prepared, it looks like that is a bribe.  

When you look a little further, you will find a letter written on 11 September 2001 by the Town Clerk. The pages are not numbered, but it is a letter from Kampala City Council and it is headed, “Termination of Your Management of the Council’s Bus Park.” 

This letter clearly states: “Following your failure to fulfil your contractual obligations namely, making monthly remittances to the Council in respect of the management of bus operations in the city, the council has decided to re-enter and take over the management of this service, forthwith. 

You should however note that this is without prejudice to Council’s right to recover the unpaid money amounting to Shs 73,180,000.” 

When I look at this and the vouchers and I look at the allegation that there are bribes, I am not convinced. To me, as an accountant, what is alleged to be bribes is probably a clearing of arrears. So, Madam Speaker, after scanning through this –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you made a ruling on the matter. Is it in order for members to continue, and to re-open the debate when you have made a ruling on a matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are not in order. We have proposed that the Committee of Works, Housing and Communications examines these numerous documents on our behalf and reports by Monday, next week. 

This is because I believe that even though we are Members of Parliament, we should not misuse our authority. Let us follow this step by step, because many members have actually not read these documents. They do not know what is going on. So, the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications will handle this on our behalf.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF the SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY 
AND FISHERIES

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, this report is being presented in respect to Articles 155 and 90 of the Constitution, and Rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to present the report to this august House for general debate and eventual adoption.  

The committee considering the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) received the ministerial policy statement and invited its Ministers of State, Director General of National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) and their technical teams and heads of autonomous bodies. These are our findings:

The Ministry’s Structure, Mandate and Policy Framework: 

The ministry consists of two directorates namely, Crop Resources and Animal Resources. It also has the Fisheries Department and Plan for Modernisation of Agricultural Secretariat, which is known as PMA. 

Our committee’s observations are that the directorates have left some of the departments and units, like the Planning Department, hanging. They do not fall under any directorate. 

There are also many semi-autonomous bodies and projects, which relate to the ministry with little coalition. The committee, therefore, recommends that the on-going functional analysis should be completed as soon as possible so as to provide the ministry with necessary tools to restructure. 

The committee also cautions MAAIF to ensure that such a reform should not aim at destroying the achievements of the ministry. Some directorates are already understaffed and cannot perform effectively. One of them is Crop Resources. NARO is also on the list of this reform, which is awaiting a recommendation from the functional analysis. That is the reason we are cautioning the ministry.  

The mandate of the ministry is “to support, promote and guide the production of crops, livestock and fisheries so as to ensure improved quality and quantity of agricultural produce and products for domestic consumption, food security and export.” 

These are the committee’s observations, Madam Speaker:

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has confined itself to a highly focused mandate, which limits its operations to production per se. The essential elements of processing, preservation and marketing remains outside its mandate. The committee still believes that MAAIF should not abdicate from this responsibility.

It also observed that in pursuit of the decentralisation policy, MAAIF over-divested itself from its primary function of monitoring agricultural extension services, thus leading to poor co-ordination and ineffective supervision and accountability. Currently there is a poor and sometimes weak linkage between the district agricultural extension staff and MAAIF.

The committee therefore recommends that MAAIF should strengthen its linkage with the ministry and organisations that handle the marketing components of agricultural products so as to bring them nearer to the farmers.

The role of the ministry in agricultural marketing should be critically reviewed in light of the fact that production and marketing are components of a single chain.

The ministry should also remain with the following functions: Macro-planning, co-ordination, monitoring and supervision, setting standards and collection of agricultural statistics and capacity building, which they are doing already. However, we emphasise that this should be done in a manner that is more visible than is the case at present.

I move on to the policy framework, Madam Speaker. The principal initiatives and activities, which MAAIF expects to improve in the financial year, are:

• To operationalise PMA and NAADS 

• To implement MAAIF related components of “government interventions to promote production, processing and marketing of selected strategic exports”

• To operationalise the Animal Genetic Resource Centre and data bank

• To start a process of reviewing the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) in order to bring it into compliance with PMA 

• To formulate and review a number of agricultural statutes and policies, which are enlisted 

• To finalise the functional analysis with a view to causing further structural reforms in the ministry, and to bring it in line with PMA objectives, and; 

• To initiate the transfer of the ministry headquarters from Entebbe to Kampala.

On the performance of the ministry in the financial year 2001/2002, we made an analysis and these were our findings: 

The functional analysis is going on in the ministry in addition to the on-going review of NARS. There is also an intention to restructure the National Agricultural Research Organization (NARO). 

Our observations and recommendations are as follows:       

The ministry is charged with developing and establishing a decentralized, flexible market information system and bringing on board all the main stakeholders but its roles have not yet been felt on the ground because information is not evenly disseminated. 

The committee is also of the view that the practice of over decentralising services is likely to affect the country negatively. It is therefore advised that problems arising out of decentralisation of activities be dealt with at ministerial level. 

In view of the above observations, the committee proposes that the ministry considers getting specific policy proposals that can fit in the decentralisation system but enable it to monitor and control those policies and activities.  

On the performance in regard to marketable technology, the ministry, through NARO, developed viable and marketable technologies of various vegetables and fruits. This included a number of crop species that are enlisted. 

On the performance in regard to epidemic and pest and disease control, the ministry established viable and sustainable measures and mechanisms for epidemic pest and disease control. It ensures that all crop disease outbreaks are reported - especially the banana wilt disease outbreak in Kayunga and Mukono districts - to the ministry, and control measures taken immediately.

Performance in regard to water for agricultural production: 

Treadle pumps were popularised in Masaka, Jinja, Kamuli, Bugiri, Pallisa and Kumi districts. Water harvesting technologies were promoted in Luwero, Kumi and Masaka and at least 1,000 farmers from the farming communities were sensitised on the benefits of such improved technologies. 

The committee’s observations are that one of the ministry’s functions specified in the policy statement is to promote sustainable utilization of natural resources, water inclusive, for agricultural production. However, a target for developing capacity for efficient and sustainable irrigation may not be achieved because the ministry has no control over water for production. 

The major constraints that are affecting the ministry as a whole are as follows: 

• The already limited budget of MAAIF is worsened by the two percent persistent overall allocation of the national budget. 

• The process of approving the functional analysis delayed full integration of the ministry’s programmes into new mandate and functions.

• Uncertainty of market availability for agricultural produce negatively affected farmers’ drive to increase production. 

• Insecurity in certain parts of the country led to the displacement of some people from their areas.

• Common occurrences of diseases and pests such as the foot-and-mouth disease, giant loops, coffee and banana bacterial wilt retarded animal and crop production respectively. 

• Weakness at the local councils arising from inadequate capacity for implementation of decentralized programmes prevented adequate mobilisation of farmers for production. 

•  Inability of farmers to adopt new and improved technologies due to uncertainty in financial returns relating to these technologies slowed down agricultural modernization. 

• Low salaries for public servants continued to frustrate their inputs.

The committee’s observations: 

In the financial year 2001/2002, Shs42,957 billion was approved for the ministry but only Shs28,530 for both recurrent and development budget expenditure was released. 

In the same way, the actual release for NARO was Shs30,596 billion against the approved budget of Shs32,999 billion. As a result, vital activities such as efficient support to extension services, control of pests and diseases and supervision of planned activities were not fully implemented. 

A bigger percentage of the ministry’s development expenditure and that of NARO are donor funded compared to the local contribution. This over- dependency on donor funds with unfavourable conditionalities that are sometimes inconsistent with local realities has and continues to affect the performance of the ministry. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that bearing in mind that the vital activities were not fully implemented, we would like to get an explanation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the persistent release of less funds than those approved by Parliament.

The Ministry set the following policy targets: 

The committee was informed that PMA is a sector- wide Government intervention towards poverty reduction, which aims at increasing household income and quality of life of the people. But PMA embraces 11 key ministries and organizations, which are of strategic and economic importance. The ministries and organizations are listed in the report. 

The Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, through PMA, identified eight priority areas namely, infrastructure, agricultural advisory services, natural resource use and management, institutional policy and regulation, research and technology, agro-processing and marketing, access to rural finance and agricultural education. 

Implementation of PMA will be consolidated in the year 2002/2003, and MAAIF hopes to formulate and review current legislation for PMA compliance. It is the view of the ministry that the success of this target will depend on the on-going functional analysis. 

The committee further learnt that Shs 4.4 billion under PMA funds was disbursed to 24 districts, which are also listed.

The observations of the committee are as follows: 

• PMA seems to overshadow most activities, which should be falling under the directorates. 

• The committee is concerned that PMA has been provided with only Shs 1 billion under the budget ceiling and yet it is a multi-sectoral strategy.

• PMA seems to have received wide publicity among the members of the Executive, but the general population has not grasped the concept and its contribution to poverty reduction. Disbursing of PMA funds under the non-sectoral conditional grants to the local government at the district might be a subject of abuse. At national level, agriculture receives only 27.1 percent and NARO gets 9.6 percent of the total finances realised through PMA. The rest are allocated to projects in ministries other than agriculture.  

• The committee believes that PMA has been turned into a vehicle for implementation of Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), other than focusing on modernization of agriculture because PMA resources are spread to over 11 other ministries and agencies. The share of agriculture from PMA resources is 27.1 percent and NARO gets 9.6 percent. The remaining 62.3 percent goes to other ministries.

• PMA funds to the districts are received in the last quarter of the financial year, which in turn adversely affects the implementation of agricultural programmes.

The committee therefore recommends that: 

• MAAIF’s PMA component should be given more of the resources realised. The committee further recommends that more PMA resources should be put directly to productive activities other than service sectors as the latter fall under different ministries. 

• The funding reaching districts should be closely monitored to ensure that it is effectively utilised. 

• MAAIF should organise more sensitisation workshops for all levels of policy makers and stakeholders to explain PMA operationalisation.

• The committee also recommends that up to 50 percent, if possible, of PMA funds should go directly to agricultural production. 

• The Treasury should stop the practice of disbursing agricultural funds in the last quarter of the financial year. This is a serious weakness, as failure to use the funds at local government level is considered to be lack of capacity by the local governments at the districts, which is punishable by the recalling of such funds back to the Treasury, or by withholding subsequent transfers.

• The committee further recommends that the Prime Minister should submit a comprehensive report on PMA progress to Parliament for full debate. This is because agricultural modernization is a lifeline of the economy and there is need to assess whether the programme is on track.

The Directorate of Crop Resources is made up of three departments: Crop Production, Crop Protection and Farm Development. Some crops are handled under semi-autonomous bodies as will be seen later in this report. 

We have chosen to tackle tea as one of the enterprises that were earmarked for strategic intervention in an effort to promote production, processing, marketing and export. Two billion shillings was earmarked for tea in the year 2001/2002, but the actual release was a mere Shs 1.2 billion. The shortage affected purchase and distribution of tea plantlets. Nevertheless, 500 hectares of formerly abandoned tea gardens were rehabilitated. 

Tea is affected by several constraints such as low yields, lack of tea research, un-rehabilitated tea gardens, inadequate supply of high yielding materials, lack of a long term development policy, poor infrastructure and limited and uneven distribution of tea processing facilities.

We are happy that two bills have been presented to the House already to repeal the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation Act, 1964 and the Uganda Tea Authority Decree, 1974. The bills empower the minister to appoint a liquidator with the hope that this arrangement will strengthen the hands of the private sector in the sub-sector. 

The tea unit is however still engaged in the establishment of tea nurseries and the importation of tea plantlets from Kenya. These are entrusted to private nurseries for production of seedlings, which the tea unit buys in turn and distributes to small-scale farmers.

The committee’s observations are that tea is a major cash crop, which cannot be handled by a small tea unit. Worse still, at the moment there is no clear tea policy. 

Secondly, the committee also noted that capital investment in this sector was not taken care of. This causes fear that the country may enter into green leaf that is beyond its processing capacity. In other words, they might produce more tealeaves than they can process.

Our recommendations are:

• A comprehensive tea policy should be formulated by MAAIF to revamp the sub-sector. 

• There is also need to monitor seedlings given to farmers in order to gauge the impact of the seedlings and create value for money. 

• Research in the tea industry should be streamlined especially in the development of improved clonal materials adapted to the climatic conditions in our country. 

• The processing capacity should also be improved to overcome limited numbers and unevenly distributed tea-processing factories. There must be a vision to fully utilise this potential.

Cocoa is a high profile crop, which is gaining prominence in the robusta coffee growing areas as a possible alternative to coffee in view of the coffee wilt disease. The market value is about US $1000 per tonne of dry beans. 

In the year 2001/2002, the total cocoa production was 3,700 metric tonnes of dry cocoa beans and this generated US $3,700,000 at an average of US $1,000 per tonne. The total production estimated for the year 2001/2002 was 4,200 metric tonnes at a price of US $2,198 and it was expected to generate US $9,231,600. By the end of June 2002 a total of 2,789,851 seedlings had been distributed.

The committee recommends that Government should upgrade cocoa to be among the strategic crops and revamp the sub-sector as a matter of urgency. 

On Irish potatoes, Government put them among the strategic crops for export. Shs. 159 million was used in support of Irish potatoes. Out of that, 59 bags of multiplication seeds were provided to Uganda Potato Seed Producers Association, while 128.8 metric tonnes of potatoes were multiplied in 20 sub-counties.

There seems to be less transparency in this programme and the committee recommends that there should be an improvement in the management of the sub-sector.

On the Vegetable Oil Development Project, the committee learnt that the traditional oil seeds have proved a success in the eastern and northern Uganda districts, but the oil pump project in Kalangala, which is the major intervention, has not yet taken off and the project is left with only four out of the original eight years.

The committee recommends that Government clears all causes of the delay in the project, especially the land issue, in order to speed up the project implementation. 

Madam Speaker, I turn to the second directorate, which is the Directorate of Animal Resources and Fisheries. The directorate covers animal production, marketing, livestock health and entomology, sericulture and fisheries. The livestock industry accounts for 17 percent of the agricultural GDP and 9 percent of the national GDP. 

The main species are cattle, goats, pigs, poultry and rabbits among others. The estimated annual production for the year 2001/2002 was eight million litres of milk, 120,000 tonnes of beef, 20,000 tonnes of goat meat and mutton, 12,000 tonnes of pork and 1,700 tonnes of poultry. The hides were 6,778,080 kgs while the goatskins and sheepskins were 927,000kgs and 206,000kgs respectively. According to the records available at URA, Uganda earned US$59.8 million from exports of hides and skins in the year 2001/2002.

The directorate executes functions in the following areas:  

Cattle breeding project: 

The committee noted the appropriateness of the project as a key component in upgrading livestock quality in the country, but it was concerned with the delay in appointing the board for the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and the lack of progress in embryo transfer.

The committee appreciates Government’s intervention in restocking, but regrets that the programme is in the Office of the Prime Minister. This is an inappropriate placement, which should be revisited.

The recommendations:

• A board should be appointed as soon as possible, and the restocking programme should be transferred to this board. 

• An embryo transfer technology should be facilitated and promoted countrywide.

Animal diseases in the country: 

The committee was happy with the improvement in rinderpest control. However, the committee expressed concern on the outbreaks of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, foot and mouth disease, lumpy skin disease, rabies, African swine fever, brucellosis, trypanosomiosis and black quarter. The committee here recommends that more funds should be allocated towards disease control.

Fisheries Department:

Following the lifting of the ban on fish exports to the European Union, this sub-sector has become a leading export earner for this country. The current fish production is in the range of 220,000 to 229,000 metric tonnes. Fish and fishery products earned US$87 million in the year 2001 from the foreign market in addition to what we sell to our neighbouring countries, amounting to US$25 million. 

One hundred and fifty million shillings has been allocated for fishing project interventions. These include, but are not limited to, Lake Victoria Environment Project, Integrated Lake Management Programme on Lakes Kyoga and George, Assistance to fish farmers in East Uganda, and Uganda Fisheries Development project.

A lot of interest has been generated to promote this sub-sector for export as seen by the level of financial support from donors. The committee appreciated the efforts taken to rescue the fishing industry, but also noted that the fishing was promoted without improving the hygiene standards in the industry.

Recommendations:

• The committee recommends that Government strengthen the quality assurance and safety of fish and fish products for domestic and foreign markets.

• All efforts should also be made to bring on board new landing sites and expand the industry to lakes Kyoga, Albert and others for export as soon as possible.

Under small-scale irrigation development, the committee appreciated the effort of MAAIF in promoting prototype irrigation pumps and treadle pumps for small-scale farmers. However, the committee was disappointed that MAAIF did not respond adequately to the committee’s 2001/2002 financial year recommendations to promote water for production (that is from source to farm gate) such as valley tanks, valley dams and irrigation pumps. The committee urges MAAIF to implement the recommendation as soon as possible.  

Semi-autonomous organisations: 

Some of the semi-autonomous organisations falling under the Ministry are listed as: Uganda Coffee Development Authority, Cotton Development Authority, National Agricultural Advisory Services, Dairy Development Authority and National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank. 

The committee was informed that following the ministry’s reform, these organisations took up some of the functions of MAAIF.

The analysis resulted in the following: 

Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) 

This was established in 1994 to regulate and promote the cotton industry. Its responsibilities include the following: To facilitate procurement, processing and distribution of planting seed, in collaboration with MAAIF within segregated areas and, where appropriate, supervise the production and distribution of cotton seeds outside segregated areas through selected ginneries, to facilitate cotton production, research, training and extension.

Under the medium term expenditure framework, Government has identified cotton as one of the strategic export crops. The committee was informed that the sub sector has benefited from allocation of monies from Government fiscal budgets to support seed procurement, dressing and distribution, and of late to support the strategic intervention for promoting production, processing and export of selected commodities.

The committee’s comments are as follows:

• The committee was satisfied with CDO’s effort on the spot cash payment to farmers for their crops. This has gone a long way in reviving their interest in growing cotton as a reliable source of income.

• Cotton Development Organisation has established a ginning school at Busitema National College of Agricultural Mechanisation, which produces highly skilled ginnery personnel. It was important to learn that there was an improved quality of Uganda cotton due to stringent quality controls at ginnery level, high yielding and viable varieties of seed for planting, and timely delivery of inputs.

• The ginning capacity was increased from 100,000 bales in 1994/95 to 800,000 bales in 2001/02.

The Committee observed that:

• Farm gate indicative prices are generally low compared to cost of production.

• Busitema College might produce too many skilled ginning technicians who might not easily be absorbed by the rather few number of ginneries in the country.

• The Treasury tends to release funds rather too late for the cropping season, and as a result CDO has had to resort to ginners on pre-financing by merchants, which is costly and results in reduced prices to farmers.

• The committee also noted the low capacity for value addition, as over 95 percent of the production is exported in raw form.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should facilitate CDO with adequate and timely funding to ensure the realisation of the annual set target of 400,000 bales per year to achieve the target of one million bales by the year 2006.

Government should provide production credit funds, which the farmers can access comfortably, and repay with ease. We do not want these ones, which are so expensive in terms of interest rates.

On Uganda Coffee Development Authority, the committee was informed that as a leading strategic export crop, the coffee sub-sector, through UCDA, has received budgetary support from the Government strategic intervention on export.

Uganda Coffee Development Authority has promoted value addition to coffee by preventing mould and enhancing differentiation to meet customer needs. Washed Robusta Coffee, which attracts premium, has been introduced in the market. 2,095 bags of this coffee, which is washed, hit the market in the year 2001 at the premium of 600 dollars per metric tonne. To take full advantage of niche market, Government has provided wet processing equipment with a capacity of 20,000 metric tonnes of cherries per year, and an equivalent of 4,000 of exportable coffee.

Robusta coffee grading has improved, hence an extra premium from between 20 to 50 dollars over and above the traditional grades. A total of 73,210 bags of premium coffee were exported in the year 2001/2002.

A joint venture company was formed between Chinese Beijing Company and Uganda, in which Uganda paid a share capital of US$153,000. As a result, a coffee shop roasting facility has been established to sell Uganda’s coffee in China.  

Back home, Uganda has secured an arrangement with Tanzania to process instant coffee at Bukoba.  Organic coffee for niche markets in Europe, USA and Japan increased from 1200 bags in the year 1995/96 to 10,136 bags in the year 2001/2002.

Uganda Coffee Development Authority continued to buy coffee seedlings from private nurseries for distribution to farmers. A total of 25,651,879 seedlings were given out to 110,831 households, and of these, 19,462,005 seedlings were Robusta and 6,188,874 were Arabica. On average each farmer received 200 seedlings.  

The replanting programme is aimed at replacing the aged coffee trees with new and more productive clones, while expanding to the otherwise non-traditional coffee growing districts as well. Coffee villages have been established to ease provision of extension services and 34,966 farmers have so far benefited from this arrangement.

The committee made a number of observations and recommendations:

• The committee was satisfied with UCDA’s effort to increase coffee production, improve coffee quality and value addition.

• Coffee wilt will remain a threat to the sub-sector. To this end, Shs3.3 billion was reallocated from coffee seedling procurement to research on coffee wilt and other related diseases. This is to be handled by NARO. 

• The committee recommends that more effort should be put on value addition and quality control.

• The committee also recommends that efforts should be made to install a processor in the country other than processing Uganda’s instant coffee in Tanzania.

Dairy Development Authority (DDA): 

While the Committee appreciates the good work of DDA, a close analysis of the budgetary allocation of the last two years revealed that the authority receives constant allocation of Shs879,300,000 per annum.

The committee sought to know DDA’s financial performance, especially the appropriation in aid.  There is also need to ascertain the status of Dairy Corporation - whether or not it will be privatised and how soon.  

The committee therefore recommends that DDA comes forward with its financial performance and business plan as soon as possible to assess its status.

Government should come up with a position on the sale or privatisation of Dairy Corporation within this fiscal year.

On National Agricultural Advisory Services, the committee learnt that this is a new approach to provision of extension services to farmers in the country, and has been in operation for one year so far. It is intended to encourage private-sector service providers to be contracted by farm institutions accountable to farmers themselves. However, out of the 908 sub-counties in Uganda, only 54 in six districts are implementing the programme, thus 854 sub-counties in the remaining 50 districts are still waiting for the programme although 10 new districts are coming on board this financial year.

Observations: 

• The total budget for NAADS in the financial year 2002/03 is Shs7.08 billion. These funds, if utilized cost-effectively, would improve agriculture in the implementing districts.

• Not all the parishes in each implementing sub-county are involved in the programme. This means that the area of coverage in each of the 54 sub-counties is minimal.

• The interim 15-member board appears to be too big, implying that a lot of money will be spent on administrative costs. 

• Currently, there is no strong linkage between NAADS and other components of PMA, especially, agro-processing, marketing strategies and access to rural finance.

• The rate of expansion to new districts is too slow. It is not known when the whole country will be covered. 

• The programme is experiencing slow and untimely release of funds from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This in turn slows the flow of funds to districts. Worse still, any money not utilized before the financial year is recalled by the same ministry. This is causing a lot of frustration from the would-be beneficiaries.

• The programme appears to be focusing more on the crop sector other than the livestock sector.
  
• In some areas, some NGOs that have been contracted as service providers do not have the capacity to execute the programme.

• The budget requirements of National Agricultural Advisory Services are based on MAAIF’s ceiling, which is already meagre.  

Despite the above observations, the programme has started to empower the beneficiaries to identify and prioritise their own agricultural enterprises.  In addition, the beneficiaries are now utilizing other National Agricultural Advisory Services’ principles, which make them own their programmes, such as participatory planning, monitoring and evaluation.
  
Recommendations:

• The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release funds on a timely basis, taking into account the seasonality of agriculture and agricultural activities. 
 
• The spread of the programme to other parts of the country should be speeded up in order to encourage balance in national development.

• Membership of the board should be reduced to nine.
  
• A need has arisen to expedite the enactment of the proposed law on micro-financing institutions to encourage them to provide more credit for agricultural production.

• Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should collaborate more with the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to improve marketing of agricultural products in the COMESA and other markets.

• National Agricultural Advisory Services should also pay attention to build the potential of livestock and fisheries sub-sectors. 

• As mandated by its statute, National Agricultural Advisory Services should endeavour to improve on the capacities of the participating NGOs and other service providers.

• Since National Agricultural Advisory Services is largely dependant on donor funds, it should not be restricted to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ ceiling. It should be allowed to implement its programmes as a matter of priority.

National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) has a separate vote from MAAIF. It is mandated to promote and streamline research in crops, livestock, fisheries and forestry. 

It is further mandated to ensure dissemination and application of research results. Its principal function in this mandate is to generate technology for development.  

To perform this function, NARO operates through nine researching institutes for technology generation, and 11 Agricultural Research Development Centres (ARDCs), which are located in the major agro-ecological zones in the country for dissemination of the technology under an outreach programme. In this way, NARO is expected to take its services nearer to the end users and other stakeholders.

The Committee’s Comments and Observations:

The committee was impressed with the amount of technology that has been generated. It commended NARO in its successful fight against cassava mosaic in the country, and the release of high yielding varieties of coffee, cotton, maize, beans, sorghum, millet and groundnuts. 

The committee also recognised NARO’s efforts in delivering effective methods for control of new castle diseases and the production of high quality fish fry.  

Finally, the committee was satisfied with the introduction of fast growing tree species for farm forestry. 

However, the committee was disturbed that such a vast amount of technology has not yet been fully accessed and adopted by farmers. We wondered why NARO took so long to establish its outreach department. 

The committee hopes that with the establishment of PMA and NAADS, NARO’s outreach department will be strengthened and improved to render its service delivery more effectively.

The committee’s recommendations: 

• NARO’s achievements should be applauded and its efforts given more support.

• The committee further recommends that MAAIF’s functional analysis should not be used to impair major activities of NARO. It would be wise to wait for the operationalisation of the National Planning Authority before NARO is restructured. 

• The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service lifts the ban on the recruitment of scientists so that NARO can embark on the recruitment of young and competent staff to be trained by the current experienced, but ageing senior scientists.  A smooth transition in this respect is necessary should the older scientists decide to retire from NARO. This exercise should be backed up with an improvement in the terms and conditions of service in NARO, which are grossly inadequate at the moment.  

• The committee also recommends that scientists serving in NARO should be motivated to stay in service for a period of at least seven years so as to produce some sustainable results.  This recommendation comes after realising that the majority of highly trained and young scientists are deserting NARO for greener pastures, leaving the organisation at a high risk of losing out in research.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, there is no doubt in the minds of the people of Uganda that agriculture is the lifeline for the country. It is a major source of food, household income and foreign exchange. It is therefore regrettable that Government has not yet given maximum attention to the role of this sector, especially the linkage between production, preservation, processing, consumption and marketing. The neglect of agriculture is seen by the mere allocation of only two percent of the national budget to MAAIF.  This is why it is necessary to immediately start the process of negotiation between MAAIF and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to revise the ceiling upwards.  

Many of the programmes under the industry actually come from donor funding as you will be seeing from the total recurrent and development budget expenditure which I will read soon.  To this effect, MAAIF should come up with an investment plan to explain this demand by the next financial year, if the ceiling is to be revised upwards. The ministry should find a good reason to justify the demand. We are calling for a serious, strong and impressive investment plan.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg that MAAIF’s budget for the fiscal year 2002/03 be approved as follows: 

i. Vote 010 MAAIF: Recurrent expenditure is Shs6.01 billion and for development expenditure, the figures have changed. It is now Shs99.01 billion.  The reason given by the Treasury, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture is that donor contributions should be included in what Parliament is going to approve now, so that there will be no complaint and bickering in the implementation of their programmes. So, out of the Shs99.01 billion, the breakdown is as follows: 

• Donor funding is Shs63.99 billion; 
• Taxes will amount to Shs8.15 billion; and 
• The Government contribution to MAAIF’s development budget is Shs26.86 billion. 

Added together, the development expenditure for MAAIF will amount to Shs99.01 billion.

ii. Vote 043 NARO: Recurrent expenditure is Shs2.59 billion and the development expenditure amounts to Shs32,030,340,000. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson.

MRS NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this good report. I would like to raise one or two issues. 

I am pleased that the committee talked about the ministry’s effort to investigate disease and immediate control was taken. The ministry has done its best to control the banana wilt in Kayunga District, especially Ntenjeru North where it hit, but I once went with the Minister of Agriculture and he promised seeds; cassava and potatoes but to my surprise, I want to inform him that nothing has been given. 

I do not know whether the committee got a chance to visit these gardens. It is really disastrous, and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is here! It is really disastrous that those people do not have anything to eat, and I feel I should raise it here. Honourable Minister, in so many other villages, people have reported to me that the disease has spread, save for those ones where you have controlled it. It has spread to other areas.

Secondly, I would like to talk about modernisation of agriculture. I want to bring a proposal, which I got from the farmers of Ntenjeru North. 

According to the nature of our farming in Buganda, we always talk about tractors, but they had a proposal that if the Ministry of Agriculture could put emphasis and effort into using ploughing oxen so that they teach the farmers how to use these ploughs, it could help. It is part of modernisation, and it will save people from digging using hoes. Thank you. 

MR ASANASIO KAYIZZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the committee for a job well done. I just want to seek a simple clarification from MAAIF. As of now, I understand we have graduates from each sub-county working as extension workers. Again, the ministry comes up with another programme called NAADS. 

These graduates at sub-counties are poorly paid and provided with motorcycles without fuel. Honourable Minister, don’t you think that this is a duplication of work and resource misdirection? We have these people at the grassroots poorly paid, poorly enumerated and with motorcycles without fuel to monitor these farmers down at the grassroots. That is all I want to be clarified on.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns about the Ministry of Agriculture - and you can see the minister laughing - are well known from the 6th Parliament and they are well documented.  

I am not going to go into that, but Madam Speaker, if you care to notice the members present in the Chamber, they are mainly the new ones. The old ones are like, “we have said it all, what else can we add?” Things are not moving and probably the new ones will also realise that.  However, I have only one observation to put on record - the appreciation of the people of Kashari of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, and in particular, the Managing Director, who is so co-operative to you members. If you have not noticed, you had better take note of that! - (Applause).  

He calls us; and you can imagine in those days we would go and line up and look for these seedlings, but this manager calls and says, “Honourable member, don’t you think it is time for planting coffee in your constituency? Please come, I have got this.” And he encourages farmers to develop nurseries. 

He buys from the local nursery developers in the constituencies and sells to the local farmers, and this has been well appreciated. It is only unfortunate that the drought has caused some of these problems, but at least as far as UCDA is concerned, for the first time I am not complaining. 

I would like to put that on record, to thank Mr Henry, and to encourage my colleagues that now we have got a very co-operative and hard working Managing Director. This helps because even the prices have gone up. The nursery farmer is benefiting and now the one selling berries is also benefiting. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MRS CHELANGAT KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee on agriculture for his report. I am going to talk about coffee. Although hon. Kazoora is praising UCDA, we are still complaining on Mt Elgon. It is not Kapchorwa alone this time, but I am now including the whole Mt. Elgon zone.  

Coffee is still our major export earner, and as a major export earner, we should do our best to see that we increase the yield and also the quality. On top of that, Arabica coffee is still the highest foreign exchange earner in this country, but I want to inform you that I am surprised that in the budget, they are not mentioning anything on pesticides.

On the Mt. Elgon zone, we have not seen any spraying of Arabica coffee for sometime now. So, it is not surprising that the yield has declined. I request the Minister of Agriculture to see to it that at least once in a year, the coffee is sprayed to kill the wilt.  We do not want to fall prey to what has befallen our people who grow the other type of coffee, Robusta.  So, as a warning to the ministry, unless we safeguard Arabica coffee, we might also fall in the same trap.  

I also want to complain because we are not really happy with extension workers in my district. They have left the farmers on their own. People are so surprised that actually there is poverty around because the people who have the techniques are not helping them. Most of the time they are in their offices.

I am also surprised because we were promised a combined harvester for wheat growing in Kapchorwa, but in the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture, I do not see the money for purchasing this combined harvester. And I want to inform the Minister that actually, once you made that promise, the people of Kapchorwa have taken trouble to grow wheat - including myself. The wheat is waiting to be harvested, and so we hope that the machine is around because that is the only way we can beat poverty.

There has been a lot of talk on AGOA, and I expected the Ministry of Agriculture to be a participant in the AGOA business, but I am surprised they are not saying anything in their budget as far as AGOA is concerned.  

We have been told that there is a firm, which is making garments to be exported to USA markets. I thought that these garments would be a product made in Uganda, starting from the crop itself up to the manufacturer. So, if I may inquire, where are they getting these clothes if the Ugandan cotton farmer is not asked to increase on the amount of cotton to be delivered to the factories that manufacture clothes in Uganda, so that we supply this new firm that has opened a factory in Bugolobi? I get puzzled; how are you really liberating the Ugandan farmer if he is not participating in AGOA?

MRS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this comprehensive and well-presented report.  

My concern is about the policy framework, particularly the initiative of transferring the ministry headquarters from Entebbe in Wakiso District to Kampala. I wonder why such opportunities should be concentrated in one part of the country. I feel such opportunities would help in the development of other parts of the country. So, I would like to ask the Minister of Agriculture for the justification for this initiative.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the PMA funds. We understand that the allocation of the PMA funds is based on the population. I would like to ask why it is based on the population and not the agricultural activities carried out in these districts. Can the Minister guide me on the criteria used in the allocation of these funds?

About fisheries, I appreciate the efforts put in by the fisheries department, which has led to an increase in export earnings but my concern is about the fishing nets and the young fish being destroyed now and then. We are aware that nets below five inches are supposed to be used on Lake Kyoga and probably in other shallow waters, but I think this is happening because our fishermen are probably ignorant about the outcome. 

My observation is that the fishermen need to be educated. So, the Ministry of Education should encourage the fisheries officers to educate the fishermen on the rightful nets to be used in Lake Victoria. If this is not done, I am sure we are going to face a lot of problems with our fisheries industry.

Finally, our farmers are disappointed and demoralized by the lack of markets for their products. I am sure you will agree with me. What strategy has the ministry put in place as far as marketing of agricultural products is concerned, in order to encourage our farmers? I know it is the ministry of trade probably concerned, but I think the Ministry of Agriculture should do something about the marketing of these products. It is the same Ministry that is encouraging people to grow certain crops at the same time disappointing people. The Ministry has not actually come up to tell us exactly what they are planning for our farmers in as far as the market is concerned.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a job well done, but I have three or four issues to raise.  

One is in regard to the animal disease situation in the country. The committee rightly pointed out that the efforts to control epidemic pests and diseases are commendable, but we still have a very big problem in this country because there are so many notifiable diseases, which the committee listed in their report, which require serious attention and focus.  

To the best of my knowledge, the decentralization policy of the country has been good, but blanket decentralization of all activities will not take us far. My observation is that diseases, and in fact tsetse flies, know no boundaries. 

Decentralization of disease and tsetse fly control is one of the problems which has caused a perpetual outbreak of these diseases. Those components, in my opinion, need to be re-centralized, because efforts from one district to control a particular disease or to control tsetse flies can be undermined by a weakness in another district. 

Moreover, the district veterinary officers in the field are not even obliged to make reports to the commissioner because their bosses are now at the district. Sometimes their technical input is even compromised by fear of who the boss is. If the veterinary officer sees that there should be a quarantine or some limited movement of livestock, the district council can say “no, where do we get the funds?”  So, in future, there is need for our Government to revisit re-centralization of those components.   

There is an organisation called OIE, which controls diseases, and it is the only one which can declare a country disease-free. If we continue with this kind of policy on disease, for as long as the disease control aspects still remain a decentralized component, we are likely not to get an opportunity to sell some of our products because Uganda will still not be declared disease-free on most of those diseases.

I also wanted to talk about training and capacity building. I know that if one is to have good food, you should be mindful of what goes on in the kitchen. Our powerhouses are the training institutions.  There is need for us to focus on the quality of the agricultural cadres who come out from Makerere University and other tertiary institutions where para-veterinary staff are trained.  

I want to propose that the Ministry of Agriculture tries to support initiatives from the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and the Faculty of Agriculture, to improve the package of information that they give to the students. For example, in veterinary medicine, I want to report here that the training has focused more on theory and very little on practicals. This is not because the faculty does not require it, but because they are limited.  

The veterinary medicine under-graduates should undertake some kind of internship from a nearby farm to enable them tap relevant practical skills when they go out there. I remember when some of us were still there, we only used to benefit from ambulatory clinics where students were taken round to a radius of about 20 kilometres within Kampala. But following privatisation of veterinary practice, the under-graduates at the university more or less have nowhere to go and they do not do some practical training. The field veterinarians have taken up most of the farms which they could have used to learn practical skills.  



I propose that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Agriculture try to liase and see a possibility of allocating at least some farms for the university to take students for practical skills. My colleague from Kapchorwa has pointed out that we even have a problem of practical skills out there, so we need to focus on improving the technical cadres who we send out to the field.

I also want to pose some inquiry here. Since the merger of training institutions, when all the training institutions from various ministries were transferred to the Ministry of Education, the Veterinary Training Institute of Entebbe was merged with Bukalasa Agricultural College. 

I am wondering what is going on with the Veterinary Training Institute in Entebbe now. The buildings are just there, I do not know what the Minister is saying. What is the way forward; are we going to look at it just as some white elephant? I wanted some explanation. 

I am also worried about the misplacement of the restocking project. Let me call it misplacement, because they are overloading the Prime Minister’s Office. I would propose that the restocking project be reverted to the Ministry of Agriculture under the animal production directorate. In that way, we would have more focused output. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula North, Kamuli): I, thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to take this opportunity to thank the chairman and the committee for the wonderful report. I also want to take this opportunity to observe and thank the minister for the high level of velocity that I have seen him have while supervising agricultural related programmes in this country.

I, however, have some observations to make. First of all, I disagree in totality with the committee’s position on the size of the board of NAADS. Fifteen may appear big, but it is just because implementation is being done in 54 sub-counties. If the implementation is to be done in all the sub- counties, then the membership of 15 is reasonable enough. So, I do not think this will increase the administrative costs in any way. 

I have some concerns about the coverage. Actually, we do not know how the committee has put it; we do not know when the whole country will be covered.  

Incidentally, I want to observe that there has been an increased awareness for the need of extension services in the communities. In my constituency, and the district in general, there is a positive trend whereby the members of the community are willing to pay for the extension services. This is good for the country. Therefore, NAADs should move a little faster to cover other parts of the country as soon as possible.

I have some concerns on two other areas. As members may be aware, under the Agricultural Sector Programme Support (ASPS), there are several components; one such component is the agricultural education component.  This component has been moved to the Ministry of Education and Sports and I do not know how they link up with the Ministry of Agriculture. The future of agriculture in this country is to get children as early as primary level to know about agriculture and take it positively, but this component does not seem to function as would be expected.  

There is also a district agricultural training and information centre component under DANIDA support.  First of all, I am concerned about the fate of the other district farm institutes other than the few that DANIDA has picked on. In Busoga, we have Ikulwe District Farm Institute. It used to be very useful, but now it is no more, and DANIDA has not picked on it. 

On a sad note, some of those few that DANIDA has picked on have failed to take off because NARO has either refused to surrender them, or because the ownership is not clear. If you take the case of Kamenya Miggo District Agricultural Training and Information Centre in Masaka District, the ownership issue has not been resolved and, therefore, the programme has not taken off effectively. The support DANIDA gives is for five years and this is already the third year. What is going to happen if it cannot take off now?  There is also Kyembogo in Kabarole District. This habit of NARO holding on to institutions is not only limited to my constituency because there is Kigge Citrus Farm, which has been renamed NARO Research Centre. They are there holding on to several hectares of land, with a well-established irrigation system but with one staff, and you can guess who - it is a night watchman.  

If NARO does not have the money, why doesn’t it hand over these institutions to the communities so that they can utilize them? In Kiggo, of course, people would grow maize, they could even have the citrus farm rehabilitated at their own initiative; so, I pray that this is actually taken up.

Lastly, I want to re-echo the concerns of the honourable member for Wakiso about marketing of agricultural products. Some time last year, a kilo of maize grain was going for as low as 30 shillings in Kamuli, but at the same time, some people were dying of famine in other parts of this country. And in Kamuli, you would get a bag of maize for 3000 Shillings! Actually, what used to happen was, somebody would sell a bag of maize for 3000/= and buy a bunch of matooke from Mbarara for 3000/= and enjoy some two meals.  

So, as we go into NAADS, I think the marketing strategy should be developed such that we have ready markets for whatever will be produced in bulk. Otherwise, the people will produce but they will not get anything meaningful out of what they have produced.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS LYDIA BALEMEZI  (Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also wish to thank the committee for the good work done, and I thank the chairman for his presentation. But before I feel comfortable with the committee, I would like a few points clarified for me.

Much as some people are very happy with the extension workers, I still have some problems. Agriculture in most districts is now focusing on the NAADS and PMA programmes but these programmes are top-down operations in that every time this group goes down to the district, they invite people for workshops and seminars, give them allowances and yet there would be no work done on the ground because of lack of facilitation. So, I really wonder whether the committee is actually satisfied with the NAADS and PMA operations in our districts, because I really feel that the implementers, who are the farmers, are left out.  

I also have a problem with horticulture. We have so many people growing flowers and shrubs on roadsides, in house compounds, forests and everywhere, and these plants are moved from district to district.  I really do not know whether the Minister of Agriculture has looked into this, because I see a possibility of transferring pests from one area to another. 

As a member from Mukono District, this is one area where we always get everything fast, be it for promotion or demolition. Very many flowers are being brought into Mukono District, and I think this has contributed a lot to the wilt in banana plantations and coffee. 

Much as the ministry has tried to curb the banana wilt, we have not been given a substitute crop. So, in Mukono we are almost going hungry. Famine is about to be felt within the district because of the coffee wilt. We have no crop income, and the banana wilt we now have is from sub-county to sub-county, and the ministry is not coming in with some substitute for our disaster. 

All this makes me think about what we are growing in Mukono, which has not been talked about. I know the chairman reported something on rabbit rearing, but that was all about rabbits. We have reared a lot of rabbits. The only solution we got here one time from the minister is to eat them since we had no market. But the chairman is going on to report that these are some of the things that the country is proud of, yet there is no market for rabbits and we have not been told how much they have got from rabbit selling.  

This also makes me think about bee keeping.  Mukono district is dealing so much in bee keeping but the ministry seems to be sidelining this, and I think they have not budgeted for it, nor are they even minding as to who is looking for income from bee keeping.

As for the fisheries department, Mukono has been left out. The ministry is only talking about issues from other districts, much as Mukono covers most of the lake area. Some time back, I requested the ministry to provide the lakes with a ministry boat because we have no government transport on these lakes. At least the ministry should come up with a boat to monitor and supervise our fishermen on the lakes and improve on our landing sites. And if possible, they should also provide some industry because we have so many landing sites and we collect a lot of fish in this district, but all of it is transported to Kampala.

We have been told that the ministry is anticipating El Nino, but I wonder whether they have transferred this information to our Minister for Disaster Preparedness. Farmers in Mukono have not been told as to how they should prepare for this El Nino in as far as agriculture is concerned. We think in case El Nino comes, most of these crops might be washed away. So, what measures should we take as advice from the technical people?  

I thank you, and if these problems are addressed, then I will be very comfortable with the ministry and the chairman’s report. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to my other colleagues who have thanked the committee for a comprehensive report. I have just three points.  

On page 11, the committee notes that it regrets that the programme on restocking is in the office of the Prime Minister, and that this is an inappropriate placement, which should be revisited. But when you look at the recommendations, the committee does not recommend which placement would be appropriate. I would like to hear from the committee what its proposal is on this particular issue.

My next comment is on page 17, and this is in respect of micro-finance institutions. The report states: “A need has arisen to expedite the enactment of the proposed law on micro-finance institutions to encourage them to provide more credit for agricultural production”.  

Although this is good in itself, I would like to note that as of yesterday when we attended a workshop, which was prepared by the Budget Committee as well as Bank of Uganda, we noted first and foremost that the interest rates are very high. Therefore, if you are looking at the issue of micro-finance institutions in financing agricultural production, which has a lot of hazards such as weather as well as price fluctuations, it may be very difficult for people to pay back these high interest loans. Therefore, I would like to hear more on this from the committee and from the ministry at large.  

We were also informed that after the law has been passed, Bank of Uganda would like to only allow five micro-finance institutions to operate. I come from Kyenjojo District where we have no bank at all. My biggest concern is that even after these five micro-finance institutions are allowed to operate, we in the rural areas will have no micro-finance institution. Therefore, I would like to hear from the committee and from the Minister what plans they have to make sure that if these micro-finance institutions are going to be used in the agricultural sector, they are accessible by people in the rural areas. 

I am afraid that these micro-finance institutions, which will be able to meet the regulations, will be the only ones that are in Kampala and, therefore, the farmers will continue to suffer as a result of having no access to finances.

My last point touches on the issue of food security. The issue of food security was raised here on the Floor in respect to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, and it was noted that we do not have anything in our silos. We have no preparation, we have no strategy and people are suffering. I would like to hear from the ministry, especially in view of the fact that we have the El Nino coming up, and that we have wars in the northern part of the country. I would like to hear some information on this from the committee as well as the ministry, so that we can be re-assured that something is being done in this area of food security. I thank you very much.

MR AKISOFERI OGOLA (West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a few comments. I am glad with this report; it is positive, it is brief but it still leaves me with a sharp appetite for the details. 

First of all, I would like to say that in the east where I come from, our agricultural activities swing from one side to the other. Sometimes it is good and sometimes it is very bad. Cotton production is one of the areas where we have done well. That is what most of us survived and trained on but cotton production has not been properly handled, especially in pricing.  

There are two cotton products which move together, cotton lint and cottonseed. Normally, prices are all fixed as one item. Your cotton is weighed and then you get paid. It is the ginneries that make money on lint by selling seeds. Out of the seeds you get the cottonseed oil, cakes, soap and others. But these things don’t seem to be passed back to the farmer, and that makes the price paid to the cotton farmer perpetually low.  

I request the honourable Minister of Agriculture and those who determine the prices that in order to induce the cotton farmers, they had better be paid a good price. This will give them proper incentive to grow cotton especially now that it is more relevant. 

AGOA is a good opportunity to enable the cotton farmer to make money, because you need cotton for the manufacture of textiles, which AGOA has started. And by the way, AGOA is not a company; it is a law. I do not know which company we are working under but under this law, AGOA is producing something in Bugolobi, I understand, with yarn imported from China. Now it seems to me that this is starting from the top rather than from the bottom. 

I would have expected that the first thing would be to encourage the growth and development of cotton, and then there would be enough cotton to make yarn. From the yarn, we would make the material rather than simply being the conduit for products imported here for passage to America.

The other areas, which I feel happy about, are NAADS and NARO. We are beginning to see the activities of these two, although with NARO, the outcome of research is always slow. But we are beginning to see them, and I, therefore, concur with the honourable friend who said the board structure of 15 for NAADS should not be reduced; I do not think that should be necessary. 

From what we gather, the problem between NAADS and NARO is in remuneration. It looks like NAADS enjoys better material benefits than NARO. If my figures are accurate, I think a director in NARO is paid about Shs2.6m while one in NAADS is paid about Shs7m, but I stand to be corrected. This difference in pay is so large that most officers tend to run away from NARO to try to get into NAADS. And I think there is need to create some kind of parity because both institutions are necessary for our farmers –(Interjection).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR OGOLA: I have only one item, Madam Speaker, and this is on animal drugs. There is a tendency to look at animal development as regional, but in my opinion, this is wrong because our society has always been mixing the activities in agriculture as well as in animal husbandry. But in my area, the prices of the drugs and services in favour of animals are very high, and it is difficult for an animal keeper to keep up. 

I request the minister and those responsible to see how these drugs can be made more affordable to ensure that the whole country joins in production, whether of crops or animals. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was expecting that in this session, you are going to seek clarifications, because the budget process started in March and we were involved in it. We had a very lengthy debate on the State of the Nation Address and on the Budget. Then our committees have been sitting for the last one and a half months where I thought some of these matters would have been raised. But you are now proposing that this group should be paid more and the other should be paid less. Can we just address clarifications; things that the minister can address very quickly? Thank you.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for a job well done. I have the following things where I need specific clarifications:

One, we were told in this committee report that functional analysis is going on in that ministry. I am aware that intensive restructuring was done in that ministry, but the committee seems not to be happy with the structure, and yet it appears again they have embarked on restructuring and thorough job analysis. May I know what this is all about? Are we going back to restructuring the ministry? 

Two, I concur with the committee that the two per cent allocation to this ministry, a vital ministry, is really not being serious as a Government. I request the Prime Minister to try and prioritise agriculture as a very important sector in our economy.

Three, when the President visited Kabale District, he was concerned about the poor state of sorghum in our district. Actually, he called the sorghum, “stunted sorghum”. I do not know what the ministry is doing to help us carry out research on this sorghum and come up with high yielding seeds so that sorghum, which takes nearly a full year to mature, can take maybe three to five months. 

I also want clarification on recruitment, which the committee touched on. There is a halt on the recruitment of scientists in that ministry. It is interesting when we are looking for the right people to man important areas. We lack scientists, yet the jobs exist in the public service. If you look at the advisers to the President, they are many, and I know the cause of this halt is resource constraints. Can’t we reduce these advisors who are not necessarily technical, who are just political appointees, who just get money from the Consolidated Fund to appease them, so that we recruit more people in technical ministries like Health and Agriculture?  

Lastly, I am concerned about the extension workers in my constituency. In my opinion, they are not there. It has taken me one full year to look for an extension worker to help me look at certain areas where I am involved. I had to go to Kabale to look for the agricultural officers. It appears there are no agricultural officers and there is no follow-up on supervising these extension workers. They appear on the payroll but actually, they are not doing their job. With these few remarks, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please seek clarifications only.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its report, but I seek clarification on a few issues. 

One of the objectives of the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project was to try and improve sanitation conditions at fishing villages. The project is about to end and fishing villages in my constituency on Lake Victoria have not realised the special sanitary facilities, which were supposed to be provided under that project. Can I know what happened, or why those facilities have not been provided, yet it is known that fishing villages are the first victims of cholera outbreaks? May I know what will be done in the face of the coming El Nino?

Two, my area is one of those affected by the coffee and banana wilt disease. People are now trying to find alternative crops and are turning to vanilla and moringa. I have even heard that farmers in Butambala are making money on mairungi. Can the ministry come up with a policy to guide farmers whether these are actually viable alternative crops? Otherwise, they might be expending their energies on crops that may not pull them out of poverty.  

Can I also be informed as to what the ministry is doing about the documentation for export of the non-traditional produce? Importers abroad are getting more concerned about nutritional information on our produce.  Are there any concrete measures being undertaken by the ministry to establish standards so that our exports meet the required standards by the would-be importers?  

Finally, the debate about modernising agriculture has raged on for long. They have been trying to transform the peasant into a miracle worker beyond their capacities and competencies. Can I know whether the ministry has considered commercialisation of agriculture through contract farming? 

Can I also know the fate of the arrangements that had been floated earlier to have professionals in agriculture facilitated to become producers as a faster way of transforming the economy of this country? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson for his paper, but I would like the minister or the chairperson to assist me with the following: 

One, I do appreciate the fact that PMA is a multi-sectoral programme, but definitely the Ministry of Agriculture is playing a leading role in it. In order for this programme to run on a sustainable basis, may I know how the ministry has integrated PMA with the principle of UPE as a way of ensuring that agricultural modernisation and better farming practices are taught to the young ones right from UPE levels? 

Most of these UPE graduates may not end up in the formal sector. They may practice what they picked from school. Otherwise, there is so much concentration on the farmers who are already in practice, but I think we should look ahead. Have we looked at that as a possible way of running this programme on a sustainable basis?  

Secondly, when you look at the amount of money sent to sub-counties, you find that there are a lot of activities among our rural folk who are dealing with agriculture but it looks like the population and not the activity determines the amount of money. A lot of money may go to urban areas where there is little to do with modernisation of agriculture. So, may I be told how best this is done in order to ensure that agricultural activities in the countryside are enhanced? Otherwise, the arrangement may not be very useful to our people in the rural sub-counties.

Thirdly, I do appreciate the work done by NARO in fighting the cassava mosaic, but in this report, I did not see how far they have gone in the fight against the coffee wilt disease. I think it is a big problem whose progress we need to know.

Lastly, agriculture is the backbone of this nation and economy; is the two per cent share of the budget a true reflection of the importance of this ministry to this economy? I would like the minister to answer whether he is comfortable with that so that we know how important that ministry is taken. Thank you very much.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): Madam Speaker, after others have spoken, when it comes to our chance, we have to be restricted to clarification – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, honourable member. I think you are out of order. I have been repeating for the last 30 minutes that please seek clarifications, do not make submissions.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I did not hear from the report of the committee any policy relating to an agricultural census. May I know whether the ministry has any plans to hold an agricultural census; and if so, when? 

There is a lot of pressure on the land now and the carrying capacity of land is getting smaller. The Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment has commissioned a study on national land use policy. I think the coincidence of agricultural census with that policy vis-à-vis the problems I have stated would be quite important. So, I think it is important for this House to know whether the ministry plans to hold an agricultural census.  

The Lango sub-region has embarked on growing coffee. Coffee seedlings have been distributed and people have planted coffee. Some people, including myself, have started getting coffee yields. As I speak now, some people have harvested coffee and it is in their houses.  They do not know where to sell it. There has not been an area where coffee was marketed, even with liberalisation. Can we be told what plan is there for buying coffee, which is being produced or which will eventually be produced in this sub-region?

On page 8, the committee laments about the delay in releasing money to districts and the fact that monies not spent are eventually recalled. This does not only relate to Agriculture, I think this is affecting many ministries. 

In the Constitution, local governments are supposed to be given three types of grants: conditional grants, unconditional grants and equalisation grants. As far as I understand, conditional grants are attached to a specific function. May I know from this ministry, and may be that of Finance, under what other law grants to local governments are withdrawn or are subject to an embargo? 

It is a constitutional entitlement for local government districts to get these grants. I want to know under what law this system of giving, withdrawing, embargo, not releasing is being exercised because that is a very serious relationship between local governments and the central Government in the area of sharing national resources.

Finally, I notice from the report that NAADS is so far operating in 54 sub-counties and six districts. I would like to be reminded whether NAADS is a pilot project, which is testing a concept. If it is found not to be working, then it should wind up; or if it is found to be working, then it should be replicated. 

If that is not the case and it is a national project, which every taxpayer should be able to benefit from, what is the problem with NAADS operating countrywide? If the problem is resources, how is it planned that when NARO eventually covers the whole country it will get those resources? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me commence by thanking the sessional committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the work on the report. I have a few concerns, which may lead to clarifications. I would like to start with NARO.  

Observations have been made that our research institutions are doing wonderful work, introducing new hybrids for enhancing production in this country. But surely, the dissemination channels are lacking. I would like to know from the minister concerned what strategies the Government has in ensuring that these crop and animal hybrids get to the people at an affordable price. 

A sack of unshelled nuts, for example, which was researched and produced in Serere, costs Shs100,000, if you ever got one. This kind of situation will not take us very far in spite of the fact that a lot of resources go into that research.

On Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), much has been said about the good work they are doing. It is unfortunate - personally I have not known how the seedlings are distributed, but I think there is lack of transparency in the distribution of those seedlings. May I be educated on how they are also getting disseminated to those areas that the ministry has found as being possible coffee growing areas? 

I would like to cite an example where His Excellency the President, out of his good gesture, promised members seedlings for their constituencies. Could it be that we were to get those seedlings from the UCDA? If so, why haven’t we been told about this?  

I would also like to talk about the late releases from the Ministry of Finance in regard to NARO. Since we are now embracing a situation where donors will no longer be giving much of this money directly to the projects but to the Ministry of Finance, the common basket for eventual dissemination to the districts and whatever departments the money is allocated to, if the late release phenomenon of the Ministry of Finance is going to continue and we would like to promote production of crops for export and even domestic needs, it is essential that the research aspect is prioritised and facilitated. 

If this is going to continue, let us take just an example of research into groundnuts, and aware that rain is erratic and seasonal, if this money is going to reach Serere Research Station late, how do we expect such institutions to go ahead with their work? Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I pray that the minister gives me answers to those questions. Thank you.

MR NSHIMYE SEBUTULO (Mityana South, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the minister about the ministry’s policy on vanilla, because it is not included in this report and yet I am told it is a highly paying crop. Is it the policy of the ministry not to promote it?  

I would like to refer to page 11 of the report where the committee has recommended facilitation and promotion of the embryo transfer technology in animal quality upbringing. I have received reports on the ground and I have also been a victim of artificial insemination gone wrong. Are we satisfied that we have sufficiently excelled in artificial insemination to now embark on this more complicated and scientific method of embryo transfer? 

I am saying this because these days farmers complain of inseminating their animals as many as three to four times before the animals become pregnant. Does that suggest that the semen is not sufficiently fertile? And it turns out to be very expensive; because each time an insemination is done, it costs between Shs 25,000 and Shs 30,000!  

My last point is on coffee. I would also like to commend the good work done by UCDA; they have been very co-operative with Members of Parliament. The problem now, however, is that the officers who are responsible for coffee distribution at district level have monopolized the business of establishing the nurseries. They no longer want other stakeholders to get involved. As a result, they no longer recommend others at parish level to get involved in this exercise. Consequently, some premature seedlings have been given out, and in the process of transporting them, they get destroyed. When they give them out at gombolola level, even those who do not have gardens are given seedlings. These people finally sell them off and end up drinking with the money they got. 

Does the ministry have a policy of monitoring and auditing on the ground? I recommend that Members of Parliament should be involved. And in order to have an equitable distribution of these funds from UCDA, they should be decentralized up to parish level. It would then even be easier for farmers to get them. That would be better than giving them out in towns where not many farmers live. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me first of all thank the committee for the work well done. I however seek clarification from the minister; why don’t I see any programme of restocking our lakes up to today? I have seen in the report that they are giving farmers money to start ponds, but there is no restocking programme! 

When you look at certain areas, they have the potential for restocking, but the lake basin is empty. All the 52 lakes are empty and they need restocking. Fort Portal, Kabarole, and Kisoro districts are full of empty lakes. Can the minister clarify to me; when will NARO begin this programme?  

Secondly, some time back, the Committee on Agriculture visited my county and found out that in the area of Kafuro, there is very good cotton. There were supposed to be negotiations between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Tourism for some land from Kyambura Game Reserve to be given to the farmers. I do not know whether the idea was abandoned. I seek clarification from the minister as to whether the idea is still on, so that my people can rest assured that they will have more land for cotton. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West, Sironko): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek a few clarifications from the committee and the minister. One, are you aware that they are only giving out about five seedlings per farmer, yet here you are claiming that it is about 200 seedlings each? 

Two, in Bugisu where I come from, maize and beans did not do well; that means we are expecting hunger any time, like many other places. What plans has the Ministry of Agriculture put in place to tackle this issue of the expected hunger?

On Agricultural loans, they have talked about pumps for water, and giving us coffee and bean seedlings. When are you going to offer the farmers loans so that they are able to buy drugs for tomatoes and pumps to spray their plants? When should we expect this? I can see we have got a budget of Shs 99 billion; out of this, how much is going to go to us in form of loans? 

There is the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA), but aren’t you modernising poverty? This is because I have not seen anything here about the modernisation of agriculture. There is nothing like modern equipment being brought in to help farmers! I have not seen any progress, apart from maybe the modern roads, which are handled by the Ministry of Works.

I remember before Coffee Marketing Board was taken over, there was a very good project, which had been brought up and we were going to get equipment to make instant coffee. I think the contract was supposed to be signed on a Monday and the Coffee Marketing Board was closed on a Friday the week before. What happened to that project? Who kept the deal? 

We have coffee problems in our place. These diseases that attack coffee have come back. When is the Ministry of Agriculture coming to Bugisu to spray the coffee?  

It appears the Ministry of Agriculture has forgotten all about supervision. They are talking about extension workers, but I do not know what they are extending. What measures have you put in place to give farmers upcountry better ideas of farming and good seeds? Maybe it is done around Kampala, but we are interested in this in Mbale and other places upcountry.

And what policies or ideas has the ministry put in place to deal with the issue of markets of the products we have? For example, you told us to produce more maize and we did, but the cost of production was Shs 150 and we sold at Shs 30. What incentives are in place to compensate us who made a loss in maize?  

Lastly, in every community, there is need to have a positive attitude towards other people. You know we have farmers who are suffering from HIV/AIDS and their production has gone down. What measures has the Ministry of Agriculture put in place to assist such dying farmers? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank the committee for having put in the effort to internalise the sector in such a short time. This gives me hope that we shall manage to forge the way forward for this sector together. 

I also thank all the honourable members who have contributed, and those who have listened attentively up to this time. In view of the limited time and interest to get this item out of the way fast, I will just highlight a few areas. 

Regarding HIV/AIDS, we are trying to come up with a programme in the ministry to integrate this in all programmes in agriculture. HIV/AIDS is being considered like all other programmes that are crosscutting, like gender and the environment.  

Secondly, regarding markets, the principle that we must learn - all of us who have been asking about markets - is that we have a holistic approach. One factor is to ensure that we increase productivity and profitability of farm enterprises. Another factor is that we go in for those enterprises that are market oriented. But then again, we have to distinguish between a market and a price. 

The price may fluctuate, but if you want to sell whatever you have, you should be able to sell it at any one time. So, the low price can be compensated in terms of productivity. And that is why, if I had a single cent, I would put it into research in order to generate technologies, especially for high quality seeds, stock and planting materials.  

Thirdly, to promote marketing, we must go for concentrated production, but we should not just go for production of any item that is not viable for purchase. That is why in research we are zoning the country according to ecological zones. We are coming up with agricultural research development centres that will concentrate and focus on those ecological zones and farmers’ needs as will be identified in collaboration with farmers and technicians. 

Even NAADS is now following the above. When they are discussing with the farmers, they identify what is viable in that area and what can be marketed. That way, we have pockets of concentration in production, and it will also ease marketing.

Regarding the distribution of coffee seedlings, I think that besides technical monitoring, we as Members of Parliament should also participate and monitor. And now that I see the weaknesses, I am going to cause my officials and secretary to circulate other guidelines because there have been guidelines before. For example, we tell farmers, “please, do not accept any seedling of coffee that does not have eight leaves.” You will find people accepting them, but where they are sensitised they refuse them. 

We are also involving LC I, II and III to see that they sign when the coffee is delivered. They are the ones who know the beneficiaries better. This time round, the coffee was supposed to be delivered to parishes. If in Mityana it was not delivered to parishes, then it was a problem of the nursery operators who are supposed to deliver them. 

People should take this seriously because this is also public money. Those seedlings cost us about Shs 400 each and, therefore, it is a lot of money that must really be appreciated. For them to be given to individuals and they leave them abandoned without planting them is sad. So, Members of Parliament, let us join and mobilise our people. When the seedlings are being delivered, you should become part of the programme and see that whatever has been delivered is planted and also delivered on time in the first place. 

Modernising does not mean using equipment like harvesters and tractors; it means becoming more efficient. Even small-scale farmers can become more efficient, as long as they have the attitude that they are in farming as a business. Two, you go for the high quality seeds, stock and plant materials. Three, you make sure that you use your soil and whatever natural resources sustainably, be it a paddock, a garden, or a fishpond. Four, you maintain your garden, paddock, or fishpond in order to maximise productivity. Five, you minimise post-harvest losses because you are in business. At the end of the day, what you take to the market is then actually maximised. And lastly on that issue, we are encouraging adding value through agro-processes. 

Actually, in PMA there are seven interventions, and perhaps I better take up the seventh, which is the question of education. Many have asked about what are we doing on the issue of education. The ministry is changing the curriculum of agricultural institutions. We are involved in different institutions like Arapai, Masaka and Bukalasa. We are changing their curriculum, and even that of the faculties of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine at Makerere University so that they focus on the new philosophy of modernising agriculture. 

There is already a programme aimed at restocking water bodies. That is something we have been doing for some time now. Even where there are big dams, which have been sustaining water for some time, we are restocking. I cannot give the number of fish fries that have been distributed off hand –(Mr Amuriat rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him wind up.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Since the honourable member for Kumi is my friend, we shall discuss the issues outside this forum. 

Like many other crops, even flowers, vanilla is a crop that came in through the private sector. We cannot discourage vanilla farmers, and we will continue to encourage them as long as there is a market. Once we get to know that there is market for it somewhere, we go in to ensure that we help with research on the same. We also help in extension work, control of pests and disease, and we ensure that we monitor this, and of course, work together with those concerned. 

But once a commodity qualifies to be commercial and is dealt with by the private sector, then that is the best. That way, they solve their problems; they know all the problems within that sector and they use us when they need us. So, vanilla is being encouraged because it generates money. 

What I would say is, do not extend vanilla to marginal areas where it may not be purchased. Let us have it in concentrated areas where it can be easily purchased.

The NARO technology development and dissemination: That is exactly what we are doing. They have developed a lot of technologies, but you know they are scientists. For instance, we have over 17 varieties of cassava, some of which have not been disseminated. The question is; are all the 17 varieties meeting the farmers’ needs? So, farmers are verifying what the scientists are doing. They have created an outreach; they are working in groups that evaluate these technologies, and that is one way of disseminating information. 

Decentralisation of research also helps in dissemination. We have centres like in Abii, Bulindi and others, which I will mention later. They are about 12 of them. This is another way of bringing the services nearer to the people, and this is what we are doing. 

Besides institutes like Namulonge, we now have agricultural research development centres like Mukono. We also have District Farm Institutes (DFIs), and these are the responsibility of each district. The agricultural development centres are just for training. 

At sub-county level, we encourage people to set up technology development sites, just one or two pieces of land for demonstration purposes. That is another way of disseminating information. 

Another thing, which will further encourage dissemination, is to ensure that we go for cost effective technologies that the farmer appreciates. And we are really working in this direction.

The NAADS project is a pilot project like any other. I remember I was the first Minister of Entandikwa and I designed it for just 75 sub-counties in the core Luwero Triangle, for three consecutive years. The seed money was supposed to go to the village banks, but when I went to Cabinet, they said, “Fort Portal has been hit by an earthquake, Rakai has been hit by AIDS, and there are landslides in Mbale, what can you do for them?”

When I came here, they said, “Oh, whatever you are saying is affordable in each constituency.” So, we stretched it to every constituency and what happened? I did not even have money left to supervise, not even to train anybody, and now it is a centre of criticism. So, with any project, we need to start with four districts, and this applies to the PMA funds too. 

We started with 24 districts, and we shall unfold in other districts. The only hope I have is that as I am examining my programmes in the Ministry of Agriculture, I have realised that there are so many other districts, which have an extension element like NAADS. All I am doing is to harmonise them. There are also many NGOs that are operating like NAADS. At the end of the day, you will find that I will have unfolded in many districts in a very short time.

I am really torn between concluding this as soon as possible, and also explaining to you so that you are convinced enough to approve the budget. But let me wind up with a few general issues. One of them is under-funding the ministry. This should be understood in context with the policies that guide the economy; these are liberalisation, decentralisation, privatisation and the restructuring of the ministries and the mandate I have. 

Whatever I am doing is to support, promote and guide production of livestock, fisheries and even crops. Where the private sector is still weak, we shall support it. Seventy percent of our farmers are subsistence farmers; they cannot demand for extension. We have to empower them through NAADS in order for them to demand for the services. But the sugarcane sector has grown so much that we may not have to do extension work there.

Then, PMA is multi-sectoral; it has taken a rural development approach. Whatever improvements are made in health, on the roads and on the bridges, they all contribute to the enhancement of the agricultural sector.  

If I have to attract more money, I have to work within these policies, and that is why now NAADS seems to be attracting more money than NARO. It is a new programme, which we created in order to have access to the local authorities, where extension had been decentralised. We did not have access to them, now there is a bridge. 

I am now embarking on reviewing NAADS, as it is bigger than NARO. What is in this report is that there is intention to restructure NARO. No, the intention is to review NAADS by bringing aboard even universities and private sector companies in research. That way, we shall examine how we are delivering services through NARO and this decentralised approach. 

I beg that you approve the little money that has been given to us. All I am going to do is to ensure that I interact more and hold more seminars in your respective areas so that it is fully internalised. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Agriculture, may I point out that we have some facilities upstairs, which are very conducive for discussions. You could adjourn there, with some members, and explain this in depth. 

MRS BENIGNA MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable members for their indulgence. 

In their recommendations, the committee noted that there is an embargo on the recruitment of scientists in NARO. I would like to clarify that this is not true. There is no embargo. What is obtaining is that in order to recruit more staff, there must be a post. And in order to implement that regulation, NARO has got to get clarification from the Ministry of Public Service. Otherwise, there is no embargo, as the impression has been created by the recommendations in the committee’s report. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, is there anything else you want to raise?

MR ODIT:  Madam Speaker, I am really grateful that honourable members have contributed quite positively to the motion. There were however one or two areas that were raised and these were –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I know the Rules of Procedure are very clear. There are a number of important questions, which we raised, which the minister has deliberately refused to answer. May I know why?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we discussed matters of agriculture when we were starting debate on this Budget. We started discussing these matters in March. In June, we spent almost two weeks discussing agriculture and other issues in the State of the Nation Address. In the general budget debate, you talked at length about these matters. Our committees have been discussing the same, and you had lots of opportunities to get answers. 

Nevertheless, the door is not closed. You can ask the committee chairperson to call the minister back on certain issues, but I do not think we can really answer all of them today.

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the attention of hon. Dora Byamukama to the fact that we did recommend where restocking should be placed.  

On the idea of credit for farmers, we have been told that PMA and NAADS are working on it. So, the process is there. It is our work to make sure that the process speeds up so that we get something to benefit the farmers. That is what I wanted to say. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
VOTE 010 – MINISTRY OF 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY 
AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,007,000,000, under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 110 – MINISTRY OF 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY 
AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 95,847,385,000, under Head 110 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, you first read a figure of Shs 98 billion and what we have now voted for is a figure of Shs 95 billion. Which is which?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is Shs 98 billion.

VOTE 043 – NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,587,000,000, under Vote 043 - NARO be provided for as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 143 – NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 32,030,341,000, under Head 143 - NARO, be provided for as development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Chairperson, I now move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports there to. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I wish to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the estimates of Vote 010 and Vote 043, and Heads 110 and 143 and approved them as follows:

• Recurrent expenditure, Vote 010 - Shs 6,007,000,000. 

• Development expenditure, Head 110 - Shs 98,847,385,000.

• Recurrent expenditure, Vote 043 - Shs 2,587,000,000 and 

• Development expenditure, Head 043 - Shs 32,030,341,000. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
 OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow we shall proceed as scheduled with the report of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, starting at 2.00 p.m. 

At 4.00 p.m. the body of the late Brig. Toko will be brought to Parliament – (Interjection) – Has there been a change? Let the Prime Minister inform us.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I am sorry, Madam Speaker, there have been a lot of requests and, therefore, I had just gone out to put some finishing touches. We have just agreed, that is why I moved out, that in fact the body of Brig. Toko will lie in state in Parliament at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. 

There was a view that Parliament could have met in the morning, but when we checked, no report was ready. That is why we did not stick to that arrangement. Then at 2.00 p.m., tribute will be paid to him by Her Excellency the Vice President, Dr Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe. 

On Thursday at 10.00 a.m., there will be a funeral service at All Saints Cathedral. On Saturday, burial will take place at Mvara in Arua District.  Her Excellency the Vice President is going to represent Government. I am very sorry, Madam, Speaker! I should have availed you these matters, but the contingent element was ubiquitous and I had to cope with it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much! Now, honourable members, in view of that, I think I would like to give you notice that we may have to inconvenience you further by either calling you on Friday afternoon or on Monday to finish this matter within the constitutional deadline. I have given you notice. So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 August 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


