Tuesday, 22 August 2006.  

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you to this sitting and also to take this opportunity to thank you for what you have been doing as far as Parliamentary work is concerned. We adjourned the sittings because of the Budget and you have been tirelessly working on the estimates of your respective committees. I hope you have completed that work and, therefore, I thank you. 

I want also to thank you for the constituents’ work which you have been able to carry out. On this particular note, I want to thank the honourable Member for Ruhama for having taken the constituents away from Uganda to see the development elsewhere. 

Honourable members, you are aware of what is happening to our country in as far as peace is concerned. The most important business in as far as peace is concerned is what is going on in Juba to find a solution to the problem that has faced us for the last 20 years in Northern Uganda. 

As the Speaker, I have received some communication on this issue, which I should read to you. This is a letter, which I received from Joseph Kony, the leader of LRA -(Laughter) But I could not read it to you because we have not been sitting. I do not know how the letter reached here but it did reach my office. (Laughter)

The letter is dated 1 August 2006 and it is addressed to hon. Ssekandi, Speaker of Ugandan Parliament. The Subject is “THE ON-GOING PEACE NEGOTIATION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND LRM/A: I wish to, first of all, take this opportunity on behalf of the LRA High Command, the entire LRA and indeed on my own behalf to congratulate you upon your recent re-election as Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. 

We in LRA do fully associate ourselves with the confidence the people of Uganda through Parliament have put in you. We do hope that you shall remain the beacon of hope for Uganda to steer clear of our turbulent past and current politics.

In the last few months, it may have come to your knowledge that the Government of Uganda and LRA have been engaged in finding peaceful solutions to the current armed conflicts between the Government of Uganda and the LRA. I wish to reaffirm and reassure you of our firm commitment to this process and hope that the Government of Uganda is equally committed. I have already appointed and fully mandated the LRA delegation in which I have full confidence. 

As you are aware, many of the items of discussion in the peace negotiation have bearing on constitutional and legal provisions of the laws of Uganda. It is, therefore, my hope that Parliament shall give its full backing to the process and find ways and means of integrating them into the laws of Uganda. 
Yours faithfully, 
Gen. Joseph Kony
Chairman, LRA High Command”

This letter was copied to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister of Uganda and the Leader of official opposition, Parliament of Uganda. This is the letter, which I received and it was addressed to you. Unfortunately, I do not know how I can respond and deliver the reply –(Laughter)- but there is need to support and pray for the success of these negotiations. 

And then recently, Members of Parliament from the affected areas wrote to me that they had been invited by the person steering the negotiation to go and attend the peace talks in Juba. It is only today that I received a letter, which was touching that particular subject. It is again addressed to the Speaker and signed by Dr Riek Machar, the Vice President, Government of Southern Sudan. 

Fortunately, the Members from the affected areas went and joined the negotiations, and today hon. Betty Amongi is back. I saw her - we shall be adjusting the Order Paper to allow her make a report to us. I understand she is to fly back to Juba to continue with the negotiations. But maybe I should read a letter because it is also for you.

The subject is “Participation of Members of Parliament from affected communities and Parliamentary Committee of all parties in the Juba peace process between Government of Uganda and the Lords Resistance Army. 

Allow me to extend my compliments to you and make reference on the above subject matter. As you are already aware, the Government of Southern Sudan has initiated peace talks between the Government of Uganda and LRA with the view of facilitating the parties to solve the 20-year conflict through peaceful means. 

To support the initiative, we would like MPs from the affected areas and a Parliamentary Committee of all parties to come to Juba to advise the parties, including mediators in the peace process. 

In short, I am inviting through you, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Toolit Simon, hon. Malinga Johnson, hon. Jimmy Akena, hon. Okello-Okello, hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Mike Ocula and hon. Odonga Otto from affected areas in addition to a Parliamentary Committee of all parties of your choice to travel to Juba on Friday 11/8/2006 for the same purpose. 

We appeal, through your good office, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, to support the Uganda peace process in Juba and allow the above members to travel to Juba to assist us in our mediation role.” 

The letter is signed by Dr Riek Machar, Vice President of Southern Sudan. This is the communication I have received on this subject.

I said we shall allow hon. Betty Amongi to make a statement. But before I complete, I want to inform you that we have been looking into the issue of welfare of honourable Members of Parliament in particular transport and office accommodation. We have a problem of office accommodation because we had expected to get a building but we did not have funds. But now we have finished the exercise of allocating offices; we have allocated offices to parties and the independent Members of Parliament.  The official whips of various parties have been informed about the allocation and they will be the ones to allocate you depending on which party you belong. 

But before this exercise was carried out, a number of Members of Parliament were occupying the offices that had been allocated by the previous Parliament to the districts. We now appeal to you to please surrender the keys to the Sergeant-at-Arms so that he can hand over the same to the whips so that they can carry out the necessary exercise. For the independents, I will be carrying out that exercise. I thank you.  I think it is time to adjust your Order Paper so that hon. Betty Amongi can make her statement.

STATEMENT

2.41
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I am making a statement, which was agreed on in Juba by members of the delegation that had travelled there. 

On Friday, 9 August 2006, the Chief mediator of the peace talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), His Excellency, Dr Reik Machar Teny- Dhurgan invited Members of Parliament from the affected communities to travel to Juba to advise the parties and the mediating team in the peace process. 

On Friday, 11 August 2006, four Members of Parliament: Hon.Betty Amongi (Head of the delegation) hon. Johnson Malinga, hon.Jimmy Akena and hon. Simon Toolit-Akecha travelled to Juba for the above purpose. The delegation has since held consultations with parties, the mediating team, lobbyists, the traditional and cultural leaders and the President of the Government of Southern Sudan, His Excellency Dr Salva Kiir. 

A decision has now been taken by both parties and the mediating team that the delegation should remain in Juba for the entire duration of the peace process since their presence has made a substantial contribution to the process. The mediating team has also welcomed an idea of adding extra two members from the NRM to the four Members of Parliament already in Juba to help balance the political opinion in Uganda.

Delegations Report to the Mediator

The delegation affirmed to the Chief mediator their appreciation of the people of Uganda and the Government of Southern Sudan on the role they are playing in ending the 20-year-old war through dialogue. 

The delegation acknowledged and commended the personal commitment of His Excellency, Dr Reik Machar in propelling the process. The delegation assured the mediator of the support of the Government of Uganda in ensuring that restrictive legislations are amended or enacted to facilitate a comprehensive agreement should the parties agree on a peace deal.

The delegation also affirmed to the mediator that the initiative that they are pursuing reflects the wishes of the people of Uganda, and specifically the people of Northern and Eastern Uganda and all arms of government are supporting it. 

The delegation reported several initiatives being carried out by Members of Parliament from the affected areas, including forming support teams to link with the Executive, international community and to mobilise the community to support the traditional mechanism of reconciliation and accountability.

Findings of the Consultative Meeting: We are convinced beyond reasonable doubt that both parties are committed to resolving their differences through dialogue. The only disagreement is on the approach and method of achieving this goal. 

The parties have agreed on five agenda:

1.	Cessation of hostility
2.	Comprehensive solution to the conflict, tackling the route causes of the conflict.
3.	Reconciliation and accountability
4.	Ceasefire agreement
5.	DDR(Demobilisation/disarmament/reintegration and resettlement).

Three issues remain central to the negotiation. One, cessation of hostility: Parties have serious disagreement on the need to cease hostile attacks like fighting, propaganda and the use of abusive languages. The parties also seem to disagree on what constitutes cessation of hostility, its terms and conditions and whether or not it should be combined with ceasefire.  

How to Resolve the ICC Question

Debate now centres on the question of whether or not Uganda can withdraw the case from the ICC; whether or not the prosecutor and the judges can be convinced that the traditional mechanism of reconciliation in Acholi called “MATOPUT” can be an alternative form of delivering justice for victims; whether or not all the victims can accept “MATOPUT” as an alternative form of justice without descending voices; whether ICC actually has the power to arrest the indicted LRA considering that Parliament has not operationalised the ICC Treaty by an Act of Parliament; whether any state or international body with or without the authority of ICC can arrest the indicted LRA members from a country that is not a signatory to the ICC and whether or not ICC can be convinced to offer an assurance to the indicted LRA members to come and attend talks in Juba. 

Fortunately, the mediating team has solicited the services of a renowned consultant well grounded with the principles and practices of international law and the ICC Rome Statue who is here in Uganda to help Parliament on this issue. He has already met both parties in Juba and discussed the subject with a mediating team and his programme for Parliament will be communicated later. 

Mistrust and Suspicion:

Both parties keep expressing reservations on the fact that the other party is not serious. There also seems to be reservations on whether or not parties can leave up to the agreed position should the comprehensive peace agreement be reached. However, the suspicion and mistrust seem to be fading slowly by slowly.

Contention

The two parties are contending on whether or not the Juba peace process should resolve all the aspects of the five agenda. While one party is suggesting that to expedite the process, the parties should only address the principles, structures and frameworks for implementing the parties concern, another party is insisting that the Juba peace talks must address the principles, structures and programmes in detail, including agreeing on a framework for the implementation of those programmes. There is also a strong belief that the present delegates to the talks are not largely representing the interest of the indicted members of the LRA.

Status of the Talks:

The first round of the talks involved discussing and agreeing on the agenda for negotiation and presenting preliminary position papers on those agenda items. 

The second round of the talks after a break, which allowed a confident trip to Nabanga and Garamba, has so far centred on submitting detailed position papers by both parties on the agenda items. 

From Friday last week until Sunday, there were presentations from experts on contentious agenda like how to resolve the question of ICC, cessation of hostility, ceasefire and so forth. 

The mediating team has given both parties up to Tuesday this week to finalise on their position paper. After receiving all the papers, the mediating team will harmonise the submitted position papers and then negotiation on differing positions will begin. 

There are also pending presentations from other experts including that on conceptualising “MATOPUT” within the framework of ICC. Our analysis is that both parties will not meet the deadline of 12 September 2006. Our appeal is that if the talks are progressing positively, this Parliament should support the parties by appealing for extension of the timeframe of the talks.

Meeting with His Excellency Salva Kiir, President of the Government of Southern Sudan: On 17 August 2006, the delegation held a fruitful discussion with the President of Southern Sudan, the Vice President, Dr Riek Machar, and the Minister for Internal Affairs, Lt. Gen. Daniel Awet Akot. 

During the meeting, the President committed himself to ensuring that both parties do not pull out of the talks. The President reiterated the commitment of his government in continuing with the Juba peace process and assured the delegation that his government is genuine, independent and will treat both negotiating parties equally. 

The President informed us that he had already consulted various governments in Europe, Africa, USA, the UN and international community who have already supported the Government of Southern Sudan in ensuring the suspension of the ICC indictment for the top LRA leaders. He also assured us that the same governments have pledged to support his government in stopping the prosecution should the Juba peace process succeed. 

He pledged his personal and government’s commitment in protecting Lt Gen. Vincent otti and other members of LRA combatants by providing security if they accept to come to Juba for peace talks. 

He appealed to us to inform Otti and Kony not to be threatened by the presence of the UN foreign troops in Juba since these are guests of the Government of Southern Sudan under the security and protection of Southern Sudan monitoring the comprehensive peace agreement between the Government of Sudan and that of Southern Sudan. 

He assured us that his government is doing everything possible to ensure that the Government of Uganda takes a lead role in reassuring the LRA by accepting declaration of cessation of hostility. At this moment we are very grateful that this issue has already been resolved. 

He assured and reassured the parties that the Government of Southern Sudan will provide safe corridor to a safe zone in Southern Sudan for LRA, will feed them and provide international monitors if the two parties agree on terms and conditions of cessation of hostilities.

Conclusion

We are very confident that the Juba peace process is on truck and that it has all the potential of delivering peace. We encourage all stakeholders to support the process through various activities. On this note, I would like to announce that AMANI will be sending a team of five Members of Parliament to support the peace process.

We thank those who have done everything within their power to support the process and most heartedly thank His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for accepting to engage in this process and for accepting to declare cessation of hostility within an agreed limited time framework. 

We thank the Speaker for his unreserved support to this process despite all the challenges that come with it. 

We appeal to all Ugandans and to Members of Parliament to depoliticise this process so that we all facilitate the process to its logical conclusion. I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable member for the report. Honourable members, this is not a personal statement but it is a statement made by a Member and our Rules allow a limited debate for 30 minutes if any.

2.54
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo):  Honourable Speaker and fellow colleagues, first of all, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Speaker for providing an opportunity for my sister, hon. Betty Amongi, to give a brief report on the goings in Southern Sudan. 

I would like also to thank her and many of our colleagues who offered themselves to go to the Sudan in order to help this process. I would like to inform Parliament on a number of things so that when they respond, they have a complete picture of what has been going on. 

Mr Speaker, the newspapers probably never did mention this but I was one of the members of the communities from Northern and Eastern Uganda who travelled from Gulu to Nabanga in Sudan and then later walked on foot to meet the LRA somewhere in the Garamba Forest. 

The reasons why the newspapers never reported my presence was that I did not participate in making addresses. My primary intention was to go and observe the processes, try to understand what was going on and therefore to have an appreciation of the process in such a way that I will be able to advise. 

It was clear to me, Mr Speaker- and I would like the House to note this- it was clear to me that the LRA leadership both Joseph Kony and Otti - I was one of the 10 people who stayed in that camp overnight - were committed to the peace process. 

It was also clear to me that many Members- I had them say this independently that the two believe that President Museveni is genuine about this peace process. 

 It was also absolutely clear to me that the negotiating team particularly the Government of Southern Sudan was fully committed and was prepared to make all the necessary sacrifices to see that the conflict in Northern Uganda is expedited. 

It is on the basis of that data that I returned and just kept quiet because I was from that time more than convinced that if we do the right things and we give this processes the necessary support, we shall see peace. It may not be next month, but I believe within this year, we shall see peace and total peace in Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, when we came back, I was also supposed to go with a team to Southern Sudan but knowing the commitments that I have in Parliament, I could not travel. Unfortunately, when I did not travel, allegations started appearing. In fact, the newspaper reports on the goings in Sudan have been matters of great concern to those who are conducting the peace negotiations in Southern Sudan because in many instances they seem to misrepresent what was going on there. 

They also generate a gloom, which is not what we need to support the peace process. So, when I did not travel, and my colleague the Chairman of Gulu, Norbert Mao, did not travel, it was alleged in the media that the government delegation objected to our presence in Southern Sudan. 

I would like to put it on record that when a need to travel arose, I wrote to the Rt. hon. Speaker and the hon. Prime Minister. Both the Rt. hon. Speaker and the Prime Minister wrote back giving me authority and any of my colleagues that I thought would help the process to travel. Therefore, they represented to me what government is and not the newspapers or anybody who makes such allegations. 

Similarly, we have seen repeated allegations particularly in the Red Pepper that Col. Besigye has a delegation in Southern Sudan, is now the one commanding the LRA; this is the kind of cheap politicisation of the conflict in the North that has made the conflict drag on unnecessarily for all this long.  I would like to state as Deputy President of the Forum for Democratic Change Party that the politicisation of the conflict in the North has made the conflict drag on unnecessarily for this long.  

I would like to state that we in the FDC and the entire opposition are fully supportive of the peace process in Southern Sudan. We do not have any party delegation in Southern Sudan and we do not want our names to be used to undermine the ongoing peace process.

Mr Speaker, I would like to register my appreciation to you personally. The last Parliament got actively involved in the field in supporting the peace process and in supporting the suffering people of Northern Uganda. For this, we are very appreciative.  

In this regard, I would like to kindly request - because as members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, we also had our own discussions and we thought it was important for us to put our position to the Uganda Government, to the Government of Southern Sudan and to the LRA. Our chairman, hon. John Okello-Okello, on our behalf wrote a number of letters. 

I kindly request that before you open up the debate to the House, the position of Acholi Parliamentary Group is also made known to Parliament so that when people debate they know that we are all one in the process.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we are constrained with time. According to the Rules, we should have only 30 minutes for this. If he could summarise instead of reading the letters, he will have saved a lot of time. The gist of the position is the most important and then we proceed.

3.02
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua county, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 11 August 2006, the Acholi Parliamentary Group wrote three letters. The first letter was addressed to the Government of Uganda, the second to the Government of Southern Sudan and the third to the leader of the LRA.  

The gist of our letter to the Government of Uganda was to record our gratitude and appreciation for the change of mind that the government had shown by going to talk peace with the LRA.  We recorded our thanks and appreciation on behalf of the entire Acholi community and we encourage the President and his entire team to continue with the dialogue so that our suffering people could have peace.  

The second letter was also in appreciation to His Excellency, Gen. Salva Kiir, the President of Southern Sudan.  We thanked him for the initiative his government took to come to our rescue at the time when we needed it most.  

We expressed that as far as the people of Northern Uganda are concerned, we look at this process in Juba as our last hope.  We pray and hope that nothing will derail the peace process. This way, the suffering of our people will be brought to a peaceful, speedy and dignified end.

We pledged our commitment to do all that is required of us to support the peace process, reconciliation, reintegration, resettlement and all that will come after the conclusion of the peace process.

The letter to Gen. Joseph Kony was about the peace process. We sent greetings to the leader of LRA, his high command and the entire LRA on behalf of the people of Acholi and on our own behalf.

We thanked the LRA leadership for showing courage by coming out to negotiate with the Government of Uganda.  We repeated what we have said in the other two letters concerning our people at home and the entire North. We told him that we look at the peace process in Juba as our last hope.  We urged the LRA to make all the possible sacrifice so that our people could go back home and live like other human beings.

Mr Speaker, this was the gist of the three letters.  I am convinced that this last letter reached Garamba national park, because a few days later, I got a missed call from Kony. On the evening of the same day, I was driving back home with some friends. When the telephone rang again, one of the friends who was not an Acholi received the call and answered, “Wangi.” The thing was switched off immediately.  I later on checked and found it was the same call I had missed. I think that was a total discouragement and I do not think they will try that number again.  

Mr Speaker, we sincerely apologise for inadvertently missing to copy these three letters to you. It is very important that as our leader in this Parliament, you are kept posted of all the things that go on here.  However, the day we wrote those three letters, we were on pressure.  The plane to Sudan was leaving at 3 p.m. and all the letters were supposed to go so we did everything in a hurry. 

 I would like to put it on record that we have written a letter of apology to the Rt hon. Speaker for having omitted to copy the three letters to him. We sincerely apologise to you, Mr Speaker.  I thank you.

3.11
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking two clarifications.  The first one arises from your communication from the Chair.  You expressed doubt about the methods of delivery of this letter and the difficulty you are going to have in replying to it. I would like to find out from you whether you have established the authenticity of this letter for you to be able to communicate it to us.  

The second concern is the role we would like to share with our colleagues on the opposite side. A nation is like a human body. If any part of the body is hurt, the rest of the body feels the pain. The persistent insecurity in the North has been a pain not only to the affected areas, but also to the rest of the country.  When our people in Acholi suffer, the people in Kisoro feel there suffering. Consequently, the matter of peace and security in the North is a national matter.

Mr Speaker, it is in this regard that I am seeking your guidance about the role of Parliament negotiating peace with the parties in conflict, as well as with foreign governments who are mediating in this peace process.  There is a delicate balance of the separation of powers between the Executive and Parliament, which Parliament plays the oversight role.  We really feel that every effort must be made for this peace process to succeed and consequently - The clarification I am seeking from you is if the conflict is between two sides, on which side is Parliament negotiating peace?  These are matters on which your guidance is clearly very important.    I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  First of all, I do not know what to say about the authenticity of the letter but there is a seal.  This is a seal of LRA. The letter is signed. The kind of handwriting is very neat, associated with the training of the people from the North. I have no reason to doubt the authenticity. 

As for the Parliamentary role, it is good that today I received this letter. These are people who initiated the idea and encouraged people to come and talk peace.  They are the ones who invited the Members of Parliament from the affected area to take their wisdom to assist them.  What we are interested in is that we get positive results. Members of Parliament who are representing the suffering people as a result of the atrocities committed were invited. Therefore, as representatives of these people, they have something to add to this peace process. (Hon. Members rose_) Honourable members, the 30 minutes have ended –(Interruption) 

3.16
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform this House that I also found two letters from Kony in my pigeonhole on Friday. One was addressed to His Highness Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru, the King of Toro. The other was to His Highness Solomon Iguru Gafabusa the King of Bunyoro.  These letters were not sealed so when I found them in my pigeonhole, I was very inquisitive. I found the letter headed with LRA; Gen. Kony signed them, in green ink. The handwriting was really neat. I wondered how these letters ended up in my pigeonhole. I immediately contacted the Sergeant-At-Arms to explain how they got there. 

Luckily enough, hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs was coming in and I shared this with him. I told him the letters wrongly ended up in my pigeonhole. I asked him, “May I pass them over to you so that you give them to hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who is mediating our peace talks in Juba?” I am beginning to see how these letters ended in my pigeonhole. Maybe hon. Okello-Okello - I do not know if you are the one who put them there but you should have had the courtesy to contact me and request me to deliver these letters.  (Mr Okello-Okello rose) I am not saying you are the one, hon. Okello-Okello, but I am just suspecting.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, this is a small matter.  We very well know that there are people who have links with Kony. They could be the ones who brought these letters. We should end this debate by praying for the success of these peace talks. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  I think it was on a light note actually, so it was not very serious. As I asked you, did you send this by DHL? You answered that the letter reached, so do not worry. Let us end this debate.

MR KALIBA: Mr Speaker, what worried me most are the members of the press who were there, they sent news to my constituency that the Member of Parliament for Fort-Portal Municipality had been arrested with Kony’s documents in Parliament, and my people got very worried, I had to dash to my constituency to explain. That is why I am saying that it is good manners to inform your colleague that, “Please, kindly deliver these letters, they are from a, b, or c” so that we do not get such misunderstandings by the press. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us end this because you said 30 minutes; those are our rules.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have a pertinent clarification.

THE SPEAKER: A clarification to whom?

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have just been following what is going on here and I thought that government would get an opportunity to officially brief this country and brief this Parliament so that we are able to make our input into what is going on. It is a big national issue and I was wondering, because the deadline is 12th September, when government would come in here officially, notify us and we submit to the process? 

THE SPEAKER: Then that cannot be a clarification from me, maybe it is to the Leader of Government Business, he is the one who knows this.  

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first concern is that we should move in a coordinated manner because if Ugandans go to negotiate and take conflicting sides, it will be disastrous and we shall be blamed forever. So, it will be very important - and I intend to meet you outside Mr Speaker so that we agree on how to move in a coordinated manner. For example, we do not need to send Members of Parliament from the NRM when government is negotiating.  

The second point I would like to make is that we thought about making a statement to Parliament but it can be prejudicial when negotiations are going on. That has been our concern, but we shall reflect on this matter, consult the President, and see whether we can make a statement. What we would like to avoid is any act, which is injurious to negotiation because at one stage as a negotiator for a return of ebyaffe, I avoided making a statement until we completed. Some people were provoking me, I just refused and we were successful; a lot of our things were returned. So, I have a bit of experience in these matters. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to the rules, we have gone beyond 30 minutes. You have received a statement and some people have made reservations on it but the problem is that the people who are conducting – because if you blame the Members of Parliament who went, they are the ones who invited these Members of Parliament. So I think we have to talk with those conducting the talks so that they do not involve others. Otherwise, this is the letter and I will give you a copy.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the first time. I also accordingly lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications for the same.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the first time, and I beg to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications for the same.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2006

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2006” be read for the first time, and I beg to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications for the same.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the first time, and I beg to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications for the same.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES, (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the first time, and I beg to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications for the same.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on table the following papers:

(i) 	The Income Tax Act, Cap. 340 - The Income Tax (Designation of Payers) Notice, 2006;
(ii) 	Statutory Instrument on Tax and Duties (Provisional Collection) Order, 2006;
(iii) 	Statutory Instrument on Value Added Tax (Rate of Tax) Order 2006. These were already presented to this Parliament by the Minister of Finance.  

I also beg to lay on the Table a request by the Government for Parliament to capitalize the Civil Aviation Authority in respect of on-lent loans totalling to US $24.1 million and US $27.7 million from the Governments of Spain and Denmark respectively. This is to enable the Civil Aviation Authority undertake immediate and medium-term investments. I beg to lay on the Table.  

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee of Parliament study the document and submit a report to us.  

3.29
MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006
II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND 
EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/2007

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you remember this is a motion that was moved on 15th June when the Minister of Finance read the budget. I also remember that before we went to consider the estimates this same motion was repeated. The Shadow Minister of Finance gave his statement and we also received a statement from the Chairman of the Budget Committee. Now, debate is open for you to deal with this motion.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on how we are going to handle the reports from committees. In the past, before various committees presented their reports the Budget Committee would sit with the Minister of Finance and make some adjustments, which are pertinent to the estimates. For example, if today we discussed the report of Local Government and Public Service with the estimates and approved it and passed it then tomorrow when we sat as a Budget Committee we would propose some adjustments. Do you think that would be possible? 

This is because in the committee where I sit we believe that we shall need the involvement of the Budget Committee to address certain problems like a whole urban sector having almost zero allocation in the budget. We think that we cannot present a report to this House for approval with almost zero allocation for certain sectors. I seek for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is consider the issues involved with this sector as a committee, make your recommendations then Parliament will decide.  

3.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr William Wopuwa): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, before I proceed in presenting the report of the committee allow me to lay on the Table the report and the minutes of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government as stipulated by rule 193 of the Rules of Procedure.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee considered the policy statements of the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Local Government, Public Service Commission, the Local Government Finance Commission and the Local Governments of Uganda. We had opportunity to meet the Second Deputy Prime Minister, the hon. Ministers of Public Service and Local Government, the chairmen of commissions and their technical officers. I want to thank them for the support and information they gave us, which allowed us to discuss the report.  

On page 2, we have Vote 005 for the Ministry of Public Service. Bullet 2.1.1 is a list of the planned activities and programmes as at 2005 and 2006. On page 3 we have development activities, projects and other specialised activities of the ministry while on page 4, bullet 2.2 we have the amount of funds that were appropriated for the Financial Year 2005/2006. Bullet 2.3 contains supplementary appropriations while bullet 2.4 contains the amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance. Bullet 2.5 contains achievements for financial year 2005/2006.

Specific achievements, which were registered by the Ministry, include the following: 

a)	Salaries, pensions and gratuity claims are being paid promptly by the 28th of every month, though we have shortcomings in some districts.  
b)	The payrolls for the entire public service were monitored and those with deficiencies were corrected.  
c)	The Parliamentary Pensions Bill was drafted.
d)	The Public Service Reform Strategy 2005-2010 was drafted and circulated.
e)	Modalities for the contributory pension’s scheme were finalised.
f)	Severance packages were paid to 3,292 compulsorily retired staff of local governments, leaving 1,708 cases pending.  
g)	The Human Resource Capacity Building Policy was finalised. 
h)	Reports on the customised local governments’ structures for districts and urban authorities were published.  
i)	Assistance was given to ministries, departments and agencies in respect of restructuring.  
j)	Technical assistance was provided to ministries and departments on how to manage and preserve records.  
k)	With a supplementary of Shs 769,890,028 the Ministry arranged the burial of the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote and the renovation of buildings in Kololo, Lira and Akokoro. On the recommendation of the Ministry of Works, additional funding is required to refurbish the estates.  

Bullet 2.6 on the same page contains pending or ongoing activities and programmes for financial year 2005/2006. 

Bullet 2.7 contains the planned activities of financial year 2006/2007 from (a) to (n). We also have planned development activities and these include procurement of machinery and equipment for retooling the departments, procurement of furniture and fixtures for offices and procurement of motorcycles and vehicles. The vehicles are between <2000 c.c. to <3000 c.c.  

We also have projects and other programmes listed down. Under bullet 2.8 we have the amount of funds requested by the sector. 

The committee examined the policy statement and made the following observations: 

Concerning payment of salaries it was noted that while salaries were being paid every month, we still had problems especially in districts arising from a number of factors that included:

•	Problems in inter-bank transfers, 
•	Delays caused by district officials in processing payments,
•	Unauthorized diversion of salary funds. 
•	Weak inspection of the ministries due to low funding.

We also observed that there was a problem of salary awards where organized groups of civil servants demand for salary increments and usually they attract the attention of the President. This, however, puts mainstream civil servants in the ministries and departments who are not members of the unions at a disadvantage.  

Concerning facilitation of former leaders, the committee noted that a range of allowances and services including transport were being paid to former leaders. The committee noted positively the Government’s contribution towards the burial expenses of the former President Dr Apollo Milton Obote.  

The ministry though, through its compensation department, manages matters to do with pensions and terminal benefits, defence pensions, survivors’ benefits and compensation for former employees of the defunct East African Community. However, the committee observed that the outstanding pension arrears were Shs 320.7 billion, which includes the Shs 17.5 billion that government undertook to assist local governments. While the Government is commended for making a provision of Shs 51 billion –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, some of us do not have copies of the report being read and we are not able to follow. I wonder whether something could be done about this because we are hearing but not following what is going on. Why should fewer copies than the number of Members of Parliament be produced? I think everybody should be catered for. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We have been informed that they are producing a number of copies for you so soon you will have them. I think in the meantime he should proceed. 

MR WOPUWA: While government is commended for making a provision of Shs 51 billion in the 2006/2007 budget to cater for arrears, there was need for more focus on matters pertaining to compensation and payment of terminal benefits. Pension arrears were attributed to revision of the Pension Act, which was backdated to 1988 by calling for revalidation of the pension quantum. 

The Ministry reported that while it could largely meet the monthly pension payment for 28,000 beneficiaries, it could not adequately manage the problem of arrears due to cash flow problems and failure by the Ministry of Finance in granting them the entire funding gap. Whereas this is the case, the ministry has categorized the arrears as a priority and brought it to the attention of the committee. 

The committee noted a number of challenges in the management of pension and gratuities. These included:

•	Delays in accessing the pension payroll after retiring.  
•	Failure by the Human Resource Management Department in the entire Public Service to make a follow-up of persons expected to retire within six months.
•	In addition the committee noted that much as districts are required to meet the pension obligation of the respective local governments, they have over the years been unable to meet the obligation. 
•	The delays in paying pension arrears and East African Community benefits continue to attract a seven percent interest. 
•	Delays in processing claims were also noted as a result of the ministry’s failure to customize the computer software.

Concerning pensions for Members of Parliament, the committee noted that the Bill was passed but referred back to Parliament for amendment in respect of the percentage contributed by MPs and the Government. The committee noted with concern the silence that has surrounded the Bill since it was returned.

Concerning pension reforms, noting the numerous problems caused by the existing setup, the Government is progressively working towards establishing a contributory pension scheme. The committee was informed that the adoption of the scheme and enactment of legislation in the form of the Public Service Pension Fund and Pension Authority Bill should address all the anomalies and the impediments currently being affected.

The committee also looked at government offices and observed that government was spending a lot of money. For example, the Ministry of Local Government and Local Finance Commission were spending over Shs 1 billion in annual rent.  

On the issue of the National Records and Archives Centre, the committee noted that the absence of the centre and its structures put the country and government in a critical situation and in danger of losing vital records through destruction or poor management.  

Concerning the Public Service Commission Bill, the committee commended the ministry for having finalised and processed the Bill and passed it on for Cabinet’s consideration. The Bill has been outstanding ever since the commission was set up in the 1995 Constitution.

Concerning payment of severance packages, the committee noted that over Shs 9,943,336,829 was paid as severance packages yet there were a number of staff who had not been paid.

Concerning severance packages for former staff of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television, the committee received the petition and observed that despite preparations to start Uganda Broadcasting Corporation the Public Service Commission abolished the civil service posts of all workers of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television with effect from 30th September 2005. Despite all this, the workers were kept ignorant about the abolition and more so without getting information in respect of their retirement and retrenchment benefits. The beneficiaries informed the committee of several eventualities in payment of the packages, which were inconsistent with the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act, 2005.

The committee noted that in the financial year 2005/2006 Shs 244,875,000 was budgeted for as a wage component for district environmental officers. However, none was released.  

All the ministries and the commissions that appeared before the committee observed that the rising cost of fuel and lubricants have curtailed their operations. While this has been brought to the attention of the Ministry of Finance, minimal increments if any have been made to their fuel and lubricants budget. 

Mr Speaker, the committee made the following recommendations to the Ministry of Public Service. 

1.	The Ministry should enhance its inspectorate role to ensure that public servants are paid by the 28th of every month. 

2.	In a bid to promote fairness and equity, the Ministry should rationalize salary payments across the board so that public servants in the mainstream public service receive salary increments commensurate with requests by unionised workers.

Mr Speaker, we made recommendations on pensions and pension reforms. The committee says that out of the Shs 51 billion approved for settling pension arrears, Shs 5 billion should be redirected to offset the Shs 17.5 billion due to local governments. 

The Government should also consider amendment of the law so that it takes over the responsibility of pensions for all local governments.

The committee made a recommendation of facilitation of former leaders, the National Records and Archives Centre, the Public Service Commission Bill, payment of severance packages and a general increment in the fuel and lubricants budget.

Concerning Vote 146 of the Public Service Commission, the committee commended the commission for the exemplary work it has shown throughout the years.

Page 12 consists of recurrent activities while page 13 handles development activities, the amount of funds to be appropriated for financial year 2005/2006, supplementary appropriations, the amount of funds released by Ministry of Finance and the commissions’ achievements for financial year 2005/2006. 

These achievements include: 

(a)	Handling renewal of contract appointments for permanent secretaries; 
(b) 	Recruitment of four principle assistant secretaries;
(c) 	Consideration of a total of 2,343 cases of appointments, confirmations, promotions and disciplinary action. 
(d) 	Handling the revalidation exercise of local government accounting officers particularly CAOs, deputy CAOs and municipality town clerks.

Bullet 3.6 handles ongoing activities and policies that the committee examined.

Bullet 3.7 comprises of planned activities for financial year 2006/2007 and they include the following: 

a)	Recruitment of 40 CAOs and 45 deputy CAOs especially for the new districts;
b)	Filling all vacant positions including those to be filled by fresh graduates;
c)	Prepare the Public Service Commission annual report;
d)	Give guidance to the district service commissions;
e)	Conduct promotional interviews for common cadre staff;
f)	Handle all disciplinary cases;
g)	Conduct civil service psychometric tests;
h)	Train staff in basic computer packages.

Bullet 3.8 handles the amount of funds requested by the commission both for recurrent and development expenditure. The committee made the following observations especially on filling vacancies: 

(a)	That the new ministries should have their staff filled so that they can perform. 
(b)	The exercise of appointing the administrative officer in local governments should be handled expeditiously. 
(c)	Existing vacancies arising from restructuring in districts and policies on civil service examinations. 
(d)	Concerning the commissions’ policy on job adverts, it was reported that one page of the New Vision advertisement is about Shs 3.5 million and in many cases this had made it very difficult for the commission to fulfil its work.

Concerning relationships, the committee was informed that the relations between the District Service Commission and Public Service Commission are good and they give regular guidance to each other. 

The committee made the following recommendations:

(a)	All filling interviews arising from the past adverts should be handled expeditiously.
(b)	Consultations into the institutional home of chief administrative officers and municipal clerks should be concluded soon.
(c)	The commission should make a follow up of persons who present sworn affidavits so as to eliminate the threat of employing unsuitable public servants.

Regarding relationships with district service commissions, the commission should assist district service commissions by conducting interviews on their behalf at the expense of those districts. 

Furthermore, the consideration of the Public Service Commission Bill, which is now before Cabinet, should be expedited and tabled in Parliament within the first half of this financial year. Its consideration is expected to strengthen the commission and give it further guidance.

We also recommended that there be harmonisation of capacity building workshops for district service commissions.

Concerning Vote 11 for the Ministry of Local Government, in bullet 4.2 we looked at the performance of the previous budget 2005/2006.

Under recurrent activities we looked at the development activities raised in the policy statement, projects and other specialised programmes, the amount of funds appropriated in 2005/2006, the amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance, and achievements of the sector during 2005/2006. A list of the activities and achievements are listed on page 21. On page 22 we have pending or ongoing activities and programmes for 2005/2006.

Concerning the list of the development activities, the Ministry will continue to support local governments to effectively and efficiently levy and collect property taxes, implement trade licences reforms, streamline the management of market dues and implement a local revenue generation strategy.

On page 25, the Ministry has mainly four projects: the Local Government Development Programme Phase II, the District Development Support Programme, Area Base Agricultural Modernization Programme and Household Agricultural Support Programme. 

Bullet 4.9 contains the amounts requested by the sector, recurrent expenditures, development expenditure, projects and other activities. 

The last commission we examined was the Local Government Finance Commission. The commission exists to promote equity in sharing of revenue between central government and local governments as well as to promote efficiency and effectiveness in local revenue mobilisation and generation by use of best practices in a conducive policy and effective legal environment.

Bullet 5.1 handles the performances of the previous budget from (a) to (l). Bullet 5.2 handles the amount of funds appropriated for 2005/2006 while bullet 5.3 handles supplementary appropriations, which were nil. And 5.4 deals with the amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance both recurrent and development. The achievements of the Local Finance Commission 2005/06 are from (a) up to (g). 

5.6 are the pending activities. These activities include: 

a) 	The report on the mechanisms for accessibility of grants by lower local governments is in the process of being drafted. 

b) 	The sensitization of stakeholders on the new allocation criteria is still pending due to Cabinet’s failure to consider and adopt it by the close of the financial year.  

c) 	The development and co-ordination of the national standards for service delivery was not included.  

d) 	The review of alternative sources of financing local governments was not carried out partly due to the commission’s inability to attract funding and partly due to a similar study being done by the Ministry of Local Government.

The commission did not do it partly because there was no funding and partly because the Ministry of Local Government is also doing a similar exercise.

5.7 Planned Activities:

Complete the process of designing the mechanism and modalities for access by lower local governments of central government grants. The planned activities are listed up to page 29, and the amount of funds requested for by the sector as recurrent expenditure and development expenditure are indicated there.  

The committee made very serious observations on the Local Government sector as a whole:

Three new districts that were created, Lyantonde, Bukedea and Bududa, have not had their votes created. The districts do not have votes.

The decline in local revenue generation especially after the suspension of graduated tax has greatly affected local governments’ programmes especially for raising funds for co-funding. The LGDP II alone requires Shs 6.6 billion, and we have LGDP, NAADS, and PMA.  

While the Government is commended for providing Shs 30 billion in the budget, Shs 34 billion was issued out as tax compensation in the last financial year. The Ministry of Finance directed that money should only be used for starting up new districts, paying political leaders and emoluments for leaders. In effect, there was no money left to run decentralized services. 

The money that was supposed to be used for compensation to run councils, including LC III and district councils, was targeted at paying the new political leaders and starting up districts. As a result, many of the councils, including LC IIIs, have not been able to fulfil their statutory obligations.  

In this financial year, there is a provision of only Shs 25 billion and yet the estimated cost of local revenue from graduated tax is supposed to be Shs 80 billion. The Shs 34 billion was not enough. What is being provided now is Shs 25 billion.

Much as the legal framework places the obligation on the local governments to pay pensions, Government has only been able to pay severance packages of these people who were restructured, leaving the gratuity and pension, which is bigger, to local governments.

Consequent to the introduction of the regional tier system, it was also noted that the operationalisation of the regional tier system has not started.

While tender boards were abolished and subsequently replaced by contracts committees under the new regulations governing procurement and disposal of assets in local governments, it was noted that gaps still exist in their supervision.

The committee also observed irregularities of the Local Governments National Assessment Teams in respect to objectivity and regularity of their activities. The committee noted that the assessment teams were not objective.

With the enactment of the Local Council Courts Act, it was noted that the dispensation of local justice had not yet gained momentum due to the absence of standards and regulations.

Note was also taken of the laxity with which local governments perform their legislative role, in addition to their failure to apply by-laws. When we looked at the policy statement, there were less than 10 districts that had made by-laws on their own. Our interpretation was that the local governments do not have the capacity or they have a problem on how to make by-laws, which are essential in our operations.

We also observed that while there is an arrangement to share assets, there is no provision to share liabilities. In many cases, the new districts walk off without debts and leave old districts with all the debts.

The committee also noted that currently grants provide 90 percent of the total budgets of local governments. As such they are the main source of funding for service delivery and yet the mechanism for their allocation is subjective, non-transparent and inconsistent. While the Local Governments Finance Commission has developed a new formula taking into account views of stakeholders, the Cabinet is yet to consider and adopt it.  

We looked especially at the Ministry - when you look at page 32, the allocations of SFG, you find that Adjumani’s budget was approved at Shs 709,888 but at the end of it they had received over 120 percent. Kaliro whose SFG was 90 million had received 506 percent. Tororo Municipality only received 46 percent. 

The formula in place lets the district officers and the respective ministries decide on how to allocate unilaterally. We looked at the current formulae of allocation, but they are not uniform. The Local Finance Commission has made that policy, but Cabinet has not taken it up. 

We also looked at the unconditional grants, which go to the districts. According to the Constitution, an unconditional grant is meant to allow local governments run decentralized services. However, most of the unconditional grants are swallowed up in wages. We took the case of Mpigi, on page 31. All their money put together leaves a shortfall of Shs 49,386,000. That type of formula makes it difficult for decentralised services to be run because most of the money is swallowed up in wages.

The committee also noted, on Page 31, from 1991, 2001 up to now, the unconditional grant continues to decline. The money, which is available for running services, continues to decline every financial year and yet the cost of public administration increases. For every new district, for example, you need a standard chief administrative officer, an engineer and heads of department. The cost of administration rises but the unconditional grant available to run decentralised services has been decreasing. The ministries prefer to increase conditional grants and if you look at this percentage, it has increased from 79.2 to 87.2.  Now, this does not go well with decentralisation.

We also noted that the Ministry of Local Government is understaffed, especially the inspectorate department. There are only 14 officers, including commissioners and assigned commissioners, who are administrators generally.  There are 14 officers to inspect 80 districts and over 100 municipalities. It is impossible to get good services from that team. 

The committee also noted the disharmony between the Local Governments Finance Commission, the Ministry of Local Government and other local government associations. The relationship between the Ministry of Local Government, the Local Government Finance Commission and the Uganda Urban Authorities Association is not good, and yet these are all key stakeholders in implementing decentralisation. We hope the new ministers coming in will be able to address that problem.  

The committee commended government for increasing teachers’ salaries and calls upon them to extend similar services to other areas of the public service so as to enhance the steadfast implementation of decentralisation.

Recommendations on the Local Government sector

Noting that graduated tax contribution to local governments before being interrupted was about Shs 80 billion, government should increase the current Shs 25 billion to Shs 45 billion for tax compensation. 

We examined the budget and selected a few ministries on items of motor vehicle maintenance.  Between 2005 and 2006, the component for motor vehicle maintenance was Shs 25 billion. For 2006/07, the component for motor vehicle maintenance, including fuel, is Shs 82 billion.  Now, consider that all rural district roads take Shs 4.5 billion, the urban roads take only Shs 4.4 billion and yet you have Shs 82 billion for maintenance of vehicles. If we repair the roads, we will have more money on the roads and then we shall have less costs on the vehicles because the damage by the roads will go.  

The committee also recommended that the unconditional grant component be divided into specific items. We should have unconditional grants with a wage component. It is possible to establish how much money is required for the wages in the district then you have money separately for the unconditional grant.  

In the absence of an alternative source of revenue to replace graduated tax, government’s compensation for it should be reviewed. The amount of tax compensation should be reviewed upwards. 

The local government national assessment team should streamline their operations and areas of interest, which should be known to local governments well in advance.  

Noting the inhibitions of implementing the local government council courts, the Ministry of Local Government in conjunction with the Solicitor General should expedite the drafting of the necessary regulations in the Act.  

The Ministry of Local Government should develop a comprehensive policy on sharing of assets and liabilities during the creation of new local governments. Currently, only assets are shared leaving all the liability with old districts.  

While the Local Government Finance Commission has developed a new grants allocation criterion, the Ministry of Local Government should spearhead its consideration and adoption by the Cabinet. The Ministry of Education should support the policy so that grants being allocated under SFG and other programmes have a definite transparent formula. 

A harmonious working relationship should exist between the Ministry of Local Government and other local government associations. When you put the Local Governments Finance Commission together with the Uganda Urban Authorities and other local government associations, all of them are very negative about the Ministry of Local Government.  

The Ministry of Local Government should strengthen its inspectorate division.

Noting that there was no clear formula to select only 10 districts out of the entire 80 districts to benefit from Shs 16 billion money for SFG, it is recommended that this money should be distributed equally among all districts. 

The Ministry of Finance should take the advice of the Local Finance Commission before setting indicative figures for local governments. 

Mr Speaker, the impression we got from our interaction with the sectors is that, the Local Finance Commission is deliberately being made redundant. When indicative figures are being decided, it is not consulted, it is not informed.  In fact, it appears that the Ministry of Finance has left the responsibility of allocating funds to desk officers. 

We also recommended that the districts of Lyantonde, Bukedea and Bududa whose votes have not been created be handled through a pro-agenda.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But did you put the question as to how the districts are going to be financed to the ministry concerned? Did you not get an answer? 

MR WOPUWA: We made consultations and they said they could handle it. We made consultations with them after looking at the budget book and they will handle it the way we have recommended.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the House considers and adopts the committee’s report together with their respective budgets for the financial year 2006/07, covering the following votes:

•	Vote 05 - Ministry of Public Service: 
	The recurrent expenditure is Shs 3,442,000,000. Development expenditure is Shs 23,940,214,000. 

•	Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government: 
	Recurrent expenditure is Shs 5,089,000,000 Development expenditure is Shs 77,390,149,000. 

•	Public Service Commission:  
	Recurrent expenditure is Shs 2,033,369,000. Development expenditure is Shs 800,000,000.

•	Vote 147 - The Local Governments Finance Commission: 
	Recurrent expenditure is Shs 1,640,008,000. Development expenditure is Shs 120,000,000.  

•	Vote 501 –761 - All local governments of Uganda  (annex attached): 
	Combined recurrent expenditure is Shs 797,658,159,000. 
	Combined development expenditure is Shs 164,605,373,000.  

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and the committee for the report.

4.14
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Mr Speaker and my colleagues, it is my honour and duty to present an overview of the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2006/07 in respect of the Ministry of Local Government – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But how are you going to do this? Are we going to get views or debate the report itself?  Are the shadow ministers not part of the committees that make these reports? Do they not get the opportunity to air out their views during the proceedings of the committee? I think each shadow minister is going to present a report when actually these views should be expressed and discussed in the committee. The officials concerned should be summoned during the committee and then you work out a report. This is my view.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am in receipt of a letter from the Clerk to Parliament, copied among others to you, requesting us to come up with a minimum of five and a maximum of 10 votes that we the Opposition would wish to make a presentation on and have lengthy debates. This is in accordance with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Practice. 

I have just been consulting with him as to whether we have identified the votes that we would want to have full debates on. I have not agreed on which votes because I am yet to consult the party headquarters. I am however aware of the fact that by 31st of this month, as demanded of us by the Budget Act, we should be through with the work that is ahead of us. That is the procedure, which I received.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, it is not necessary that we debate each report. In a multi-party setting like this one, the Opposition is given an opportunity to select some votes, which they think require serious debate but others, once tabled here, are passed. Later, a committee that thinks the policies of a sector under it require further debate can requisition time after the budget is passed, so that we can in detail examine the policies and workings of those ministries. 

We may have 17 ministries and I do not think we shall debate each ministry. If the Opposition have say five or so, we concentrate on that and the others we adopt and then proceed. I do not know whether I am clear. Apparently they are not ready; they have not selected which votes, so we can now receive other reports while they make up their minds.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, while we are considering the selection of the five and maximum of 10 votes, how about those who had already taken time and made inputs? Will it be proper, for purposes of sharing information and reading, that in the course of this budget debate they be allowed to circulate their views to the Members so that if the views can be considered at an appropriate time we –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Circulate them. Who denies information? You can do so.  

MEMBER: Mr Speaker, hon. Arumadri John is a Member of this committee. I am seeking clarification as to whether he is presenting a minority report or otherwise. According to our Rules of Procedure, if he is a Member I do not think he is supposed to contribute. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You are a Member of this committee and this is your report. If you do not want to call this your report, you should have produced a minority report. We know how these are produced, but we do not have a copy of the minority report -(Interjection)- It was not signed, I know. I have been chairman of these committees; some people are just not there. It is not that because they have not signed, they are not part of the report. Is it a minority report that you want to present?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, at the beginning of this 8th Parliament under a multi-party dispensation, I remember coming to you in your Chambers to seek your opinion among others as to where the shadow ministers should be assigned responsibility. Earlier on, we did not want them to be assigned responsibilities in the ministries that they oversee. However, you did advise me that they should be assigned responsibilities in the ministries where they are responsible so that they can be privy to information. 

I asked as to how their views that are not acceptable to government will be brought on board. You did tell me that they will be given an opportunity to give their views which are not presented. I thought that was really the spirit, because now everything has really caught us off-guard.

THE SPEAKER: When I said they will be given an opportunity, I meant it. I think the shadow ministers who are sitting in the committees have opportunity to make their views and even to question the officials of a ministry. When they are writing the reports in the committee, they take into account the views that are expressed by the shadow minister. 

When you are a Member of the committee, you will say, “call the permanent secretary so and so, call commissioner so and so to explain.” He comes and explains to the entire committee. The entire committee takes the views expressed and he uses such information to make the report. You could also be in the committee but you disagree with the conclusion. If you disagree with the conclusion then you make a minority report.  

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, these are very changed circumstances. The circumstances under which we used to sit together and make reports were under a one-party system with the Movement system. We have now changed and the opposite view has been given a hearing. You attend the committee to be able to know what is going on there and make a presentation. 

But definitely the Opposition should be given chance to make its own view of what goes on on the Floor of the House. And it is on the basis of this understanding that we became Members of these various committees.  We learn what goes on there and express ourselves but we do not necessarily have to go on with the majority view and it looks clumsy always to be presenting a minority report. So, I think the circumstance should be that the Opposition should be in a position to make an alterative position of what they see and of what has come out as a policy statement.

So really perhaps we may have to re-organise ourselves as we move. For example, as we speak presently I know of committees, which have not yet completed their reports but they are already on the Order Paper. So, it appears this being the first time we are appearing, we are stampeding ourselves into a situation and as we move, we should be able to polish up this arrangement and be able to hear all views on the Floor of the House and not only in committees, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Does it mean that when a Member of the Opposition is on the committee he/she is not part and parcel of that committee? Because when he is in the committee, he will be able to express himself; in fact, the committee may adopt his views and write them in the report. But I think so long as you are given the opportunity to express yourself in the committee, I think it must be an end to this. 

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, that is the Clerk of Parliament who wrote to the Opposition to indicate which ministries we think we should debate and it is on that basis that we think we make alternative positions. But even the Members of government, it is in their interest to be able to express their views on the Floor of the House where they think they may not agree with what has come out of the report otherwise people are just going to be dragged.

THE SPEAKER: That has not been our practice. Our practice is that, if you are a Member of a committee, and a report is given, you leave the other people who are not Members of the committee to contribute to the debate. But if it is the position that you have selected this particular report, we accept it; that it is one of the five although you have not conclusively reached which one. We take it that way.

MR KAWANGA: If we agree on that position that the Whip can indicate if they have agreed on that one and then we shall be able to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let people speak when they have been identified.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, we are not invading away, before we reached where we are, I had an opportunity to seek opinions and views of very many people who sat in this Chamber before us.  The last multiparty Parliament was from 1980 to 1985, and having the opportunity for the Opposition to present is exactly what used to be the case. Even if one went to the library and read the Hansard of 1980 to 1985, this is how Parliament operated at that time. I think for us to get enriched and informed by history is equally useful.

THE SPEAKER: If you think that this is one of the reports you should seriously debate let us take it as one of the five. Maybe by tomorrow you will have indicated to me other votes, which you want to debate. Let us take it that way as we sort ourselves out.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO:  Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, we have agreed I think with him that this is one of the five.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: No, this is not about the five, Mr Speaker.  This is a very important matter, which actually should be determined right from the beginning. From time to time, oppositions challenge to give an alternative view.  If they cannot do it on this Floor, where else can we give our alternative views? 

Mr Speaker, we are no longer under the Movement system and between five and ten opposition Members should be at liberty to give alternative views on all the policy statements; not just on who is to decide on what criteria.  I think we should be free to give our alternative views on all policy statements. We are not going to sacrifice this country to time. I think we should be considered.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, no one disagrees with you; but my question is, why do we set up committees of this nature in this Parliament? And why are these committees constituted so that the opposition Members sit on them? What is the function of these committees in respect of this matter? Nobody disagrees with you; you should be given the opportunity. 

I would be the last one to say you do not, but the thing is, what was the role of these committees sitting for so many days, calling the technical people from various sectors? You had them there, they gave you answers and the things were digested and eventually you decided to make a conclusion. Or otherwise we can say, let us do away with the committees that everything is debated without the committees that will be different. But anyway we have to sit and examine this issue. Meanwhile, I think let us treat this report, which has just been presented by the chairman as one of the committee that the Opposition wants to go into details. (Prof. Kamuntu rose_) Are we still on this, otherwise I do not see the end really?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very, Mr Speaker.  We have it under our rules that the Opposition will provide a chairman of certain oversight committees, including the Public Accounts Committee. Now, if it was a question of providing an alternative even when you have been a Member of the committee itself, when the Public Accounts Committee comes to present by the chairman from the opposition, it would imply that the government should also give its alternative view which would be really clumsy.  

In other words, I am agreeing with you, Mr Speaker, that when a Member has been participating in a committee and a committee is giving a report, if we allowed him to provide an alternative what it would amount to is, in the committee he might abstain since he will have a chance to come and give his alternative views on the Floor of the House, we would have an endless exercise. So, why I thought your guidance should be repeated is a fact that the Opposition is given special opportunity on selected committees so that by sampling you provide more critical areas -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Point of information.

THE SPEAKER: No, if you say information and the person holding the Floor does not yield it means he has rejected your information, those are the rules.

MR EKANYA: I think he has yielded.

PROF. KAMUNTU: No, I did not yield.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and hon. Ekanya knows the rules very well, I did not want him to interrupt. I just wanted to finish by saying that your ruling is within the provisions of our procedures. By giving them a sample vote on which they provide an alternative, it saved them repeating what you would have already agreed in a report.  

THE SPEAKER: The impression I get from what has happened is that, the Opposition or Members who have stood from this side treat the committee’s report as a government report. No, that is not the position; it is a report of a committee of Parliament. Otherwise, if it was a government report, they would simply have adopted what the Minister of Finance read and say, “We totally support it.”

As Prof. Kamuntu has said, we may face a situation where a Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, who is from the Opposition, will make a report here, and then you hear people on this side say, “That is the Opposition’s report.” They may disown a report, which might have been presented by a chairman from the Opposition side. This is the trend you may develop here, and it is not good.  

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, in view of the intricate situation in which we are, I beg to suggest that we sleep over this matter, consult and come up with a stand tomorrow. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So, in that case what do we do, we receive another report? Was this the only report we had?

MS BETI KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have an answer to hon. Kamuntu’s question, but I know that receiving alternative policies is a hard won right of the voter. The voter has to know and hear an alternative policy. And my understanding is that, the work done in a committee as is laid down in our Rules of Procedure is to scrutinise government policy, which government policy draws its mandate from the President’s manifesto. The alternative policy is not necessarily in the President’s manifesto. So, I think that we must find a way to finding space for the voters to enjoy their right of hearing the alternative view. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Then, honourable members, will it be the view of the honourable Member for Lubaga North and the Shadow Minister for Agriculture, that those in the Opposition would sit, consider the budget on their own and these on this side sit and consider their budget, so then when they bring the report later they will say – I suppose the committee comprises of people from both sides.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our rules provide for these kinds of dissenting views, and you are right to make a minority report and declare it, and it can be read concurrently with this. But otherwise, you cannot split the committee according to parties.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I am really surprised because I was a very democratic chairman, and I had two shadow ministers on our committee. We had the hon. Rebecca Otengo, Shadow Minister for Public Service and my brother, Shadow Minister for Local Government. Many of the issues that we have raised in this report captured all opinions. They were not necessarily those of the government side because they would not have come out like that. I am really surprised, but I think we shall –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As the Opposition Whip has said, we need to sit down and sort out this, otherwise I see problems cropping up.  

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, like you did rule, if the Members of the Opposition missed the opportunity of presenting their views during the committee, they will miss the fundamental opportunity to interact with the Executive arm of government, which will not be part of this Floor of the House. It will depend on why the Members of the Opposition are raising the issues that they are raising. If they want to raise the issues for purposes of changing the course of government and the policies, it makes more sense when they raise their issues in the committees.  

For example, Mr Speaker, in the Committee of Natural Resources we are privileged to have the Shadow Minister for Water, who was also a former employee of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. During deliberations of the committee, she was so useful that she gave us information, which as a committee and Members of the government side, we would not have had without her presence and her recommendations have been incorporated in the proceedings of the committee. Now it will depend, if the desire of the Opposition is to act to the gallery so that they may be heard, then the Floor of Parliament will be their position. But if the issue is influencing policy, the committee would be the best venue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.    

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we may not be able to resolve this issue here. But as you heard from the Opposition Chief Whip, I think we want to have a small meeting where we shall deal with this question and report to you the way forward later.  But my view is that, a report of the committee is not a report of government, it is a report of a committee of Parliament reporting on a budget presented by the Executive and we should see it that way. But we shall sort out this issue with a few of you and then report back. Honourable members, I understand that there is no other –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give information to my colleagues from the other side. Possibly in future if they feel the shadow minister wants to make a presentation, then he/she should not be a Member of that committee so that he/she is able to make his/her presentation. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling you have just made. I just want to get clarification on one matter. In the course of the consultations, would it not be safer if we deferred the entire process of presenting reports so that we come out with a clear position, maybe tomorrow or the day after tomorrow? My fear is that, to come to a conclusion harmoniously would require a response for each of these reports – I do not know what would come out. But in case it is not that position, there will be no problem.  So what I am requesting is that, we defer the presentation of the rest of the reports for a while so that when we agree on a position it is clearly harmonious to all. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But you see, the Budget Act, which was enacted in 2001, says 31st August. Anyway, give us opportunity to sit and we shall report tomorrow because if we don’t then it means even tomorrow we shall not sit. I think we shall find a way out.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be helped by you just to appreciate ordinarily why we created the shadow ministers. What role did we expect them to play? Because when we put them to the committee – I am at least conscious of the fact that in our committees there is no specific tailor-made assignment for the shadow ministers. My understanding of the shadow ministers was that they would be able to make an alternative policy response to the ministerial statements.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly you are shadow to the substantive minister, therefore, you cover his activities and you are free to bring out weaknesses in his policies of that particular government; and mark you, we do not debate ministries’ policies only during the budget, you can requisition time as a Shadow Minister for Transport to debate a transport policy. That will be done, but what we are saying is, should you disown a report where you have been part and parcel? You participated in the debate, in interviews, maybe you have signed it, and then you come here and say that is a government report! It is not a government report. It is a parliamentary report. But we shall sort out this, honourable Member.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not think the shadow ministers and the Opposition Members who participated in the committees just want to disown those reports. Neither are we keen on minority reports. We are keen - because this is a multi-party dispensation - to provide an alternative policy position, which may not necessarily be availed or covered in the committee report and it is in the best interest of multi-party development that we allow for an alternative position because our existence as the Opposition is not about winning the vote of the day - we do not have those numbers.  But the best thing we can offer to this country is an alternative thinking, is information, which can be used by those that are in power and those that have the numbers. So, it is still my view, and I hope that we do not just consider the presentations of shadow ministers as things that will be relegated to minority reports. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, let us explain this. I entirely agree with what you have said.  I think what you are suggesting is how we write these reports. Maybe we have to improve on the way we write these reports in the sense that when the committee is writing its reports, it comments on the views expressed by the opposition that, “During the proceedings, the Shadow Minister for Lands made this observation. The committee considered the matter, but in light of what we received, we did not move with him, we moved that way.” So that that position is captured in the report and they have it here that that view was expressed. When we start debating it as a Parliament here, we may comment on that view.  

But, honourable members, let us leave this please.  Since hon. Wadri Kassiano said that he wants a meeting, we shall have a meeting, discuss this and report to you tomorrow. But I want to assure Members of the Opposition that you are entitled to express your views in the committees, or if the matter is not in the committee, to express them here during the plenary. I understand there are no more reports, let us adjourn prematurely until tomorrow.

Maybe before you go, this is something that I should have raised before. Our rules say we sit on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; Monday and Friday are not in. But I am faced with a problem of power.  You see, the load shedding by UMEME is different from our programme. You may find that UMEME supplies us with power on Monday the whole day when we are not sitting. Honourable members, I am appealing to you, for purposes of this budget, let us work on Monday and Friday. On Wednesday we may work in the afternoon to enable the Cabinet sit because we need them here, but let us agree to work on Monday and Friday. We are not changing the rules, but the Speaker can always appeal to the House to give in more time. That will be only for purposes of handling the budget process. Is it agreed?  

HON. MEMBERS: Aye!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.49 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 August 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)


