Tuesday, 23 August 2011

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you back to the plenary. I note that you have been busy in the committees, dealing with the policy statements. But I have also received information that you have been supporting each other in the constituencies. I want to encourage you to continue supporting one another, because it enables you to understand the problems of the country, so that when Members raise issues here, other Members are able to understand what is going on in those areas. 

But since we last met, two sad events have occurred: One is that, hon. Jack Sabiiti lost his mother, Mrs Bakainaga Thabitha. She will be buried tomorrow in Rukiga. 

As if that was not bad enough, last night we received the sad news of the death of a former Member of Parliament, the late hon. William Giboni Wanendeya, who passed away yesterday. Mrs Wanendeya Aidah and the children are up there. 

Hon. Wanendeya was a prolific debater in this House. If you look at the Hansard of the NRC, he made a lot of contribution. He had a lot of staying power in this House and contributed to almost everything. So, we are sorry about his death. His body will lay at home today from 3.00p.m. and there will be a service at his residence. Tomorrow there will be another service at Kisugu Church of Uganda, after which the body will be transported to Budadiri in Mbale and the burial takes place on Thursday, 25 August 2011 at 2.00p.m.

I want to make clarification on the Order Paper. Item No.4 is a motion, which we had left in abeyance since the 21st of July but which the Minister for Finance has written to me requesting to withdraw, and I asked them to do it formerly. So, this item will be handled by the Minister of Finance, not the Minister of Energy. It is just for formal withdrawal, not for debate.

2.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I think it is important that today, we observe a minute of silence because of the many people we have lost. It is also very important that hon. Wanendeya, a former Member of Parliament, be recognised in the House today. He is one of the people who contributed highly to the development of this country, and it is in that regard that I wanted to make a few remarks about him. 

I know that colleagues who worked with him know him well, and I hope they will also make some contribution, if you do not mind, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I have no objection.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I come from Budadiri where hon. Wanendeya comes from. I joined politics in 2001 and he was my advisor and mentor. And without him, maybe I would not be standing before you here to debate. Those who knew hon. Wanendeya know that he was a straight man; and we know from our history that wise people come from the east, and Wanendeya is from the east and you will agree with me that he was a wise man.

Until the time of his death, he has been fighting for good governance in this country; and good governance calls for integrity, accountability and transparency. 

He is also one of the people who have contributed a lot in the co-operative movement, particularly in the coffee sector. As those of you who are old may recall, he was one of the first chief accountants of the Coffee Marketing Board and the developments made are clear to us. He led in the issue of buying a house in New York; and in UK, there are two houses and one in Mombasa. So you can see his contribution in this country. As much as that coffee was from Bugisu region, it is the people of Uganda enjoying the benefits.

During the NRC, during the debate on stock exchange in Uganda, he was the first person to talk about stock exchange. He was a lead person, although it passed later when he had left. He gave a lot of reference with regard to stock exchange in UK, New York and so forth. He even made a paper which he presented. There are people who later adopted it and treated it as if it was their own idea, but it was hon. Wanendeya who introduced stock exchange which we are enjoying right now - and that is why I said that wise people come from the east!

But it is very unfortunate that despite the contribution of this Member, there is nothing that was done to show that he made a contribution, which we recognise as Ugandans. It is very unfortunate that many of our Members of Parliament, who were here since the 60s, are not well off; some just foot. We forget about them as soon as they leave Parliament, and that is one of the unfortunate things we have gone through. 

A person like hon. Wanendeya should not have been forgotten because his contribution is well-known. In fact, you remember one time he was contemplating seriously and he closed his eyes, and they said he was sleeping. When he rose up he said, “I was not sleeping; I was contemplating”, and he contributed immediately repeating what had been said even in a better form. 

So, while we make the laws, we should also appreciate people. Hon. Wanendeya made a big contribution and he has left a family. But here we only remember people when they are dead; then we start talking good about them. But when they are alive, none of us bothers to know how they are. Hon. Wanendeya has been coming to the precincts of Parliament, but I am sure nobody bothered to know about him - not even Government! 

Recently, I met him and he told me he had been visiting the Speaker of Parliament. I do not know what he had gone to discuss. But one of the things, I said he should discuss, is pension for all Members of Parliament who have retired from the 1960s to-date.

I am lucky in Bugisu, where I come from, there is one more still living called Muduku. I think he was here in the 60s. I know Gen. Moses Ali knows him because they were together. If you look at the state of life he is in, it is a very bad life yet those are the people who have been around, contributing a lot in this country! 

Recently, we were making the laws and during amendment, we took care of the retirement benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. [Mr Tumwebaze: “And the Leader of the Opposition?”] Well, the Leader of the Opposition was left out, which was also an error. We made a very big mistake. You have said the right statement. The Leader of the Opposition should have been taken care of, even if I am one of those who should benefit in future as Leader of the Opposition. Even Members of Parliament; there should be some retirement benefits, which should be given to them in recognition of the job they do in this House. I do not think we are fair to our people when we do not take care of them when they retire. We should do so.

Hon. Wanendeya is one of those, maybe as Parliament, we should do something for in honour of his contribution to this House. He should be recognised. We should look for a token as appreciation to his family for his contribution to this country.

Finally, hon. Wanendeya, as I said, was fighting for good governance. He has died when it is not yet complete. I think the struggle for good governance continues in his memory. Without good governance, this country cannot move anywhere. That is the reason I am calling on all colleagues to continue with the fight for good governance so that we can have a good country where all of us can benefit. 

I know, hon. Wanendeya has gone! He was my mentor. I will miss him; the family will miss him; friends will miss him; relatives will miss him but, of course, God gives and God has taken. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I hope a Member will eventually move a motion properly. I just wanted to make two clarifications: 

One is that, the Parliament of Uganda, during the Eighth Parliament, took steps to look into the welfare of retiring Members of Parliament. That is why we approved the composition of the Parliamentary Pension Trust Board last week. That is one of the steps. I think Members and the country should understand that for many years, there was no Parliament in this country; therefore, many systems were not in place. I think the Eighth Parliament took steps to rectify that situation.

The second one is that, before his death, Mr Wanendeya had compiled a book entitled Origin of Man Uganda. It is a unique form of a visitor’s book containing information about the origin of man, which he said can be traced to Mount Elgon in Eastern Uganda. The book, which I will ask the clerk to table is here, he brought it to me. It contains 1,500 masculine and feminine names arranged in alphabetical order, showing their origin, gender and meaning. Many of the names have Greek, Latin, Arabic and Hebrew origin. He advised that the readers, buyers or users not appearing in this book should inform him so that in the next edition, their names will appear. He dedicated the book to his parents, his family - Aidah and the children sitting there - friends and ancestors. 

One of the things he had come to discuss with me was permission to display and market his book. This was about 10 days ago. I agreed that he can display it here and Members buy it. I want to encourage you to assist me fulfill his wish. I did not know he was about to die, but I had already given him my consent to come and market his book. Buy it and use it as a good source of information so that you can understand the meanings of your names. I want the clerk to assist me table this book by hon. Wanendeya. Do you want to lay it? Let me ask the Leader of the Opposition to lay it on the Table.

2.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay, as instructed, a book entitled, “The Origin of Man Uganda: Mom Y2K Visitors’ Book with Names, Origin and Meanings” by W.G. Wanendeya. I am proud of him. I wish to lay this book on Table. 

Since he said, “Those who will miss” he wants them to inform him; they can now inform him through me. I will handle that because – (Laughter) - I want to declare that I have a lot of information, he gave me when he was alive, concerning the origin of man and how government affairs have been conducted and how corruption has thrived and who are involved. I have a lot of information on Coffee Marketing Board, on Bugisu coffee, on BCU (Bugisu Co-operative Union), which Government wants to take and how we, as Bagisu, have lost as a result. I have a lot of information. At a later stage, I will lay it.

In that regard, I want to move a motion that we pay tribute to hon. Wanendeya who has contributed a lot of good works to this country and this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do it formally so that it is on the Hansard. I have a draft text. 

motion for a resolution to pay tribute to the late hon. William Wanendeya, former Member of the National Resistance Council and CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY  delegate moved under Rule 42       
 
2.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, motion for a resolution to pay tribute to the late hon. William Wanendeya, former Member of the National Resistance Council and a CA delegate moved under Rule 42: 

WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the untimely demise of the late hon. William Wanendeya, which occurred on the 22 August 2011;

AWARE that the late hon. William Wanendeya was a Member of the National Resistance Council and a Member of the Constituent Assembly, representing the people of Budadiri County in what is now called Sironko District;

RECOGNISING that the late William Wanendeya is credited for his contribution to issues on the national economy, and he was one of the architects for establishment of the Parliamentary Committee on National Economy;

NOTING that the late hon. William Wanendeya was a dedicated, articulate legislator of the National Resistance Council, an open-minded politician and a distinguished elder of this country from Bugisu;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1.	It collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the nation as a whole, upon the loss of this gallant and industrious legislator of Uganda.

2.	That it takes cognisance of his distinguished services rendered and contributions made by him in the National Resistance Council, the Constituent Assembly and to the nation.

Moved by Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, from Budadiri West.”

THE SPEAKER: I know that only a few Members knew hon. Wanendeya. Can I ask hon. Nasasira to second the motion. 

2.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I also want to express, on behalf of Government and on my own behalf, our heartfelt condolences on this loss of hon. Wanendeya. We want to express these condolences first to the family and the people of Budadiri and indeed to the people of Uganda. 

As Madam Speaker said, there are very few people here who were with hon. Wanendeya in the NRC, and I happen to be one of them together with Madam Speaker. 

We spent a good seven years in the NRC with hon. Wanendeya. He was an articulate debater. They sometimes used to call him a maverick and sometimes a rabble-rouser. But he definitely used a lot of his long time experience in service, especially with the Coffee Marketing Board and his knowledge of the economy, to make major contributions. And as you heard, at that time parliamentarism was starting in Uganda and so this is where the ideas of forming parliamentary committees started. He definitely made a major contribution during the NRC.    

I also knew Wanendeya because we were together in the Constituent Assembly, where he made major contributions. His contributions have made it possible for this country to establish the rule of law, democracy and good governance. 

Therefore, I feel for these years I have known hon. Wanendeya, who had seen experience of military coups, dictatorships and people running into exile - I am sure if he was here, he would also confirm that there has been qualitative change in the democratisation policy and practice in this country. 

He also made a contribution to the 1995 Constitution during the Constituent Assembly and he was also a signatory. I remember he wasn’t one of those who didn’t sign that Constitution. 

Therefore, I would like to express my most heartfelt sympathy and sadness. I will not sit down before I also mention that I knew Wanendeya socially because we shared the same sports and social clubs, where again he was an active member. So, I have known Wanendeya socially, in the legislature and outside. Definitely, he has contributed a lot. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy you mentioned the developments that have taken place in this House that see to it that when Members retire from here, they have a pension. We sometimes tend to blame Government when someone, who worked for Government, passes away just because the systems have not been in place to ensure that there is social support to those who have contributed. I am sure hon. Wanendeya got all his rightful terminal benefits. But because he was in the House at the time when the pension scheme was not there, he had to depend on what he was doing after his service to this country. We salute his service and we hope his soul will rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you each speak for three minutes.

2.55
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi in paying tribute to the late hon. William Giboni Wanendeya. As you know, we the people of masabaland have lost an elder; a person of distinction; a person of high standing among our people. 

I came to interact with the late hon. Wanendeya during the Constituent Assembly, when I was representing the people of Bubulo County East and he was representing the people of Budadiri County, which is Sironko District now. 

The late had distinct qualities that this House needs to take time to pay attention to. I acknowledge the description given by the other colleagues who have spoken before me. But I also want to add that the hon. Wanendeya had been a great family person. He was one of those people who made sure that they established themselves firmly: married in holy matrimony; with children and well established both at home and in town here at the city, Kampala. He is one of those few bamasabas at that time who put up permanent structures in Kampala in the up market places of Muyenga.

The hon. Wanendeya will be remembered for being one of the key legislators this country has had. Not only was he eloquent and articulate but he was also a fiery speaker. He was the type who spoke his mind objectively and he had such courage to speak about any subject under the sun. He feared nobody except God. And he would tell us, most often in Lugisu, when he starts his arguments that, “Musima lya wele” before he would even start saying anything. Meaning, in the name of God whatever he is going to say would be the truth and nothing but the truth. And he would go on to expound his points and bring facts to support his arguments. This taught me a lesson that when you are supporting an argument, you better have facts. (Member timed out.)

2.58
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late William Wanendeya. I first met Wanendeya in the Constituent Assembly and indeed as said, he was a man of humour. He persistently told people that the three wise men who visited Jesus, when He was born, came from the East. So, he kept telling people that wise people always came from the east. (Laughter) 

Wanendeya became a Member of the National Caucus for Democracy we formed in the Constituent Assembly to see how we could caucus as the opposition. Though we were told, when we were going for the CA elections, that there was no Opposition, we were not supposed to go on party basis, when we got to Parliament the opposition eventually emerged and the pro-government side also emerged. So, we had to form the National Caucus for Democracy, and he was a member. 

I even question if he signed the Constitution although hon. John Nasasira said that he did. In any case, signing the Constitution was not compulsory. You could do it or not and whether you did it or not, it would remain the same. So, he was a member of the National Caucus for Democracy and he always kept the caucus very lively. That is how we managed to push in a few good articles in the Constitution. It was because of his contribution.

But the most unfortunate thing is that three weeks ago, I found hon. Wanendeya in the parking yard of Parliament and he was selling some papers. I felt so bad! I felt there should be a way of handling past leaders even up to MP level. We should see how to help old MPs or the past MPs because poverty could have been one of the things that pushed the Mzee to die very fast. I felt so bad when I saw him selling papers, and he was lying on his back in his vehicle. He could hardly walk. I felt very sad! 

So, if we are to have some of these elderly people like me, for instance- (Laughter) - I am also getting to that level of elders now; we should look for a provision of catering for old MPs. Put aside a pension, like you know, Madam Speaker, you have some benefits given to you. I think something should be given to MPs or all past leaders so that they can live longer than they would. 

The late hon. Wanendeya made a lot of contributions to this country and I am begging your office, Madam Speaker, to see the best way the Parliament of Uganda can organise to bury him. That is the best service because it is said that the best you can do for your beloved is to bury him or her decently. So, I am asking you, through your office, to make sure we organise a decent burial for your late colleague - because you were together with him in the Constituent Assembly! (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay hon. Ekanya but before hon. Ekanya comes up, I just want to assure the Members of Parliament that one of the innovations I want to introduce in this Parliament is an office for the former Members of Parliament. (Applause) As soon as the President’s Office moves away, we shall get one office and furnish it so that old Members can come and do their work there: sit and read newspapers and really feel part of society. That is one of the things I want to do so that they do not have to write from their cars. Yes, we are all heading there. One day we shall be ex-MPs.

3.02
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen comrade. The late hon. Wanendeya inspired me politically on two fronts: One, he was on the Opposition but his wife worked with Government. His wife was a member of the Board of Governors of Bank of Uganda. She was also a board member of the Private Sector Foundation. 

As a Youth Member of Parliament for Eastern Uganda, I would meet him and he would always encourage me that if you want to be an effective leader, always think of the poor and before you speak, try to do a lot of research. That is one of the virtues that has kept me going. Even when he was coming to meet you, Madam Speaker, he met me in the parking lot and he gave me some reading material.

I remember in 2001, I worked with him when I was campaigning for Rtd Col Dr Kiiza Besigye and hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi because I was the only person who was a Member of Parliament, who was co-ordinating the campaign for Reform Agenda in Eastern Uganda. So, we worked very hard and made sure that we retained that seat for the Opposition and that is how hon. Nandala-Mafabi became a Member of Parliament. (Applause) Hon. Wanendeya had been removed by hon. Wambi in the Sixth Parliament, and yet that constituency was basically a UPC constituency. So, he had to make sure that he got somebody who would sort out that person who removed him. 

Finally, I would like to call upon Government that as hon. Wanendeya has passed on - recently the wife had a bit of a problem because hon. Wanendeya did not cross the line. I would like to appeal to Government that the wife should continue to be offered job opportunities, to continue supporting the family because she is very qualified. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace!

THE SPEAKER: Maybe what you forgot to mention was that Mrs Aidah Wanendeya is the first Musoga woman graduate. (Laughter) 

3.06
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and pay tribute to the late hon. William Wanendeya. Hon. William Wanendeya was a great man. He was the first Mugisu from Budadiri to go to America where he studied and acquired a degree. 

I recall vividly, when I was a student and travelling in a bus where hon. Wanendeya was seated, somebody was eating a banana on the bus and he threw the peels out. This did not go down well with the late hon. Wanendeya. He said, “It is wrong for you people to eat bananas in a bus and throw out the peels.” That I have never forgotten. 

The late William Wanendeya got a job in Coffee Marketing Board. He was the chief accountant and he did a wonderful job at Coffee Marketing Board where he retired. He would walk in Kampala with his head up. He did not steal from the Coffee Marketing Board. 

Hon. William Wanendeya was one of those principled people. He stuck to his point. He was very truthful and he called a spade a spade. At that time of the stronghold political parties, William Wanendeya was the first from that part of Uganda to stand on a UPM ticket. You can imagine trying to fish in the troubled waters of Bugisu. He stood on the UPM ticket but the way things go and things change, before he departed, hon. William Wanendeya was in a terrible state and yet you can see some of the original people who stood on the UPM ticket and he was forgotten. 

I recall when he met us in the parking yard with hon. Peter Omolo. The man had a lot of information. He still reminded us, who come from the Bugisu sub-region, that the money that built the houses in Mombasa that stored Bugisu coffee  - the Lint Marketing Board houses in Mombasa - and even the ones in London, were built using the money from the Bugisu Co-operative Union. This is a man who has inspired every Mugisu. He has been a wonderful person. We shall miss him greatly. Uganda will miss him. You can see even the book he had produced. He kept reading and writing. We shall miss him and may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tim Lwanga also worked with him. Hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Tim Lwanga and then we close.

3.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Madam Speaker, I stand to pay tribute to the late William Wanendeya. First, I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to discuss William Wanendeya. The beginning of this exercise should be given chance to last. We should never forget people who have been working for the development of Parliament as a perception. The likes of Patrick Kiggundu, who got an accident when he was serving Parliament, should equally be remembered. Since Kiggundu was a member of the NRM, I propose that the NRM looks into the possibility of harnessing Kiggundu. As we speak now, he is in a very bad shape and NRM is celebrating - what celebration are you advancing when you cannot attend to the likes of Kiggundu? (Laughter)

One of the greatest writers William Wanendeya admired was William Shakespeare. Wanendeya read a number of Shakespeare’s books: he read Richard the III, Hamlet, and Julius Caesar. He also read Murder in the Cathedral by Bernard Shaw. But through my interaction with him, he quoted to me one of Shakespeare’s writings, which are a little bit more relevant to the situation today. Wanendeya quoted Shakespeare saying: “Let death come when it wills.” We cannot pronounce ourselves like that before Madam Wanendeya but Shakespeare was saying that we should be prepared to die anytime. He has died but he remains great and huge in our minds!

I had the opportunity to examine him, especially when he was addressing the CA. He was a dynamic speaker, very fluent and a talented communicator. Apparently, while I admired him, he equally admired “The Man”. (Laughter)

Finally, the late Wanendeya is one person who never got excited about wealth; whenever you met him, he was talking about national affairs, tradition, the environment and clean politics. And those of us who regularly interacted with him rarely found him talking without mentioning the “Social Contract” advanced by John Locke – the contract of good governance between the governors and the governed. That was a big warning to us – both the Opposition and Government – that when you govern, do not think that you are the only one; there are others governing. Respect those that oppose you; do not insult them, harness their words and pay tribute to them. God bless William Wanendeya.

3.13
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to tell the hon. Mafabi that although Wanendeya may have come from Budadiri, he was a Ugandan and he loved everybody. I had a chance of interacting with him when I was a young man – he worked with my grandfather, the late Paul Kavuma, in the Lint Marketing Board. By then I was too small for this big man who was a chief accountant of that big organisation but he took interest in me. 

In 1976, we again met when I was in Mombasa as a branch accountant of Transocean. He came to me and asked what I was doing. When I told him, he said, “Always do the right thing and you will never regret.” 

Wanendeya had standards in everything he did. He was a man of very high integrity. He could have died a multimillionaire if he was one of those who use their positions to reap from where they have not sown. He was always frank and punctual. He encouraged positive development, especially in young people. I can claim to be one of those who got a chance to get some mentoring from him. And whenever he met me, he would ask, “Are you still on the track?” And I would say, “Yes.” He would then say, “Remember what I told you: integrity, integrity, integrity.”

He was an administrator with vast experience; he was an accountant at the core. He always balanced his books. 

Last but not least, he loved this country and that is probably why he wrote that book. It is amazing! I have heard about that book but the names in there are not just Bagisu names but for all of us. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the last word from his area Member of Parliament, hon. Ssasaga.

3.15
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion of expressing the condolence on the demise of our beloved leader – a great leader of Bugisu as well as Uganda. William Wanendeya was a great leader as a legislator, not only for Budadiri as a constituency but also of Bugisu as a sub-region. He was a charismatic leader and very many of us were inspired by him to join politics. Whoever could think of Wanendeya would think of Bugisu and Budadiri as a constituency. 

He is well-known as the first Member of Parliament, in the history of Uganda, who traced the creation of human beings and the Creator to the slopes of Mt Elgon. If you read his book, he believes that God was on Mt Elgon. The two rivers in the creation story were traced to the slopes of Mt Elgon - although he lacked an empirical evidence to make the world believe him. He wrote the history of bamasaba, which we as the young generation continue to read because it is inspirational. 

He is the only leader who knows the origin of our President, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. If you sat down with him, you would find him an archive; he knew everything about the great leaders of this land.

It is very unfortunate that he has left us but he encouraged the young generation to join politics. I believe that without him, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, would not have been in this House. While I was at university, he approached me also, saying he had seen a seed in me that could redeem the constituency of Budadiri East. Indeed, it was on the ruling side of the NRM but his prayer was that before he died, he would see the constituency back in the hands of the Opposition. I believe I am now here because of him. 

I join others in mourning and also take this chance to invite all Members of Parliament to join the family in this ceremony of escorting him to the Heavenly Father, that will be on Thursday and I think the programme will be very clear. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssasaga. Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to hon. William Giboni Wanendeya as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

Now, hon. Members, as I said earlier, we had two calamities: Mrs Thabitha Bakainaga, mother to hon. Sabiti will be buried tomorrow and hon. Wanendeya has also died. I request that we stand up and observe a minute of silence in their honour. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

Now, hon. Members, for those who will be going to bury Mrs Bakainaga in Rukiga, please register with the Office of the Leader of the Opposition. There will be transport in the North Wing Car Park at 6.00 O’clock. 

3.21
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. For over one month now, the people of Agago District are blocked from the rest of Uganda because of the status of the central government roads in the district. I have put this to the notice of the Minister of Works who I have kept reminding time and again, but it seems matters are only getting worse. 

The people of Agago are wondering as to whether they really still belong to Uganda because there is neither public nor private transport that reaches Agago. The only private transport that can reach Agago is that of the human foot, with which you have to definitely struggle through the mud – (Laughter) - especially when it rains. 

In particular I have three very bad roads, including the one leading to my home in Adilang sub-county. The last time I was there, when I actually reported the case to the ministry responsible, was one month ago. I was not able to go through the road by car; I was compelled to pass through several other roads in order to get home. So, in particular, Kilak–Moroto Road, which passes via Patongo-Adilang and goes to Moroto is terribly bad; Adilang-Omiya-Pachwa and Patongo-Kalongo-Payimol.  Additionally, we have Kotongo-Patongo-Agago Town Council to Kalongo and finally Kalongo-Lamwo sub-county, which are all central government roads, which are terribly impassable. 

I would like to call upon the minister responsible, who I unfortunately don’t see in here - I have been trying to reach him on phone because I tried all other possible means and failed, but even the phone could not work out. So, I would like to request the Government Chief Whip, since he is an expert and a former minister in this area, to give us a response?

My second issue is about the state house scholarships, which are under the Ministry of the Presidency. My constituents have been calling time and again to ask me about these scholarships because they claim that some people are moving around the district, telling them that there are some forms they are supposed to fill in order to get these scholarships. But as a Member of Parliament of Agago, I don’t know anything about these scholarships. So, I would like to find out from the minister responsible, can you tell Members of this august House how many students from their districts are benefiting from this scheme in order to avoid embarrassments. 

It is very difficult for a Member of Parliament to tell a constituent that they have no idea about these state house scholarships; and some call to ask you to tell the Minister of the Presidency to include them on that scheme, when you know nothing about it. So, I would like to request the ministry to give all Members of Parliament, and not only the one of Agago, that information so as to know the status of the scholarships of their students. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank my namesake, for raising that particular problem about her central government roads. But I think maybe before the minister responds, we need to understand by how far Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is responding in areas where it took over these roads.  

First of all, it was a good initiative for the Ministry of Works to expand the central road network. For that we were very happy because in some districts like Kamwenge, we only had one central government road. But now either the job is too big for UNRA - the roads UNRA took over, even those to which they sent contractors, the famous 10,000 kilometres where they had a number of contractors given those roads, supervision is a problem. I do not know why they can’t work out a mechanism of involving the district engineers? Someone comes with a grader, opens one kilometre and goes away. Now, you wonder as to whom you hold accountable. Do you go to UNRA? Obviously UNRA can’t know what is happening in Kamwenge; they cannot know what is happening in Agago. I wonder why they don’t involve the district engineer to look at the work of this person. 

In my constituency, there were about three roads – the former Minister of Works knows because we used to go to him with our problems – which UNRA took over and we were lucky that some contractors were given those roads. On one road connecting Kamwenge to Kyenjonjo, a contractor appeared for about a week and the grader was abandoned. But I kept on bothering UNRA. Then two months ago, I was told that the contractor was back on the road. But this was work for the last financial year and we are now in a different financial year. So, we wonder what the contract model is. So, maybe UNRA has too much on their plate, they need to tell the relevant committee so that we can support them in the way they need to be supported. 

But to me as an advocate of the farmers, if we don’t open community access roads, then we can’t help the farmers. Community access roads constitute the biggest constraints to production and marketing. So, I am appealing to the relevant ministry to really come up with a master plan of how UNRA - I would support a proposal to give them as much money as they need; I would support a proposal to amend the law to allow the Road Fund collect its money directly without going to the Consolidated Fund such that the fund is big enough to give to UNRA and the district. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you know hon. Franca has an emergency of failing to reach there. What you are raising is a policy of management of the roads, which we shall discuss next week. Don’t cloud her emergency.

MR TUMWEBAZE: But it could help her. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You are going to bury her emergency.

3.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard both issues that have been raised. one on the roads especially in Agago District and we shall, as a matter of urgency, pass on this information to the minister responsible who will contact you directly and tell you how the ministry is going to handle it.

Although you said transport is by foot only, I am sure the Kalongo Airport still works – not that the roads should not be there, but I know there are means by air and means by foot and maybe a few roads that are there. (Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. That is why in my communication I said the worst roads and I gave the list according to the conditions. The first three on that list are the worst, including mine and I am going home on Friday this week. I want to request that before Friday, this road is fixed because I need to reach my home in Adilang. (Laughter)

MR NASASIRA: With a lot of respect and humility, all I can assure you is that the minister will be in contact with you today and then we will work out this emergency plan of how you will get home by Friday. (Laughter)

Secondly, on the issue of state house scholarships, I think the Minister for the Presidency will soon come out with a list of scholarships and the procedures. But I have heard a lot of debates here and some emotional! I am sure when that list is presented to this House, no one will be surprised as to how these scholarships have been got regionally and have been distributed nationally.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DISPERSING OF A RALLY ORGANISED BY HON. SEMUJJU NGANDA AND ATTENDED BY HON. NANDALA-MAFABI, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, this is the response to the personal statement made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, following a recent incident in Kireka.

On Thursday, 18 August 2011, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, MP and Leader of the Opposition in the House, made a personal statement in which he wanted Government to explain a number of issues arising from what recently transpired at Kireka. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and other hon. Members of Parliament were involved in this incident.

It is true that in line with the provisions of the law, hon. Semujju Nganda, Member of Parliament for Kyadondo, on 16 August 2011 held a meeting with the Police to discuss matters relating to his intention to hold a rally in Kireka on 17 August 2011.

Hon. Nganda was proposing to hold the rally at the taxi park at Kireka. The taxi park at Kireka is along the Jinja-Kampala highway. The House will appreciate that such a place is not suitable for holding a rally as the event would definitely disrupt traffic along the highway, and this would be in addition to disrupting business in the area.

With this in mind, the Police advised hon. Nganda to look for alternative venues. Indeed on the morning of 17 August 2011, a meeting was held with hon. Nganda’s colleagues at Kireka Police Post during which meeting it was agreed that the venue for the rally be changed to Kireka PWD Rehabilitation Ground.

It is sad to note that hon. Nganda, instead of accepting the Police advice and the agreement the Police reached with his colleagues, insisted on holding the rally at the Kireka taxi place.

So on 17 August 2011, he proceeded and attempted to hold the rally at his intended venue at 2.00 p.m. Hon. Nganda’s insistence to hold the rally at the taxi park was supported by hon. Nandala-Mafabi when he arrived for the rally. The Police could not allow the rally to proceed. The group that had gathered was therefore dispersed.

On the issue raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is not true that hon. Nandala-Mafabi was specifically targeted. Police action was meant to disperse the crowd that had gathered for the rally. No one was specifically targeted.

Secondly, it is not true that Police used excessive force to disperse the crowd. As we all know, there were no casualties during that incident of 17th   August.

As for the liquid that was used, this is a harmless liquid dye that is internationally accepted as a standard tool by the Police, all over the world, to disperse crowds.

The Police action was in line with Article 29 of the Constitution under which people have the right and freedom to assemble and conduct processions. Similarly, Article 43 of the same Constitution provides for limitations to assemblies and processions and sections 32 and 33 of the Police Act grant powers to the Police to regulate assemblies. There was, therefore, nothing that the Police did that was outside the law.

In conclusion, I once again call upon all of us to always act within the law. Let us enjoy our rights and freedoms while minding the rights and freedoms of others. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I believe this statement is made under Rule 40. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised a complaint here and I directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain. So, no debate will follow this matter but only elucidatory questions. Is there anything that you would like the minister to elucidate? 

3.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I have brought items, like I promised the other day. I have heard the minister and I want to thank him for the response. What we prayed for has not been done; it clearly shows that I was a target. I promised that I would table the clothes in which I was dressed on that day, which show that I was a target. 

Madam Speaker, as you can see, this is the white shirt and the suit that I was putting on. If you say that this chemical was not aimed at me, it went through the coat to the shirt to the vest - and the panty that you wanted is here. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a Member to display and lay on the Table clothing that is not fit to be displayed in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I do not know the purpose of your laying. I do not think the question of your being there was in doubt. I don’t also think the question of your being sprayed was in doubt. So, I do not see the purpose of your laying. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I promised this because the minister said I was not specifically a target. If I was not the target, I would not have swallowed all these items of the pink spray and I even have a recording of what took place. 

It is true that hon. Ssemujju Nganda had a meeting with the Police and they agreed on the venue. It is also true that the Police had confiscated the public address system before, and hon. Ssemujju Nganda was in discussions with the Police about the same. As soon as I arrived, I was welcomed by hon. Semujju who told me that he was waiting for the public address system and he said we would be moving to the nearby area – 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you want to draw this House into debate on a matter, which nobody can either dispute or accept. First of all, it was not parliamentary business and we do not know what you were doing there. And now you want Members to debate whether you were walking towards or away; this is not fair to the House at all. You have made your complaints and the minister has answered. Let us close the matter. Otherwise, it will mean that I will now have to rule on whether they properly aimed at you or not. I do not know and I don’t want to be part of that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we agree that you are the head of this institution and we agree that there is a government in place. When your own are really hurt and you come and support those who have done wrong to them, then I don’t think it is right. It is unfortunate! We have seen regimes; today you can be happy that somebody has been treated that way and tomorrow you can be – (Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we appreciate the concern of the Leader of the Opposition, is it in order for him to continue with the procedure to challenge your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I really think you are stretching this House a bit too far. Last time, we said that we sympathised with what transpired and we have asked the government to explain. But you want this House to debate and take a position on matters, which they do not know. I don’t think that is fair to this House. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO INCUR EXPENDITURE OF SHS 61,333,333,333 ONLY TOWARDS THE THERMO POWER SUBSIDY UNDER VOTE 017 - MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT ABOVE VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

MR NASASIRA: I am rising on a point of order. Madam Speaker, now you see why the Police have a problem in this country -(Applause)– that people can fail to behave according to their Rules of Procedure in this august House and remain standing after you have ruled, and they remain standing when an item on the Order Paper is being presented, and they even remain standing when I am raising a point of order. Is it in order for us to continue with the business of this House when Members of the Opposition are standing on the Floor?

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Point of procedure -

THE SPEAKER: On what? First sit down. Hon. Members, I do not even know why you are standing because there is no motion. Proceed with our other business there is no motion.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I beg to withdraw my motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to incur expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 billion towards the thermo power subsidy under Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development above the Vote-on-Account. This is coming about after taking the advice of this august House that we consider this item under a corrigendum. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What did you say? You have withdrawn? Okay, that motion which was moved by the Minister for Finance has now been withdrawn and will no longer appear on the Order Paper.

MR OMACH: With your permission, I beg to lay on Table a corrigendum to the draft estimates of financial year 2011/12, whose copies have already been submitted to this august House accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Is that in line with the instructions of the Budget Committee?

MR OMACH: It is in accordance with the submission by the Budget Committee but more so in accordance with Section 32 (i) of the Public Finance and Accountability Regulation 2003. The submission is to correct inadvertent errors, omissions and commission as well as a few decisions in the draft estimates for the financial year 2011/2012, that need to be rectified in considering this budget approval process. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: So, do we commit it to the Committee on Budget? Okay, the corrigendum is committed to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.  

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I. THE REVISED REVENUE EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

II. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development moved this motion that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of: 

(i)	The revised revenue expenditure  estimates for the fiscal year 2011/2012
(ii)	The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2011/2012 and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House resolve itself into a Committee of Supply as proposed by the Minister for Finance.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

I now invite the Shadow Minister for Finance to make his statement.

3.54
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am honoured to present to you the Opposition’s response to the financial year 2011/2012 budget statement. 

As the shadow minister for finance, planning and economic development, let me first congratulate hon. Maria Kiwanuka on her recent appointment as Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

I wish to inform the hon. Minister upfront that the economic times today, that lie ahead, are tough. They demand honest and effective action against problems affecting society. Our expectation of you is to keep your eye on the Treasury. It is a tradition led by the Opposition to give the Minister for Finance a starting balance sheet and a report card so that when she leaves that office, she may judge for herself whether or not she has added value.  

We did this for hon. Dr Suruma; we cautioned hon. Syda Bbumba when she assumed that office; and now here you come. We shall partner with you to achieve the common good. Our response to the Government budget statement is structured as follows:
a)	Introduction
b)	Review of the economy
c)	The budget and key sectors review
d)	Conclusion

The challenges we are facing as a country are unique in the history of Uganda’s economy. This is the 6th term of President Museveni in power, which will mark a 30-year continuous rule. The continuing economy-related civil actions occasioned by the general dissatisfaction of the population with the state of their well being, is totally absurd. Government’s lack of empathy and sympathy for the common citizen in this regard, is even more dangerous.

We believe that overall, the challenges confronting Ugandans have been created by several years of bad planning, budget indiscipline, neglect, and outright theft. I thank the hon. Minister for recognising some of these challenges in her budget speech at the beginning of her tenure. The minister honestly intimated to us that certain “...extra-budgetary pressures”, such as elections and security-related expenditures, often derail and misdirect public resources as was the case last financial year.  

As you are all aware, anything “extra” in nature is criminal, as much as “extra-judicial” is criminal. The extra-budgetary pressure, referred to by the minister, is a plain criminality going on against our public treasury, which is being treated as if it were a private fund. 

Ugandans now want solutions to the mountain of economic problems that have accumulated over the two decades. They want solutions; now and not later. They want salt, sugar, soap and paraffin at affordable prices. They knew from the past that no budget speech would end without the exact price of these items being mentioned. They have never known what is meant by “duties on kerosene being remitted.” They do not know what effect that has on the price of kerosene.  They want food, fuel, and school fees because the youth need education and employment.  

Above all, they want medicine. Well constructed buildings with big signposts reading “Health Centre”, without medicines, do not impress them anymore.

Talk of “Oil production is around the corner” does not excite Ugandans anymore, because it does not provide them any relief. We must simply fix the basics and once these are in place, then they will let us talk freely about national backbone, service and industry, and East African Political Federation, the food for the huge political egos. The unrest will grow if the NRM Government fails to meet the basic needs of Ugandans; you have been forewarned.

The theme for the budget 2011/12, “Promoting Economic Growth, Job creation and Improved Service Delivery” does not arouse curiosity in the mind of Ugandans. What is new that should be expected this year, which is different and will lead to a change in people’s lives? After all, isn’t that what we have heard over the last decades? The economy has been growing all along at impressive rates and yes, the promise of jobs and bonna bagagawale has been around with us for some time.  If this time you want to cause real change by acting real different than before, what is it in the budget which should light the spirit of Ugandans? What is it that is signalling a new era for Ugandans other than just the same rhetoric protected by ugly looking hardware in the yard, meant to ensure a safe passage for the current leaders?

As I said earlier, these are land-mark times: a Shs 9.8 trillion budget, a historic 18.7 percent inflation of time, high interest rates, high food prices, run-away public expenditure and a dwindling agriculture.

Ugandans demand to know from the NRM Government, which is meant to protect them, whether it cares about them anymore as they struggle to feed and sustain their families. Those in business trying to earn a living are pushed out by high taxes long before their first anniversary. Teachers painfully continue teaching children of the rich in primary schools while theirs languish at home because daddy and mummy have no money for their secondary and tertiary fees. The doctors and nurses have hang in there, and resisted temptations to run to Rwanda for better terms and kept serving Ugandans selflessly yet they cannot afford treatment for their own children, all for the love of their country.  

The young men and women in uniform, whose remuneration cannot compare with those in the region, have braved it all and even risked their lives and family in a myriad of war and peace efforts in the region, albeit for some additional penny. Mothers still die needlessly in labour all because, no one thinks and acts about their predicaments.  

All these Ugandans who eagerly looked up to the government to wipe tears from their eyes were rudely turned back by the budget of 2011/12. Instead, it turned out that Government plans to use Shs 4.9 trillion, 50 percent of the budget in recurrent spending with a   walloping Shs 1.8 trillion paying salaries rather than investing in the future of our children. It turns out that defence expenditure has been allocated Shs 657 trillion, seven percent of the budget while allocations for agriculture where their lives are anchored have been slashed down further to a paltry Shs 433 trillion, 4.5 percent this financial year.

Of the total budget resources of Shs 9.7 trillion, domestic resources will account for Shs 7.6 trillion which is 78 percent. The allocation of the resources constituted development budget allocation of 35 percent - and I repeat; of the domestic resource, development has been allocated only 35 percent while 65 percent of the domestic component is for consumption. This is premised on external financing well aware of the performance of external resources. This leaves the development of the country to the mercy of donors. 

Further, the total transfer to local governments for development is only Shs 400 billion out of Shs 2.6 trillion while recurrent is Shs 1.2 trillion for consumption of the domestic resource.

A national budget should ensure equitable distribution of resources and aims to bridge the gap between the poor and the rich. It should aim to ensure that the tax regime is fair and target investments for future generations. 

Ugandans also demand to see immediate strategies for reduction in the cost of living, and the prices of petrol and diesel to ease pressure on prices of essential goods and industrial products. 

One renowned development economist of time, Prof. Michael Todaro, once counselled that if you are planning for the poor, keep in mind the poorest person you have ever met. This budget is devoid of honesty and lacks the pro-poor touch that Ugandans expected from it.

As a cover for the glaring failure, the NRM Government solicited the help of their friendly media houses to whitewash the act and painted the budget as a “Pro-poor budget” in an attempt to cause some excitement over it. You remember how those media houses went into overdrive in a huge propaganda campaign with screaming headlines such as “People’s Budget”; it never worked. Unfortunately, Ugandans have discovered that they were not being told the whole truth. Today, the price of kerosene has not gone down; the price of sugar has not gone down and the price of hoes has not gone down.

Our response to the budget is made under the theme, “Together for equitable progress”. We believe that this country cannot sustainably be moved forward by one individual or one party. Ugandans made a choice that was, “Peace, Stability and Prosperity”. If the NRM claim to have been elected by the majority, then who are they working for? The majority that voted them or themselves on the success of political fraud? 

NRM as a party has failed Ugandans despite of the majority. We must change our governance; we must change our economy and we must change our society. We must create employment opportunities, develop our infrastructure, protect the environment and return the virtues of honesty and transparency, as cherished by our forefathers. Only then shall we raise the standard of education of our children, deliver quality health care, raise the standards of living and have even enough time for sports. All we need is our freedom, liberty and unity of Ugandans. 

Together for progress

It is absolutely possible, if everyone has the will and cares. We believe that the key for long term progress is to think and act long term.  We do not agree with the ad hoc short term of “fire brigade” by the NRM where the lowest common multiple is always short and medium term. How can we ever develop a country with a plan of five years? We must re-orient our thinking and planning to long term and re-focus our national planning, policy implementation and resource allocation priorities accordingly. 

We need a 30-year national development planning framework that sets SMART targets and objectives. It should be broken into three phases of 10 development decades, all aimed at delivering progress for every citizen. Finite resources such as oil will last only a number of years. What is our plan for it? What do we want to see and be able to touch by the end of oil? It is absolutely not there. What we have noticed is that people fear accountability and, therefore, dread to commit to the long term.  

Our view is that, Uganda can run on her own resources with minimal recourse to donors.  The insatiable appetite to run to borrowing is self inflicted, badly motivated and it is an easy avenue to steal from the public.  That is why you find that most corruption scandals of the time are over usage of borrowed money hence a project driven economy where donor money is “free” money.  Such projectisation of the development agenda has no strong linkages with other sectors of the economy. Donors withheld grants and have reduced them from 34.3 percent to only 15.6 percent of total external financing in 2010/11. The donor community’s message to the NRM Government is, if you want money to waste then borrow it at your own cost. 

The Prosperity for All (PFA) hype has also now died. Throughout the budget statement, there was no single mention of Prosperity for All, or even just prosperity or Bonna Bagagawale for that matter. Ugandans want to see the end result of that programme before it is swept under the carpet, because every penny that was taken from the Treasury was in the name of Prosperity for All. The debate in the public domain is still to try to understand and feel PFA.  It has successfully died down before it was understood and it was felt by only the intended beneficiaries. We demand a forensic audit of account of PFA.

Review of the economy

Uganda’s economy continues to suffer structural mal-transformation due to Government’s failure to streamline and implement development priorities. The economy is reported to have grown at impressive digits, but largely driven by the industry and service sectors, having grown by 7.5 percent and eight percent respectively, compared to 0.9 percent for agriculture, which feeds the nation.  

As long as the fastest growing sectors in the economy do not takeover in importance, mal-transformation will prevail. The fastest growing sectors must be seen to attract and employ the population. In the alternative, the growth from those sectors must be seen to be channelled to the sector which employs most Ugandans. Without such strategic objectives, Ugandans will continue to trek to towns for employment in the fastest growing sectors to no avail.

The budget statement is devoid of the role of National Planning Authority (NPA) in guiding resource allocation to priority sectors in achieving the National Development Plan, the expansion of the tax base and fiscal policies. 

The NRM Government has caused economic jam that must be cleared now and today. What economic policy is Uganda pursuing? Is it liberalised? Is it command, mixed or none of the above? The clarity to the above is very vital to handling some of the challenges the country is facing today. 

Economic Policy

Uganda’s economic development policy has remained that of private sector-led, export oriented growth, since the World Bank and IMF structural adjustment era of the 1990s. However, the private sector in Uganda has inherent weaknesses that do not permit it to replicate development successes elsewhere. While on one hand there is a small formal foreign-dominated sector of largely the multi-nationals, on the other hand is a large informal local SME sector. The foreign-owned multi-national companies are largely subsidiaries, whose policies, operations and management are determined by the parent companies, often based on profitability and market ownership goals, with little consideration for the national interests of Uganda. 

The recent departures of Caltex from Uganda, the rapid change of ownership from Celtel to Zain to Airtel in a short time, and the divestiture by Shell of its interest in Uganda, are but just a few cases in point. Related to this, is the phenomenon of imported risks and shocks. The recent freezing of Libyan assets sent shocks to the Ugandan economy, including affecting the Kampala-Eldoret oil pipeline project, whose take-off is now in balance. The same can be said of the Kampala-Mombasa railway line, where Egypt’s Citadel is a key player, against the changing fortunes of its key shareholders. 

We note with serious concern that some foreign investors who are bent on vandalising Uganda’s natural resources will not pass the investment test. Our forests like Mabira are our inheritance that we must pass to our children at all costs.

The central bank must play its role to assist affirmatively, the development of the Small Medium Enterprises (SME) sector.  Uganda has one of the highest costs of borrowing in the world, and the latest actions of the Bank of Uganda to increase the bank rate have hit local business hardest. However, the multi-nationals will access cheaper financing overseas, while our SMEs are phased out by the so-called investors who even enjoy tax holidays, including those walking on foot in Kikuubo and St Balikudembe Market. This explains the mad rush of investors into the sector, as reported by Uganda Investment Authority in the first quarter of 2011.

We recommend that Government takes an active role in key sectors of the economy, as a surrogate entrepreneur. All the strong emerging economies of the world have a visible state regulation regime. The new economic powers of the emerging world: Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, known as BRICS, can be described as “Managed economies.”  The World Bank and group, which pushed the private sector-led pill in our throats, have also acknowledged this in their latest World Bank Report on Africa (2011), as well as our own so-called National Development Plan. 

The budget and key sectors review

We now turn to review key sectors vis-à-vis the proposals made by the NRM Government.  We make along each sector specific recommendations for the sector, that we believe will strengthen our economy, and enable us move together, in equitable progress.

Agriculture

Government’s speeches do not rhyme with its actions regarding agriculture. While on one hand they say they are committed to transforming the sector from subsistence to commercial farming, ensuring food and income security and ensuring agricultural-led growth, and that a six percent annual growth will be targeted by allocating 10 percent of the national budget to the sector, this same sector is systematically edged out in budget allocations.

The agricultural sector remains the largest employer of Ugandans, despite the decline in its contribution to GDP, where 80 percent of Ugandans are directly or indirectly employed by the sector; with 60 percent depending on it entirely for their livelihood. In spite of this, to-date, there is no clear established national agricultural policy in Uganda, other than disparate and isolated projects and initiatives, which are largely sub-sector specific, in response to donor funding. The Development and Sector Investment Plan (DSIP) is so far the only substantive document that would approximate to a policy on the sector. But intended output will remain mere intentions, if allocations to the sector continue to stagger.

Virtually, the entire agriculture sector value chain has remained rudimentary, notably production, harvesting and storage. This explains the decline in agricultural production and productivity that has a perverse trend or negative growth, as low as 15 per cent in 2010/11. While Uganda signed up to the AU Maputo Declaration of 2003 to commit to allocate at least 10 per cent of their national budgets to agriculture, the sector has not received even half of that commitment for the last two decades, and there is no plan to deliver that commitment even in the medium term. It should be noted that agriculture, together with water and environment combined, have only 7.3 per cent budget allocations this financial year.

Where is national planning? Why should the same Government contradict herself on the same subject in the same planning framework? Why should Government say she will do this in the Development Sector Investment Plan and then say, “We cannot” in the budget speech? Where is the NRM Government’s commitment to agriculture and the poor? That is why the sector is less attractive to private sector investment and credit. There are no structured, consistent, reliable and predictable value chain linkages from the farm gate to the grocery and to the supermarket. 

Agriculture continues to be marginalised. The removal of 10 per cent tax on hoes was a gimmick intended to hide the deception of the NRM Government. The removal of duties on premises used for animal and 
poultry feeds was another gimmick; and the reduction of import duty on food supplements from 25 per cent to 10 per cent was yet another gimmick with no expected effect on the outcome. Already, cash crop earnings declined by 15.8 per cent, putting agriculture’s total share of GDP at 13.9 per cent, the lowest since 2005 compared to the service sector at 52.4 per cent and industry at 25.3 per cent.

We reinstate that there is no way Uganda can develop without having a developed agrarian economy. The rampant unemployment today can be solved by having a well-developed agricultural sector. This budget should make concrete proposals in the short, medium and long-term to spur agricultural production and value-addition to uplift the farmgate prices for farmers and spur production, productivity and employment.

The supply problem in agriculture can be dealt with by improved seeds, land tenure system improvement, financing, technology, storage, irrigation, revival of “organic” co-operatives, complete with re-establishment of the stabilisation fund in the proposed Uganda Agricultural Development Bank. Such systems are presently doing well in countries such as Malawi, where Government provides agricultural tools and inputs on credit and at the same time through established marketing boards, procures produce and sells to international markets at a price that stimulates production. The profit is ploughed back into the stabilisation fund. 

Instead, the NRM Government supervised the killing and burial of all these. They promised to build storage facilities for produce in every sub-county in 2008/09, but the stores are yet to be seen and no refund has ever been made. Why should Government flout people-led protests, which are now becoming part of the national psyche? We must remind the NRM Government that food security is a gateway to national security.  Either you deal with food security or you buy more ammunition. The choice is yours.

Unpredictable weather patterns is another impediment to the sector. The changing weather conditions coupled with lack of capacity by farmers to predict weather vagaries have grossly affected agricultural production and seasonal timing for many agricultural enterprises. According to the 2010 World Bank Strategy for Africa, African economies are called upon to allocate substantial resources in supporting weather forecasting through their meteorology stations. Government, therefore, should have allocated substantial funding to the Meteorology Department to revamp the infrastructure and personnel in this area. The NRM Government should also follow up and punish those who squandered the Shs 1.0 billion CHOGM funds allocated to Meteorology Department for enhancing weather forecasting capabilities.

We recommend that the NRM Government takes deliberate action to invest in key areas of the agricultural sector, so as to reap advantages associated with the matrix forward, backward, lateral and vertical linkages. The sector should be closely linked with industry in an integrated, harmonised manner; leading to a type of industrialisation that is anchored on agriculture, the mainstay of our economy. 

Way back in 1986, that was the main idea contained in the “late” Ten-Point Programme about an integrated self-sustaining economy. Services and industry on their own cannot develop the Ugandan economy without appropriate linkages with agriculture.

Production

While the National Development Plan castigates practices such as the use of hand hoes, and subsistence production as one of the constraints affecting the performance of the agricultural sector, the minister’s budget is seen to be promoting this practice by abolishing import duty on hand hoes. As earlier stated, the National Development Plan was signed behind the back of Parliament. 

We agree with the Minister of Finance that facilitating the rural folk with a hoe is a matter of necessity, because whereas tractors and other agricultural implements for mechanisation are duty-free, they are currently beyond the reach of small-holder farmers who feed the country and sustain the agricultural sector. However, we do not agree that the best way is to remit duties on the hoes. Opposition emphasises, like in the last five budgets, that each household be given two hoes free of charge. (Applause) One scholar once opined that “Uganda entered colonialism with a hoe and came out of colonialism with a hoe; only that the first hoe was locally made, while the second one was imported.”

Agricultural mechanisation programmes can progress only when people have food at home. The Ugandan economy cannot fly before it can walk properly and before its joints are firm. Such an economy would surely fall if pushed. That is what brought the food shortage crisis. It is a man-made crisis. The Ugandan economy cannot be driven by industries and services alone and ignore agricultural development because after all, it does not deliver any kickbacks. It is our collective hope that the NRM Government does not forget the backfire, learns from this bitter experience and moves quickly to put money in the agricultural sector to forestall further uprisings.

We recommend that Government first provides two hand hoes to each household and secondly, makes available modern agricultural implements on credit repayable in reasonable instalments and period.

Irrigation

Uganda’s agriculture is still rain-fed; a factor that renders the sector erratic and unpredictable yet the NRM Government just mentioned in passing the need to kick-start irrigation initiatives. The financing is left to donors under such projects as Livelihoods Support Programme and the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP). Irrigation as a method of production has been neglected despite the simplicity of its basic technology, and the enormous potential it has for Uganda’s agricultural sector.

We recommend that Government revives the irrigation schemes. These have the potential to absorb a good number of unemployed and under-employed youth. Water harvesting facilities, including run-off water tanks and reservoirs, should be constructed and encouraged at community and household level, closer to small-holder farms. These technologies and skills can be developed at Uganda industrial research institute technical schools.

Marketing

Storage and marketing is the most critical stage of the value chain where farmers are most vulnerable. This is because the crops are harvested all at once, in the same season, thereby instantly flooding the market and overwhelming demand, which forces prices to drop.

Farmers have domestic obligations that compel them to sell immediately after harvesting, at any price at the time. They have no hope and guarantee that even after storing for a while, prices will improve so much that it covers storage costs and the risk of spoilage.

More often, they will have borrowed money from various credit sources, and waiting to pay at harvest time, including mortgaging or selling crops while still in the fields.

However, it appears that the ground is not good enough for Government to intervene. The budget is silent about marketing, other than just a mention of warehouses and a promise of Shs 2.0 billion towards rehabilitation of warehouses at sub-county levels. The same promise was made in the budget of financial year 2008/09 as earlier discussed, and nothing is seen to-date.  

Does the NRM Government have any statistics indicating how many sub-counties in Uganda have existing warehouses, those that are dilapidated and those that need rehabilitation? The budget does not suggest how the warehouses will be managed, if they exist at all, and what crops will be stored. (Applause)

We recommend that Government invests substantially in the establishment of silos, storage warehouses, professional marketing programmes, to assist farmers dispose of their produce at competitive rates, just as is happening in other countries in the world. 

We also recommend that Government develops and promotes agricultural zoning, where regions specialise in a major crop and agricultural product to ease establishment of the appropriate storage and marketing infrastructure for the respective regions.

Extension services

Madam Speaker, what Government calls NAADS is actually a white elephant programme. Government must evaluate the NAADS programme with a view to revamp and re-tool it. It has been suspended several times over concerns of lack of output; NAADS coordinators have been faulted over abuse and misuse. Some politicians are grossly involved in dispensing benefits and selection of village beneficiaries. It has turned out to be a programme for rewarding NRM sympathisers at grassroots level, and as a mechanism for the well-to-do to recover their costs incurred in mobilisation for NRM. A whole value for money report by the Auditor-General of 2010 is there for everyone to read for one’s self: one hundred million dollars went to waste!

We have already pointed out the danger of projectisation of development. Donor-funded projects and their managers are more answerable to the donors than the line ministry or local government authority. The many power centres have given room for money to be stolen; at both political and technical levels. Other than on and off suspensions of the NAADS programme, no substantive action has been taken to obtain accountability or even to streamline the programme. All you hear is that there is a new NAADS, same white elephant, same people, and same agenda.

Agricultural credit

The Minister of Finance has for the last two consecutive financial years allocated Shs 60 billion to the agriculture credit facility. However, in her report, no mention is made regarding the performance of the participating commercial banks.  Whereas they were supposed to match the funding level of the government, only the government component is reported to have performed at 99.7 percent.
 
Government’s agricultural credit facility assigned to commercial banks to manage has only benefited very few well-to-do commercial farmers. It has not achieved the intended purpose. The minister noted that it performed dismally in the last financial year 2010/11, with only 12 percent of the available funds borrowed by farmers. The minister attributes this to the requirement for banks to match the Government fund as a condition for accessing this facility. 

The justification of the minister is wrong considering the fact that most commercial banks in Uganda are foreign-owned, with policies and strategies determined elsewhere. Agricultural lending, with its intricacies and risks, ranks least among their revenue streams and they will avoid it at the slightest opportunity. 

We recommend that Government takes immediate remedial action to catalyse agricultural financing as a stimulus for increasing agricultural production. Government should pool all the disparate funds into a specific agricultural development bank for financing agricultural programmes in Uganda. (Applause)

In his response to the State of the Nation Address, the Leader of the Opposition reminded Members that the Opposition has been seeking support from all Members towards our planned introduction of a Private Members Bill for the creation of a Uganda agricultural development bank. In this regard, and with your permission, Madam Speaker, I will be seeking leave to table this proposal and I call on the support of Members for the good of the country. 

Summary, recommendations for the agricultural sector

We recommend that Government takes up the role of surrogate entrepreneur in ensuring a reliable, structured, predictable value chain in agriculture. The government in Kenya, with an economy more advanced and larger than Uganda’s and an agricultural  sector more commercial-oriented, still ensures market for farmer’s produce through the produce and cereal board that regulates prices, buys and stores harvests, to sell to millers and exporters. This is besides supplying inputs and other production services through co-operatives. 

Still at our neighbourhood in Kenya, Government’s silos also serve as food security reservoirs and a coping mechanism during food scarcity, since Government can easily control export of foodstuffs. 

In the livestock sector, a government parastatal, the Kenya Meat Commission, is in charge of developing the meat industry, whose quality has attained export quality certification. 

In the dairy sector, the New Kenya Co-operative Creameries (KCC) regulates milk prices and ensures market for dairy farmers. KCC had been privatised but Government bought it back after it had been turned around to profitability. In Uganda, the NRM Government should listen to the many voices that have been raised about reviving producer co-operatives.  

Government must take the lead in planning, financing and agro-industrialisation. Agro-industrialisation has the potential to transform this economy, given Uganda’s natural resource endowment. Besides the usual catch-words “value-addition”, “agro-processing”, “PMA”, “agribusiness”, there is no clearly defined and robust strategy on agro-industrialisation. In the financial year 2010/11, the Finance Minister talked about reviving Uganda Development Corporation as an investment arm of Government and that it was already playing a role in the implementation of the Soroti Fruit Processing Facility Project; the Tororo Phosphates Mining Project; and the manufacturing of iron and steel from the abundant iron ore deposits in Kabale and Kisoro districts. 

However, nothing is mentioned about it in the current budget of 2011/12. Instead, reports have been received from the Auditor-General, indicating appalling implementation of the Soroti fruit facility, among others. Would the minister explain to this august House what happened to the UDC proposal? 

For agricultural financing, we recommend that Government establishes a specific agricultural development bank, and I call on you Members to support an upcoming motion and Bill in this regard.

On extension services, the Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institutes (ZARDIs) should be financed and staffed with technical staff to undertake research, development and dissemination of technologies, varieties and breeds, the way it was with stock farms and District Farm Institutes as centres of excellence and learning. The various research institutes under NARO have been largely left to donor- financing on a project basis. Some of this funding comes from countries with surplus food stocks that are periodically poured into the sea. 

The recent debate on Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) is another indicator of the dangers of leaving such a key sector to foreign financing. Already there are indications of indigenous animal breeds, especially cattle, being under threat of extinction due to the prioritisation of imported breeds in research and development. Indeed, in the agro-industry phraseology, “improved” is synonymous with “foreign”, or “imported”, both for crop varieties and animal breeds. Government must domesticate our research agenda.

To ensure food security, Government must spread rural industrialization, mainly cottage, to light industries. Smallholder farmers have resorted to selling all their harvest due to lack of alternative sources of income to meet other needs, including education and health care, leading to perpetual food insecurity. 

It has been established in a study simulated in Gulu and Bushenyi during a food security baseline survey, that a rural farmer selling 10 bunches of matooke per month, at Shs 7, 000 each, will need to sell for 60 months to earn enough money to maintain one student for one semester at Makerere University, assuming all income goes to financing this single child’s education. The one selling simsim would need 72 months to achieve the same objective. Thus, in the absence of alternative income, smallholder farmers will remain food-insecure and undernourished. This partly explains why Bushenyi, the richest district in Uganda, has the highest number of stunted children. Everything grown is for the market, with most land switched from millet and sweet potatoes to matooke growing, which has higher urban demand.  Elsewhere in China, one village in rural China increased her GDP and food security by focusing 80 percent of their manpower from rice growing to manufacturing buttons. 

Water and environment

Despite its importance to the economy, the water and environment sector has long been neglected by the NRM Government. The share of the sector in the budget has declined over the last seven years, from 7.4 percent in 2004/05 to 2.7 percent this financial year. 

In addition, climate change has not been given the attention it deserves even as the entire country is experiencing its effects in form of floods, landslides, crop failure, all associated with famine. There is no provision for such calamities in the national budget. This is not helped either by the continued destruction of wetlands by highly placed individuals in this republic. 

Paragraph 57: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I request that it be recorded in the Hansard. 

THE SPEAKER: But you have been reading everything. Were you going to skip it?

MR EKANYA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Why? You do not want to read it? Well, it is your paper. 

MR EKANYA: Let me read it. 

Funding to this sector has largely been concentrated in the Ministry of Water, which takes 62.6 percent of the sector allocation, leaving the other sub-sectors of environmental management and forestry management to share 4.07 percent and 10.67 percent respectively. While the centre of service delivery is at local governments, they have been allocated a miserable Shs 58.9 billion, being 22.65 percent of the total budget of that sector. Over 96 percent of this allocation is to be spent on rural water and sanitation, with only 1.3 percent of this, amounting to Shs 0.785 billion, left for natural resource management. 

In many local governments, the environment departments and district forestry services are either non-existent or dysfunctional due to lack of funding. Consequently, the country is facing a deepening environmental crisis manifested in the declining quality and quantity of environmental parameters, including land and soil, forestry and wetlands, climate change and biodiversity. 

Environmental law enforcement has systematically broken down, with some politicians usurping the powers and functions of law enforcement and administrative agencies. This has not been helped by the already poor co-ordination among the environment and natural resources institutions. Civil society organisations have warned of a deepening ecological crisis but some of our political leaders seem to be pre-occupied with securing their own share out of the mess rather than providing political leadership to enable the country secure the environment for posterity.

Recommendations

We, therefore, recommend that Government prioritises this sector and insulates it from predatory practices such as budget reallocations, provide for adequate funding of local government district environment offices, and district forestry services and include a time-bound commitment to reform and restructure the institutions under this sub-sector to ensure effective leadership and coordination.

Health

According to reports attributed to the Minister of Health, Dr Christine Ondoa, 70 percent of diseases in Uganda are preventable. Yet the current budget emphasis and other programmes focus largely on treatment of diseases, as if we had a ministry of disease rather than a Ministry of Health. Despite being a priority sector, Government is yet to live up to the Abuja Declaration by committing 15 percent of the budget to health. This financial year, the sector has been allocated 10.3 percent with a greater percentage being donor funding.

The budget makes proposals for the rehabilitation of health centre IVs across the country and scrapping tax on ambulances. However, Government has not provided concrete measures to make medicines available in these units, or indicated how they will motivate the low-paid health workers, aspects that have affected the quality of healthcare delivery and the continuing brain drain of medical practitioners in search of greener pastures. 

A recent report by Ministry of Health indicates that remuneration of health workers is absurdly low in Uganda  compared to other East African countries, hence the exodus of health workers, which has left Uganda’s biggest referral hospital grappling with a doctor-to-patient ratio of 1:40. The health workers who remain are tempted to divert drugs to sustain themselves and be able to provide a meal for their families.

We recommend a 50 percent pay increase for all health workers in order to enable them improve their professional performance, and to stop graft in the sector. 

We also recommend a structured system of domestic hygiene and sanitation enforcement at household, school and community level, notably in rural areas and urban slums. The regular outbreak of diarrhoea diseases in urban slums in Uganda is unacceptable in the 21st century. In this respect, the budget should focus on-  

1.	investing in public health and save on epidemic outbreak;
2.	establishing a drug procurement and supply chain system that eliminates stock-outs and expiry by end of 2012.

Because of the financial strain on the health sector, Government should institute health insurance for workers in public and private sector, and the resources saved from there be re-directed to provision of quality free healthcare to the needy categories as follows: 
•	Pregnant women who are needy 
•	Children of unemployed parents between 1–10 years and
•	the unemployed elderly of over 50 years old.

On education and manpower development, we all know that education is one sector that has suffered the biggest brunt of liberalisation and privatisation. It has now become a commodity, with students seen as clients ready to buy. From nursery school to university, education in Uganda has taken a whole new trend, not easy to discern and define anymore. From the supply side, it is a lucrative business; while from the demand side, it is turning into a good of ostentation: the more expensive the school, the more enrolment it will attract; whether the quality is commensurate with the cost, is secondary.  

With an examination-oriented system, high grades are interpreted to mean success, thus becoming the unique selling proposition by schools to parents and learners, from nursery to university.  

At policy level, there seems to be no clearly defined, articulated policy about education in Uganda. Government does not have any long-term national manpower plan oriented to our development plans and complete with any export potential, in specific areas. Education has, instead, become an end in itself, rather than a means to an end.

The current rhetoric is “skills development”, “vocational education”, “job-creators-not-seekers” etcetera. But what does all this mean? Jobs cannot be created in a vacuum. Education reforms can only make sense and have impact in a given context. Vocational skills will come to naught in an all-importing, consumer economy like ours and so will science.

Government flout the culture and attitude of seeking paid employment as retarding Uganda’s development but skills alone without experience are not enough. As illustrated by Charles Handy, a management guru, graduates will need to hang onto an organisation to gain experience into the realities and challenges of business management before going out on their own. It may be interesting to conduct a cohort study of Enterprise Uganda graduates to assess their rate of success and job creation. UPE and USE are good but their purpose is only political and short-term, with a double effect of rendering majority of parents irresponsible towards the education of their children, while placing a burden on the few who will struggle to pay university costs for their children.

This year’s budget allocated an impressive Shs 1,416.27 billion (14.5 percent), towards the education sector with much of the allocation going into UPE and USE sub sectors at Shs 867.53 billion. Uganda has received considerable international attention for being the first, and to-date, the only country to adopt a policy of free universal secondary education. However, research studies have shown that the policy was adopted with little attention to system capacity or involvement of secondary head teachers. There are questions surrounding its quality and capacity of schools to handle the huge number of students. The budget does not address the critical challenges affecting Uganda’s education sector from low teachers’ pay, limited infrastructure commensurate with high student numbers to the quality of teaching.  As you are aware, teachers recently threatened to lay down their tools countrywide over low pay and indeed they did, while primary teachers’ colleges simply closed up. The 2011/12 budget does not address these concerns.

We also curiously question why gross fees paid by students in traditional secondary schools such as Budo, Gayaza, Nabisunsa and Namagunga are comparable to those paid in private secondary schools where Government does not contribute to teachers’ salaries and capitation grants. This leads us, therefore, to suggest that these schools can, just like their private counterparts, live on the fees they charge. In this case, the savings from there can be channelled to rural UPE schools, while the said traditional schools are handed over to their foundation bodies.

We recommend critical reforms in the education sector. We focus on increasing a primary school teachers’ pay to a starting level of Shs 400,000 and investment spending on school infrastructure. 

We also recommend urgent need to review and evaluate the whole UPE and USE to tertiary level; the entire education sector needs a total conceptual review. Education and skills development must be planned, guided and aligned with the development roadmap of the country. Government needs to ask and answer key questions regarding the sector like:
1.	What is our development strategy? Is it resource-based industrialisation, hi-tech industrialisation, or export of manpower? 
2.	What skills shall we need at each phase in each key sector and in what quantities?
3.	How shall we attain those skills? Will they be government-led or private market?
4.	Is it possible to do a 10-skills needs mapping to guide planning?

We recommend that in the medium term, Government should:
(a)	Operationalise the higher education loans scheme starting with students from poor backgrounds.

(b)	Re-direct available resources from the skewed government tertiary sponsorship towards training, and development of science teachers for secondary schools.

(c)	Re-introduce the pre-university youth programmes - scaled up to two years, with a comprehensive curriculum that includes attachment to industry or workplace. This should be compulsory for all, whether joining government or private tertiary institution. These programmes should not be for purposes of political brainwashing!
 
(d)	We also recommend that Government provides free lunch for UPE pupils. (Applause)  

Youth and job creation

Madam Speaker, Government has been under pressure from the recent and current social and political unrest, and these were taking place during the drafting of the 2011/12 budget. The NRM Government decided to allocate Shs 44.5 billion for youth job creation, including Shs 25 billion for Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital and 3.5 billion for Youth Entrepreneurship Training Programme under Enterprise Uganda. 

Our concern is that, acting in haste due to extreme pressure, the NRM Government throws the proposal on the stage without suggesting concrete mechanisms for handling it. The NRM Government had earlier pushed for a strategy of co-operatives like SACCO formation to enable small borrowers access the needed financing for business. What happened to that programme?  

We believe that the proposed Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme (YES) is not going to generate the anticipated youth employment. The first YES, which was launched over a decade ago, was a still birth. The Entandikwa scheme, designed under similar arrangements, was another abortion. These programmes were launched as political responses to challenges of the day; they died and were buried without any post-mortem. Post-mortem reports would have established the cause of the demise of these programmes. The findings would have been critical in informing any fresh attempts in this regard. Why has Government failed to learn from its past failures? 

We would also like Government to clarify the source of the Shs 44.5 billion and its intended use. How much is from the Government of Uganda versus DFCU Bank, and how much is going to be allocated to KACITA? How much will Enterprise Uganda take for training? Government should give us answers because young people of this country cannot wait anymore.

We recommend that employment should be carefully considered as a critical factor to the country’s progress, and Government should focus on funding economic sectors that have strong capability to create a multiplier effect on job creation, such as agriculture, mining and tourism. We believe that this budget, in its current form, will clearly not create the much hyped youth employment.

Energy

With the population growing at 3.5 percent per annum, and an economy growing at six percent per annum, average demand for power is growing at 30MW per annum. And yet, the total average supply stands at just 380MW, more than half of which is from expensive thermal plants and cannot support large scale industries like steel mills, textiles mills and aluminium processing industries.

The high cost of doing business, resulting from power instability, has been one of the biggest challenges to the private sector’s growth. While the 2011/12 budget anticipates growth prospects to come from the private sector, the energy options for private sector growth are absolutely unconvincing. 

Although the power generation and production capacity is projected to increase with the number of new dams to be constructed, the power and energy cost is still high and unaffordable. Thermal generation, introduced as an emergency response in 2005, consumes 80 percent of the money allocated to the energy sector, yet it only produces 50 percent of the energy used. The high energy production costs explain why energy tariffs stand at about Shs 385 per unit for domestic consumer; Shs 299 at off peak hours and Shs 405 during peak hours for industrial users.

We are gravely concerned about the inefficiencies in the energy sector. When the sector was restructured, and UEB unbundled, it was hoped that this would result into reduced tariffs for citizens and businesses. Instead, taxpayers now have to fork out over Shs 200 billion annually to sustain bureaucrats of several non-performing parastatals who collude with bureaucrats of government ministries. (Applause) These parastatals are running a risk-free business fully cushioned from energy losses, taxes and economic shocks.  
You will never find a similar business anywhere else in the world. Profit is a reward for taking risk. But the companies in the energy sector were allowed, by people whose interests had been taken care of, to take abnormal profit without bearing any risk, and the sector managers are just bickering as taxpayers are ripped off to the maximum.

We recommend that Government implements the constructive findings of the Seven-man Interim Review of Electricity Tariff Committee, to which the Deputy Speaker, Rt hon. Jacob Oulanyah, was member and counsel. Implementation of their recommendations was expected to achieve a 44 percent reduction in tariffs. We are aware that the report was reviewed and adopted by the regulator in October 2009. We, therefore, take great exception and question the intention of the concerted frustrated reforms meant to turn around this sector.  We challenge the new minister for the sector, who was an active player in the same sector prior to her new appointment, to table concrete reforms in this regard. 

The Auditor-General, in his report on statutory corporations, has questioned the persistent high energy losses standing at 34 percent, yet UMEME had undertaken to reduce loss of energy by 28 percent by 2009.  

Petroleum management contracts must be clearly reviewed by all Ugandans. A draft Petroleum (Exploration, Development, Production and Value Addition) Bill, 2010 was tabled in the last Parliament. Members should take keen interest in the Petroleum Bill when it is returned for debate in the House. 
 
Transparency is a character and practice alien to the NRM and the NRM Government. The civil society and the public have raised concerns, why the Ministry of Energy has remained determinedly opaque about oil industry management. We, therefore, recommend that Members of this Parliament critically analyse all petroleum concerns whenever they come to their attention.
  
We also want the minister to clarify on the matter of third party oil companies licensed to import oil products, without any distribution chains, that is, infrastructure in the country. The NRM Government has not exercised its right to have the oil meant for Uganda to dock at the Kipevu terminal with adequate capacity, rather than accepting to be pushed to the Kimanzi terminal, with very limited capacity to handle oil imports to Uganda. This has left the petroleum industry players in Uganda vulnerable and susceptible to no option but to procure from these middlemen and pass the cost to the consumers. The NRM Government is aware that because of the inability to address adequate flow in the distribution chain, Ugandan consumers are being ripped off by about Shs 400 per litre of petroleum products.

Finally, could the minister clarify to the country on what she reported as oil revenue earned during the year amounting to Shs 1.008 trillion, part of which is reported to be earmarked for Karuma project? Where is the money? Does she have an escrow account for this? Where in the current budget is this money reflected as a resource available for appropriation by this Parliament? Is the minister aware that the Opposition knows that part of the money she purports to earmark for Karuma, is already fully resourced by monies appropriated by Parliament?  

Madam Speaker, unless the minister tables details of this money, we have no choice but to conclude that this money was diverted and we hold her responsible for non-disclosure on her part.

Financial sector

The financial sector is experiencing turbulence, raising concerns of a governance nature over institutions charged with the management of this sector.  Earlier attempts by Parliament to bring Bank of Uganda to order in this regard, as well as compliance with procurement laws, were only deflected by people bent on keeping operation of this institution intransigent. 

As it turns out, Bank of Uganda has endangered the macroeconomic stability, financial stability and economic stability making Uganda’s currency the worst performing currency in the world.

We wish to question Government’s motive of raising the capital reserve requirement for operating a commercial bank by over 600 percent, from Shs 4.0 billion to Shs 25 billion. Our concern is that, this will put the small banks out of business or expose them to takeovers by banking giants, which are foreign-owned and foreign-controlled. This will negatively impact on the ability to lend and expand financial services to those who need them most, especially in the remote areas.  

What is important is not the size of the bank, but rather the strength of it; as indicated by the appropriate financial ratios, as provided for in the Financial Institutions Act. We see this as another government design to forcefully borrow from commercial banks under the guise of strengthening them.

The primary responsibility of this House is to protect small growing and young indigenous institutions from economic predators. It is the small but effective financial institutions that can spread across the country to provide financial services to the under-served. We recommend that the NRM Government stays or abandons their ill-advised plans whatsoever.

We take exception to the way the Treasury is being managed. The integrity and sovereignty of Bank of Uganda is greatly eroded. The recent Auditor-General’s report to 30 June 2010 provides a glimpse of a failing central bank. The reserves in Bank of Uganda have deteriorated having variously been irregularly encroached on even by Mr Museveni for the procurement of jet fighters, with no value added to the economy. 

The Consolidated Fund account has been overdrawn to red, without due authority of Parliament. Government’s regular bank accounts have been overdrawn by Shs 3.188 trillion, about one third of the national budget, without the authority of the Auditor-General, Accountant-General or Parliament! Whereas Bank of Uganda is a banker to Government, they have continued to act as though they were the holders and owners of the Consolidated Fund: issuing monies at will, without authority of Auditor-General or Accountant-General. Treasonable acts have been committed through commission or omission by Mr Tumusiime Mutebile, the Governor of the Central Bank.

Madam Speaker, earlier on in paragraphs 5 and 10 above, we invited you to take note of the financial indiscipline and extra-budget by the managers of Uganda’s Treasury. It is now public knowledge that NRM drew excessive money from the Treasury and poured into our economy before and during the 2011 elections. As a consequence, there is too much money in Uganda shillings chasing for too few goods and too few dollars. 

This witnessed an increase in growth of currency circulation from below two percent to 32 percent per annum by March 2011. So, inflation and exchange rate problems were exacerbated by this misconduct. This mess has already cost Ugandans another Shs 419 billion to clean up by way of interest costs on Treasury Bills issued by Bank of Uganda, who allowed the problem in the first place.

Some time back, the Minister of State for Finance failed to explain why Uganda is the only country on the planet with two currencies running side by side, and why banks continue to issue old notes. The same minister forgot that when the new currencies were being pushed onto Ugandans in haste, the reason cited by the NRM was a perceived “rampant counterfeiting” because of weak security features in the old notes and non-conformity by those notes to international standards. 

The matter was to be very urgent and that old notes captured into the banking system will not be re-issued in this regard. The minister’s statement confirmed what we have been telling the country, that the real reason was to have an opportunity to print excess notes for the 2011 elections. 

We recommend that Government compels Bank of Uganda to comply with public scrutiny. They should be advised to tow a cautious approach in their monetary policy and desist from being a regular player in the market. This has caused unnecessary costs in terms of interest and crowded out the private sector, as banks now prefer to invest in Treasury Bills, at the expense of private sector borrowers.

Our recommendations under the agriculture sector will go a long way in boosting production for the local market as well as export, thereby reducing inflation and increasing foreign exchange earnings. 

To make matters worse, imports continue to flood our market because of the un-conducive tax regime that is punitive to local enterprises, making local products more expensive, leading to the increasing import bill. Government should recognise that inflation and exchange rates are primarily caused by supply and demand imbalances; supply of Uganda shillings against supply of goods and services, and supply of Uganda shillings against supply of foreign exchange. 

We recommend that Government should not lose track of these ingredients and deal with them as we have variously discussed in this response.

The Ministry of Finance needs to strengthen financial hygiene in the Microfinance Support Centre Limited (MSCL). We have heard that money is being poorly handled at MSCL because governance there has collapsed, as demonstrated by the recent sacking of the entire board and executive director. 

We recommend full investigation and serious disciplinary action on all those who will be found guilty. We further propose integration of Post Bank and Pride Uganda, all of which are huge loss makers, into the new proposed Uganda Agricultural Development Bank. 

We further propose that the authority of Parliament should be exercised whenever public monies are applied. This Parliament must bring to order the Bank of Uganda, through the relevant committees, and desist from succumbing to workshops called by them intended to trim the long arm of this House. Only then shall we see the re-invigoration of the financial sector and prudent management of scarce resources.

Madam Speaker, the minister did not make any proposals for reforms necessary to stimulate certain key subsectors, which play an important role in economic growth, including: the insurance sub-sector, pension sub-sector, collective investment scheme, venture capital, and mobile money regulation.

The transport sector

The transport and works sector remains critical for economic growth and development as it affects all sectors of the economy. However, while budget allocations to the sector have remained above 10 percent - Shs 1,290.79 billion in financial year 2011/2012 - of the budget over the last three years, the huge investment in this sector has not translated into an improvement in the transport network. 

Most roads in the country are still in a very poor state: characterised by potholes, poor drainage systems and increasing number of accidents. We believe that one reason for this state of affairs in the sector is the confusion over roles among agencies responsible for the sector. The Uganda Road Fund, the Uganda National Roads Authority and the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT) have clearly mixed up their roles. It is well known that the role of the URF is to finance road maintenance, while UNRA should design and maintain roads, leaving the MoWT with the responsibility for policy. However, MoWT continues to carry out construction works, repairs and maintenance, which is clearly a mandate for UNRA. This has resulted into duplication and allocation inefficiencies among the key players.

UNRA on their part, are carrying out haphazard maintenance activities without any clear strategic direction. They have been questioned by the Auditor-General as to why they do not have and are reluctant to formulate and document strategic maintenance plans, and continue to rely on short term and often ad hoc operational plans, as if they cannot see beyond one year. As a result, money remains unspent and is returned to the Treasury, never to be seen again as balances at the start of the financial year.

We, therefore, recommend that the MoWT should concentrate on policy, monitoring and evaluation and leave the other functions to the responsible bodies, including the local governments for districts urban and community access roads. 

Government must also address the lack of capacity of local providers to supply the required construction and maintenance services. Such local providers, if adequately empowered and engaged in the works sector, have the potential to plough back into the economy in terms of jobs and other spin-offs. 

We are also aware that the Eighth Parliament approved a loan for acquisition of road units from China and Japan. We are surprised that no mention is made of the progress of this initiative. We are also perturbed by the continued traffic jam in Kampala, resulting from Government’s failure to allocate sufficient funds to overhaul the transport system in Kampala, including the implementation of the Kampala Transport Master Plan. The cost of traffic jam in terms of fuel and time is of concern. 

We recommend that Government establishes satellite parks outside of Kampala, discourages mini-bus taxis from the city centre, immediately completes the Northern by-pass, commences construction of the Southern by-pass, and constructs flyovers on the central business district roads.

We are also concerned about the continued reports by Government to be handling the same roads, year in year out. In financial year 2008/2009, Government reported that the following roads were constructed, rehabilitated and upgraded:
•	Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe road;
•	Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road;
•	Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka road;
•	Kabaale-Kisoro-Bunagana road.

Those same roads have since then continued to appear in the subsequent budgets of financial year 2009/10, and financial year 2010/2011 as being undertaken by Government. Although the Soroti-Dokolo road was reported in the 2010/2011 national budget as having been completed by December 2009, this same road has been reported again in the financial year 2011/2012 national budget as one of the roads close to completion. The same applies for the Gayaza-Zirobwe and Matugga-Semutto roads, which have since 2009/2010 to-date been reported as being close to completion and are still being reported as being at the same stage. 

Such glaring duplications in reporting have the potential to misdirect resources, especially where there are still inadequate monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, to ensure that Government delivers on the promises made in the budget speech. 

Madam Speaker, we are gravely concerned about the increasing number of road accidents in Uganda! According to the 2010 statistics abstract, there was an increase in the number of traffic casualties from 13,400 to about 18,500 between 2008 and 2009. The highest percentage – 96 percent - of persons killed in these accidents was registered among the motor cyclists. The increasing number of accidents has mainly been attributed to the narrow roads, potholes, poor driving standards, lack of walkways for pedestrians and lack of drivers’ and riders’ training. 

We recommend that Government finalises and implements the Road Safety Policy and Strategy, which should apply to both motorists and cyclists. In addition, the implementation of road safety measures such as speed governors and tough punishments for reckless driving should be instituted. 

Railway Transport

It is estimated that only 32 km of railway network is functional today, compared to 1,266 km in the early 1990’s, a clear sign that this sub-sector has for long been neglected by the government. It should be noted that the railway and water transport, if well developed, are very efficient and cost-effective means of transport which would offset the strain on the road network.

While the 2011/2012 budget acknowledges the importance of investing in the railway network and promises to rehabilitate the Kampala-Malaba railway and the Tororo-Pakwach railway, Government does not show any plans to develop railway links between Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan and Western Uganda and the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. This has made the country less attractive in business potential both in and around the region. 

Furthermore, the roads linking Uganda to the regional markets especially Sudan and the DRC are not well upgraded and maintained, which causes delays and traffic, thus affecting trade. This, coupled with the high and escalating fuel prices and depreciation of the local currency, is likely to make the country’s products not only expensive but also less competitive. 

We recommend that the railway be treated as a special project, the way CHOGM was treated. Since billions were raised for this passing event in a single financial year, how and why can’t we raise the same in two financial years and work on the railway? (Applause) Besides the line, Kenya is seeking a contractor to put up a modern terminal in Mombasa, Nairobi and Kisumu. Are we at the same pace? 

The proposal to deploy and employ UPDF should go beyond serving soldiers. We can benchmark Tanzania’s state-owned construction firm, Jeshi la Kujenga Taifa, which recruits and trains youth in various practical skills, under military discipline.  This programme can be made a pre-university, two-year skill development phase with students engaged in various projects in key sectors, as we have already recommended above, under youth and employment.  

As part of the oil revenue investment, we should already have projections going into electric railway systems, with pollution-free trains, fast enough for one to stay in Gulu and work in Kampala. 

Trade and Tourism

We are a little surprised that the minister did not outline any specific measures to deal with the ailing trade and tourism sector. We have discussed how to increase foreign exchange earnings, through revitalisation of the agricultural sector.  The minister only showed concern for constraints on the balance of payments resulting from slower growth of exports, tourism receipts and remittances on one hand while imports continue to increase. However, no measures were cited regarding the plight of tourism in Uganda.

Ever since Uganda’s national carrier was allowed to collapse, other countries with vibrant airlines have continued to cash in on the lucrative routes to Entebbe, moreover carrying their national flags.  And yet the cost of transporting one container of goods from Mombasa to Kampala costs about three times it takes to bring the same container from Germany to Mombasa by sea.  

Across borders, tourists who come to Uganda are allowed free access to Uganda, complete with their vehicles and food while those from Uganda going across are denied the same treatment. The scandals in the sector, such as those that have dogged the Uganda Wildlife Authority currently under investigation, have not been addressed by the sector. Government does not either show any initiative towards tapping into the potential of Ugandans in the Diaspora to market Uganda as a tourist destination and how the dual citizenship framework has been operationalised and utilised to benefit them.

Public administration sector

Government expenditure has continued to rise, with over 50 percent going for recurrent expenditure. You will notice that public sector management and administration combined takes 13.3 percent of the total budget. The expanded government occasioned by increased ministries and proliferation of districts, are a big pain in the neck of Ugandans.

We recommend a lean and effective government, headed by knowledgeable and competent politicians and bureaucrats. (Applause) We believe Government can save up to 40 percent of public spending from this and direct the funds to more productive sectors like agriculture, industry development, health and education.

We recommend that Government saves the RDCs, DISOs, GISOs and presidential advisors from the disguised unemployment they are in and deploy these good people to more value-added responsibilities to save taxpayers’ money.  

We recommend that Government turns every county into a district, with lean structures but without LCV leadership and the district woman Parliament representative. 

We also recommend that representation to this House be restructured and downsized so that one MP represents a population quota of at least 300,000 people. 

We further recommend that Government adopts a federal system of government. 

The duties of RDCs, DISOs and GISOs should be mainstreamed back where they were curved from and that is the Police, which should be strengthened and motivated.  

We further propose that to achieve the holistic objective, cabinet must be downsized by 40 percent. It is these hard decisions that will prevent waste and save taxpayers’ money.
Madam Speaker, in this regard, we invite you and hon. Members to notice the “anti-waste” and “anti-corruption” gimmick that Government flashed in their budget speech. The proposal to reduce Government expenditure by cutting on advertising, fuel, travel and vehicles is a classic diversionary tactic which should not pass-by without your notice. Advertising of tenders is a PPDA requirement to ensure competition, transparency and, therefore, value for money. This is the type of advertising we all see in the media. To cut or attempt to stop this would mean Government tenders and jobs will be awarded on selective basis. Parliament cannot allow this!  

Firstly, the freeze on purchase of Government motor vehicles except for critical areas such as hospitals, Police and security services was pre-supposedly intended to curb wasteful public expenditure. However, all ministries, Government departments and agencies, according to their policy statements, have huge chunks of money for the purchase of motor vehicles including Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with a budget of over Shs 2.0 billion shillings for the purchase of motor vehicles.

Secondly, vehicles, fuel and stationery mentioned by the minister are a necessity for a big government. The real solution for this apparent excess is to downsize Government as proposed above, and the burden will go. You cannot appoint and create more district chairpersons and then suggest that they should not have paper to write on or have an office car. This was a gimmick and the purpose was to divert your attention from the grand corruption and waste that we are talking about at the political level! If they were genuine in their proposals, they would also have suggested cutting expenses on rent for Government offices, such as Bauman House and Police headquarters on Parliament Avenue.

We, therefore, recommend that Government resolves this contradiction, and adopts our well-meant recommendation to firstly downsize Government and then move to replace the current policy of assigning vehicles to officials and departments, with a facility to enable officers purchase private cars at concessionary rates, which they will use for the performance of their official duties as well. Exceptions to this rule should clearly be put in place.

Given the current economic hardship, we take note with concern of the unsustainable debt stock that stood at Shs 11.9 trillion as of 31 March 2010. We further note the commitment fees paid on undisbursed loans, amounting to Shs 4.76 trillion, being a charge on Ugandans for not spending committed money.
 
We recommend that Government should borrow only for critical and well-designed programmes that they are ready to implement rather than accumulate arrears in commitment fees for non-performing loans. 

Savings from these initiatives will be channelled to enhance and pay a living for doctors, nurses, men and women in uniform, civil servants and teachers, improve our hospitals, provide drugs in hospitals, improve on school infrastructure by building more classrooms, provision of laboratory equipments, fund agriculture and even afford free lunch for our pupils in UPE schools.

Presidency

We continue to observe the interference of the Executive in the works of the Judiciary against a clear separation of powers enshrined in the supreme law of the land. This underpins the lack of commitment to fight corruption. The will to fight the vice is crippled by the Executive. You will note, for example, that the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, which ironically reports to the President, is in disrepute on matters of financial accountability with the Auditor-General expressing a disclaimer opinion on their appropriateness.  

The nomenclature of the sectors connotes the linkages and functions that support related programmes for purposes of budgeting and planning. Mention has been made on the proliferation of all Government departments with attendant budgets under the Presidency. We note, among others, the placement of the Office of the Vice-President placed under State House. We also note the astronomical budgets for agencies like the AIDS Commission with a development budget of over Shs 2.0 billion when its programmes are well placed under the health sector.

The aggregate allocation for the presidency in this financial year amounts to Shs 154.651 billion yet State House alone spent Shs 168.194 billion last financial year. What then is the basis for allocation of Shs 66.645 billion to State House given that past experience? This is unrealistic in planning as State House has always exhausted its allocation within three months of the financial year, and continued to rely on supplementary budgets. We demand that this budget indiscipline must be brought to an end.

We also call upon the responsible organs of the state to appropriately advise the President to stick by the law and let other state actors do their part without any further infringement. In the same vein, we recommend the reinstatement of Office of the Vice-President under the presidency where it rightly belongs. 

Further, we condemn the duplication of functions under the presidency and the wasteful and total disregard of institutional development for the proper running of public affairs.

Taxation

Uganda’s tax base is still narrow, a factor that explains the limited revenue generation and dependence on development partners. With the advent of regional economic integration, cross-border taxes are set to decrease even further. The future, therefore, lies in domestic tax revenue whose base must be expanded. We have consistently pushed Government and given suggestions on the need to formalise the informal sector. The bulk of Ugandan businesses fall in the informal sector, which has a huge potential for tax revenue.  

We recommend that Government decentralises functions of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to the level of the sub-county. This will ease the registration of small businesses and bring them into tax purview. 

We also wish to remind Government about the national ID project into which we have injected over Shs 300 billion but nothing is seen coming out, other than one ID card for the President. (Laughter) The purpose of this project was to facilitate identification for purposes of tracing to individual activities that are now passing as part of the informal sector.  

Now we hear the minister saying that the measure will reduce the cost of capital to the business community, thereby watering down the primary objectives of this project which were tied to the expansion of the tax base.

PAYE thresholds have remained stagnant and unadjusted for years and are overdue for review. In a recent survey by Deloitte and Touché, over 64 percent of Ugandans have pleaded to Government to reduce corporation tax and raise the PAYE threshold so as to ease the burden on low income earners. A similar demand has been made by Private Sector Foundation Uganda in its budget submission to the Minister for Finance, asking that the PAYE threshold be increased from Shs 130,000 to Shs 500,000 to enhance effective demand and broaden the tax base. All these calls have for the last several years been neglected.

The result is that our tax to GDP ratio will forever remain at below 14 percent incomparable to the Sub Saharan average of 18 percent. This is simply because Government bureaucrats do not appreciate the time-tested concept that reducing taxes increases disposable income, which in turn leads to increased consumption expenditure by the poor and then increased taxes. The effect is double on both consumption related to welfare of citizens and taxation for further investment. 

We also discourage any attempts by Government to introduce VAT on leasing of trucks above 3.5 tons, which are crucial to the business and agricultural sector.

Conclusion

We have presented our views regarding the stewardship by Government of our affairs.  We have shown you what we believe are workable policy alternatives which, if adopted, will go a long way in moving Uganda forward and restore hope in the management of public affairs. Progress does not mean progress by one person or a few; meaningful progress requires all citizens aboard. The inequality in the country demonstrates that not everybody is on board. No amount of singing about economic growth will convince Ugandans that their lives are moving forward. What they need is progress that they share; the progress that touches their lives too.

We will not reach there unless tough decisions are taken as we have variously recommended. Some recommendations may be painful today but we will reap from them, if not our children. Yes, downsizing Government might be painful in the short run. Cutting people’s umbilical connections from the Treasury will hurt many people and their relatives in the short term. But to do this now is the only sure way to progress, which we badly need. (Applause)

We have taken this liberty to be generous with our thoughts, during this very first budget of the five budgets that will be presented by this term of Government. We purposely do so that you do not blame anyone, saying you were not told. You are going to be judged by how well you listen to us and how well you hear us because we speak for those who cannot reach you.  

That is why, when you thought that the Walk-to-Work was our thing and, therefore, tried to persecute us, you were confronted by helpless women matching in the streets with empty saucepans to protest why you were not listening to them.

Madam Speaker, we believe we can progress together equitably and I now urge you and my colleagues, to support our policy proposals for the good of this country.

I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Ekanya deserves another glass of water. (Laughter)

Hon. Members, I want to thank the Shadow Minister of Finance for that lengthy and comprehensive response to the budget speech by the Minister of Finance. And since you have been listening for about two-and-a- half hours, I am not sure whether I should subject you to receiving another report from the Budget Committee.

So, I will give you time to digest this comprehensive statement and then tomorrow we will start with the statement from the Budget Committee before we go to the policy statements. I do not know which committees are ready tomorrow – Finance is ready? Okay, after the Budget Committee then the Committee on Finance and ICT tomorrow. So, House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 5.49 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 24 August 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)


