Tuesday, 21 August, 2007

                        Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you and to thank you for what you are doing. I am following up what is going on in the various committees; some work is being done, although I must confess that I am a bit worried, in that last year we were able to complete the process of the estimates by 31st August, but I do not know whether we shall be able to meet that deadline as we did last year. Although we were a new Parliament last year, we were able to be on time. Anyway, I trust that with your diligence we shall be able to get the reports and process them by 31st August.

I must apologise for the inconvenience you are facing these days in accessing Parliament. As you will notice, some works are going on in the building; we are polishing ourselves. I do not know, it may be CHOGM or whatever, but I think we are having a new face in the Parliament, and that has necessitated inconveniencing you in accessing Parliament. But this will be done fast, within two or three weeks the work will have been completed and you will have free access to Parliament.  

You are aware that we have now been able to have some of us sit at Bauman House, therefore addressing the issue of lack of accommodation. Other improvements are also going on.  

Last two weeks or so, I had a telephone conversation with the Secretary General, MacDonald, who also had some discussion with His Excellency the President, about the Commonwealth coming in to assist our capacity to run a multi-party parliament. I am glad to announce that good things have come now. There will be a team of experts coming to meet us for a week. It will comprise of Pius Msekwa, who was the Chairman of the Commonwealth Executive Committee for sometime, and former Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Tanzania.  There will also be MacDonald, who was a Speaker in Canada and former Secretary General of CPA. There will also be a very senior clerk of the House of Lords, and another senior Member of Parliament of Ghana. They will come here to interact with you and have some discussion with you over our work.  I hope you will be able to meet them and utilise the opportunity that has been offered.

I received a note from the former Member of Parliament, hon. Kityo; he is working for Fuel Freedom International, and they have camped in our parliamentary gardens. I understand the project is trying to help us to economise on fuel use in our vehicles and you are all invited to go and see what is going on there at 6.00 p.m.  I hope you will find time to be there. Thank you very much.

2.51
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The matter I want to raise very briefly is in connection with the floods that have devastated Teso Sub-region and displace thousands of people.  As far as I remember, the scenario in Teso can only be traced way back in 1962 - 1972.  I would like to briefly give you the figures in dimension about what is taking place now in that region, particularly in Katakwi and Amuria districts.

Mr Speaker, as we talk now, we have 1,047 households that are displaced in the region and they are taking their shelter in health centres and in some schools. About 4,869 acres of crops have been destroyed towards the harvesting season; the crops I am talking about are cassava, sweet potatoes, groundnuts, yams and simsim.  

In terms of sanitation, we have about 134 pit latrines that have been washed off by the floods in Katakwi and Amuria districts.  

In terms of roads that connect the sub-counties to markets and health facilities, about 80 roads have been cut off completely; they are not passable. 

So, Mr Speaker, I would very briefly like to remind the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to respond very rapidly to the situation in Teso in terms of emergency relief items: food, medicine, road repairs and things associated to disaster preparedness.

Mr Speaker, when we get out of the House and you switch on the phone, the calls that I receive are all about the disaster that is now taking place in Teso. We would not like a situation whereby cholera breaks out because of too much water that has mixed up with everything.  There are diseases that can come up like malaria and others. I think the ministry can take charge of those, but we cannot. 

I also believe that we have a department of meteorology, which should have been able to advise the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness about the looming torrential rains that have come up and posed a threat in Teso Sub-region. I just wanted to inform Government about this.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  I am sorry for what is happening. I hope the appropriate authority will take action, central and local.

2.55
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity for me to raise a matter of national importance. Mr Speaker, I have some good news and some bad news. The good news is that after five years of battling, the PRA suspects are out on bail. That is where the good news ends. The bad news is that they are still in prison two weeks after they were granted bail because it is too expensive. It is not my intension, to challenge a judicial decision because we understand that bail conditions are at the discretion of court.  

But, Mr Speaker, they are still in prison, two weeks later because the bail conditions requires them to pay Shs 2,000,000 in cash each, and sureties to deposit with court land titles worth not less than Shs 20,000,000 –(Interruptions)- yes; this is unprecedented in Uganda. We know that we follow the common law system, but if bail is a constitutional right and people apply for it, then it should be made easy for them to access not otherwise.

I want to thank the Judiciary for taking the stand and offering them bail. But the matter I wish this House to consider is the matter of the cost of justice; if peasants are asked to pay Shs 2,000,000 – even for us MPs, if you asked me to pay Shs 2,000,000, I would find it hard, I would have to fundraise from my colleagues here. So you can imagine how hard it is for a student and a peasant to raise that much. (Laughter) And I do not know how many people would be willing to deposit their land title for these people to be able to get out on bail.

So, Mr Speaker, without going into detail, the matter is understood before this House and I would like this House to express itself on it. As we keep saying, today it is the PRA suspects, but tomorrow it could be you or your loved ones. [Mr Okupa: “It could be hon. Kakooza.”]-(Laughter)

But more importantly, Mr Speaker, while these people cannot get out after battling for five years, there are some other people on the same charges who are out on a non-cash bail – even some on murder are out on a non-cash bail. So, this selective administration of the law must be a matter of serious concern to this House. We all know the history of these people, they have been handled as a special group, and even the Judiciary and the Executive are handling them as a special group. But why should they be a special group? 

The matter before court is a capital offence, like many other capital offences. I remember the Attorney-General wrote a letter during the 2005 elections and said that one of the presidential candidates was at a different level of innocence – it is in writing, from the Attorney-General’s Office - he said that Dr Besigye cannot be nominated because he is at a different level of innocence from the other presidential candidates. So, without overstating this point, I would like this House to express itself on access of justice by different people. (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you honourable colleague. I know that hon. Betty wanted to summarise her presentation, but I thought that this information would be important. Yesterday, hon. Sam Njuba, who was the lawyer of some of these suspects who were tried, came to my office with Mr Okiring. Mr Okiring was granted bail, but one of the bail conditions is that he reports to Yumbe twice a month, to Arua twice a month, and he is from Pallisa. He is also to report here twice a month. So, he has to report to three different places, six times in a month. He gave me a budget. When he was released, he needed to come and let his people know that he was leased, so he went to Pallisa the night before and he had to come back because he had to report to Yumbe today. So the process of reporting alone, leave alone the Shs 2,000,000 they have to deposit on bail is just incredible. So, the appeal of hon. Betty is really something that we need to resolve. Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. In conclusion, the law is supposed to be blind and we are all supposed to be equal before the law. But when a certain category of people is treated as special before the law, then it should be a matter of serious concern to this House.  So, Mr Speaker, I beg that the House expresses itself on this matter.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, if I remember very well, we provided in the Constitution that the Speaker, the Chief Justice and the President would be consulting with one another. So, I wanted to seek your guidance on whether it is not proper that you consult with the Chief Justice on such a matter so that we address this thing holistically. Otherwise, if we leave it like that, we are setting a bad precedence. Next time, it may be me, a brother from that side or hon. Kakooza. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, in the making of the current Constitution, there was a suggestion for a corporate Government. A corporate Government means that the three arms of Government are required under the Constitution to come together and make consultations. But there are some who opposed this and said that if it is done, then may be the Executive would encroach on the independence of the Judiciary and Parliament. I remember when we had a problem with the Judiciary, there was a meeting that was convened by His Excellency the President; the Judiciary was there and the President chaired it. We discussed and we were able to reach a solution and the things were normalised. So, if you would like to encourage a corporate Government, you are free, there are provisions under which you can bring a motion to amend the Constitution to officially insert that provision.

3.04
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Three weeks ago, I raised a matter of concern, regarding the exclusion of the Vice President from the race of chancellor in Makerere University. The Chief Whip was in the seat of the Leader of the government Business, and they made an undertaking that they would give the interpretation within two weeks. So, Mr Speaker, I am requesting for that interpretation to be given to this House now.

THE SPEAKER: Was it the Chief Whip to give the interpretation or the official person, the Attorney-General?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, no sooner had the Chief Whip given that commitment than the Deputy Attorney-General came and conceded that he would come back within two weeks to give that interpretation. However, within those two weeks, Parliament was not sitting. So, now that Parliament has convened, we are eagerly waiting for that interpretation. 

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, the issue of the disqualification of the Vice-President from the race for Chancellorship of Makerere University came up on the Floor of the House. I undertook to follow it up and come with the position of the Attorney-General here. When I contacted my senior colleague, he accordingly wrote to the person who sought the clarification from him and that happened to be the Public Relations Officer of the convocation. There is the vetting committee and this person who sought clarification from the Attorney-General is the Public Relations Officer of the University Convocation. He wanted to know the linkage between the convocation and the vetting committee and sought for other particulars, which he is still waiting for, but I believe immediately that is done, we shall come back here and report accordingly. 

Before I take my seat, I wish to briefly make an observation on what has been raised by my colleague hon. Beti Kamya. (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, for giving way. I sought clarification, as a Member of Parliament but the clarification he is referring to is another that had been sought from another source and not from Parliament.  When I sought the clarification, the Speaker took it up and directed the Attorney-General to give the clarification to Parliament. Meanwhile, even that clarification that was sought from another source did not receive legal interpretation. What we transact here is a public matter and that could be the fact that they heard about it. 

They also talked to me and the kind of legal interpretation that the Attorney-General gave them is here, and I beg to lay it on the Table to show that the Attorney-General does not want to perform his duty of giving legal interpretation. They also do not want to give legal interpretation to Parliament so that we know how we will go about it and where it will lead.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this kind of opinion –(Interjection)- Members are requesting me to read it; can I read it, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Table it here.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, what I am laying on the Table - 

THE SPEAKER: To whom is it addressed?

MR BANYENZAKI: It is from the Attorney-General’s Chamber to the Publicity Secretary, Makerere University Convocation. This was another source that sought this interpretation –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us not contradict ourselves because he said that the Public Relations Office of Makerere University contacted him. You said that you are not interested in requisition of interpretation from the Public Relations office of Makerere, but that you are interested in your requisition. So, I think what you should insist on is your requisition of the interpretation by the Attorney-General rather than being concerned with what happened with Makerere. Your interest was the interpretation sought from this Floor but the interpretation from Makerere is something outside us.

MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Let me withdraw this interpretation and wait for his right now. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI:  Mr Speaker, I will oblige, but in the spirit of working together, I want to proceed from a harmonious point of view by contacting my senior colleague whom I found already handling the subject matter. I thought rather than come here and give an interpretation, he will come and give the interpretation sought -

THE SPEAKER: So, bring it to us tomorrow.

MR RUHINDI: I will get back after discussing with him.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concerns raised by my colleague hon. Betty Kamya, on this subject of the PRA suspects. I appreciate her legal remarks because otherwise, this issue of bail being a constitutional right keeps coming up. No one would want to deny that legal position because when you look at Article 28 of our Constitution, it gives that assurance. 

However, like most provisions in the Constitution it has qualifications and limitations. If you read Article 28 of the Constitution, in isolation of Article 24 of the Constitution, you are likely not to get the full impact because Article 24 qualifies Article 28. A person is presumed innocent until proven guilty meaning that a person should not be put under custodial punishment or otherwise, when he has not been proved guilty. 

However, Article 23(6) gives the courts powers to give bail on conditions as the court may determine. That means that there is a limitation on the right conferred on a suspect under Article 28. This Article 28(6) is given operational ground by the trial on Indictments Act, which gives exceptional circumstances under which a court may consider when giving bail to a person. 

Now, let me turn to the harsh conditions that hon. Beti Kamya refers to, that have been prescribed for the grant of bail of these suspects. I think under our judicial process, where a person is not happy with a court decision, there are remedies; there are ways and means of going about it. You can apply for review or you can make an appeal but to turn Parliament into a court of law, we will be challenged for usurping the court powers. I think the court process should be left to go on; you could advise the lawyers concerned about these suspects to take an appropriate remedy or an appropriate action. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The members concerned about these two statements that prompted the debate here approached me and said that they were going to raise these statements. Therefore, I do not expect other statements of public importance that have not been brought to my attention. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the Attorney-General is more related to what my colleague, hon. Banyenzaki, raised. I will wait for the statement but we would like to be given clear grounds or respects, in which the Office of the President and that of the Vice-President defer or whether they are the same, because it is causing confusion. Do we treat the Vice- President in the same way as the President? Is the Vice- President elected or appointed? When we hear that the interpretation took the Vice-President to be the same as the President, then it causes confusion. So, while we wait for a comprehensive explanation, the Attorney-General can shade light on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that will be part of his statement because that was the reason why this happened. So, it will be a very essential part of the statement that he will make tomorrow. 

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. Although he has said that if there is a side that is not satisfied with a court ruling, they can seek court review of the case, when we as representatives of people in this House see something that has not had any precedent and we see it coming to suppress a certain side - for example, they have said that the sureties should give titles worth Shs 20 million and for someone who has been incarcerated for four years and has not been saving to give Shs 2 million as surety - I think it is not right for us in this House to leave something like that to go on. What I am saying is that what hon. Ekanya said, that if there is a way you can consult the Chief Justice on that - for example, recently in Mukono, a magistrate gave an order to demolish a school but the Chief Justice has put a commission to inquire how this happened. So, we cannot leave this issue –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, it is true that I can make consultations with the Chief Justice on this matter, but what purpose will it serve? The issue of hon. Beti Kamya was a complaint about onerous conditions for bail. However, each judge in his court is entitled to his own discretion. There is no way the Chief Justice would tell the judge that when you are granting bail, you should never impose onerous conditions because conditions are determined by the circumstances of a particular case.  But the best we can do, if we can do it, and I think that is what hon. Beti Kamya raised, is that as Parliament, we can legislate on this and put maximum and minimum conditions. 

Is that what you want? That we should make a law prescribing the conditions that would be taken into account when granting bail? I can communicate to the Chief Justice, but will he dictate? Will he decide to have a conference of the judges themselves and consider this matter? Anyway, the judges have heard about it because this is a public debate and it has gone on record.

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, I am a bit perturbed and I need your guidance. Much as the Attorney-General gave his interpretation, somewhere, the Leader of the Opposition pointed out one of the people who were granted bail, and is required to move to so many places to report. Apart from the bail money, that one is also too much. Yes, we can say that there is subjudice and the rest, but recently, I was reading the Daily Monitor, and the judges were complaining about Parliament not putting good and modern laws to help them execute their work. But when we see such developments also, we have to air out what somebody thinks. Recently, I heard one of the judges –

THE SPEAKER: Could they have said so? I do not know under which circumstances the judges said that. There is a way of legislating, and procedure is very well known. The procedure is that the Executive initiates most of the laws and they debate them in the Cabinet. We just do not, out of the blue as Parliament, say that we will legislate on this. I think you should have clarified that procedure to them since you were there. (Laughter)

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, I was reading from the papers and there was this incidence about pouring acid on faces of the people - the acid phenomenon that is now devouring our society. They say that it is the work of Parliament to enact laws because there is no law punitive enough to curtail such activities and they are lumping everything back to Parliament. Therefore, this is why I am seeking your guidance. Some of these matters may not be subjudice; we are there to help each other and find a way forward that will help society overcome some of these evils.

THE SPEAKER: Then I would suggest, honourable members, that since this has been stated in the House and we have an appropriate committee handling legal matters, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, they may take it as a task to examine this matter and recommend to us the best way to handle it in fairness or concern.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want a clarification from the Attorney-General. It is not regarding what has been discussed here but I remember a year ago in the last session, after the court ruling regarding the LCI elections, we brought up the matter here and the Attorney-General promised to handle these matters. Up to today, we are having a problem when we need documents that need LCIs to sign. How far has the Attorney-General gone to amend the laws and to arrange fresh elections to handle these matters, because I remember it was a year ago when he made the undertaking to this House? Can he help the nation? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think to be fair, LCs are a subject that falls under the sector of the Ministry of Local Government. Why don’t you ask the Minister Of Local Government about the arrangements that are being made to ensure that LCI elections are held? (Laughter). You see the Attorney-General will only come in as a consultant on the law, but the schedule is a schedule of Minister of Local Government.

MR OKUPA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. However, I was bringing it up because the Attorney-General had given an undertaking at that time to bring it, but now that the Major General is here, we shall be most obliged to hear from him.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj.Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad to inform the Honourable Member of Parliament that the law concerning LC elections was challenged by the members of the opposition and court took decisions that affected the law fundamentally. We have proposed to Cabinet, amendments in consonance with the pronouncements of the court. The court ruling did not affect local Government only, and my colleagues in the other departments which were affected are also doing their bit. Soon the law will come here for amendment and as soon as it is amended we shall have the elections.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, in the meantime, what do we do with documents, which need to be signed by LC? How do we handle issues like getting passports?

THE SPEAKER: I think we have talked about this matter and we said that although some people had given an impression that the courts had said that the current LCs were existing illegally, that was never stated by the court. What obtains is that they continue so that they do not leave a vacuum and when proper laws are made, you will have leaders. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, before he comes in- for sometime we have missed the Leader of Government Business, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In fact he has not come here since last year, but we are glad that you are back and we welcome you to Parliament, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

3.26
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Creator who enabled me to recover from a major operation, His Excellency, the President, who facilitated me to go abroad. I want also to thank you. particularly, because you are very caring; you sent messages of recovery as well as many of my colleagues. I wish to thank hon. Alaso who has written me a very nice letter – (Laughter) - which I intend to show my wife when I go back. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.27
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker for availing me this opportunity. I would like to read my personal statement as the general public is aware from media reports that I have, in the past few days, gone through an experience that has necessitated my making this statement. 

I was remanded in Luzira on allegations of being indebted to a person known as John Kabagambe. I want to categorically state that I am not indebted to the said John Kabagambe. I wish, therefore, through this statement, to clarify on the above allegations and present the truth behind my recent experience. I hope that a lesson can be drawn from this experience so that other Ugandans do not go through the same experience. I will only present the facts as I know them because other matters might be considered sub-judice, since there is still a case pending determination in court.

On 10 August 2007, at about 9.00 a.m., I was arrested by a court bailiff named, Moses Kirunda, acting under the authority of a warrant of arrest, dated 23rd July, arising out of Nakawa civil suit No.249 of 2007. The motor vehicle in which I was travelling was intercepted along Entebbe Road and I was forcefully removed from it at gunpoint. I was riding with my 13-year-old daughter who has since been in shock owing to the trauma she suffered. I was bundled into a salon car with tinted windows and driven at breakneck speed to Nakawa Chief Magistrate’s Court.

All the while, I asked the court bailiff and the accompanying police officers why I was being arrested, but got no answer. I was relieved when I arrived at the court because I knew there would be an opportunity for me to plead my innocence. On arrival at the Magistrate’s Court, I was thrown into the cells for a few minutes and then produced before the Chief Magistrate, His Worship, Deo Nizeyimana. I was asked whether I was ready to pay a sum in excess of Ugshs6.5million and when I attempted to plead my innocence, I was quickly committed to civil prison for six months, ostensibly on account of failure to pay the sum of Shs 6.5 million to John Kabagambe. A sum of Shs 30,000 was paid to the prison authorities for my upkeep for 15 days and I was conveyed again at breakneck speed in the same saloon vehicle to Luzira Remand Prison.

I know John Kabagambe and it is true that I issued him a cheque of Shs4.2million sometime in February. The matter that gave rise to that cheque was an election petition wherein I guaranteed the payment of legal costs incurred by Ruth Kanyaruju in an election petition filed in Masaka High Court by Grace Namara. I initially issued a cheque in favour of Ruth Kanyaruju for a sum of Shs8 million. In due course, I was able to mobilise funds and I paid Ruth Kanyaruju the sum of Shs5 million in cash which was acknowledged and receipts given to me. In the document acknowledging receipt, she instructed that the balance be paid to KK Associate Advocates which acted on her behalf in the said election petition. 

Before making the payment of 5 million to Ruth Kanyaruju, her lawyer, John Kabagambe, had requested that the portion of the legal cost due to his firm, which was Shs 4.2million, should be paid by cheque, drawn in his name. Comforted by the expectation that he was a trained and therefore ethical lawyer, I obliged and issued the cheque in his name. After making that payment to Ruth Kanyaruju, I requested John Kabagambe to return the cheque to me since the amount on it was higher than the costs due. So, I wrote to my bankers telling them not to honour that cheque and when the cheque was forwarded to the bank, it was written on “Stopped: to refer to the drawee.” I paid the balance of Shs 3 million by cash to KK Associate Advocates and as far as I was concerned, the matter was closed. 

It was after I was arrested that I learnt from my lawyers, F.K. Mpanga Advocates, that their perusal of the court records had revealed that a suit had been filed against me by John Kabagambe, on the cheque of Shs 4.2 million, that I had issued earlier and which I had countermanded since part payment had been made. The court records show that one Amos Timugaya, said to be a process server, allegedly served me with court summons. I do not know the person and I have never seen him. 

Following my arrest, my lawyers established that judgement had been entered against me on 12 April 2007, but I was not in the country, interest awarded at 30 percent and a decree extracted on 15 June 2007. The bill of costs was taxed on 15 June 2007 and 1,086, 300 awarded as costs against me. On 16 June 2007 an application for execution against me was made and a warrant of arrest issued, initially to Steven Schwanda, stated to be a court bailiff, and subsequently to Moses Kirunda who arrested me.

The above experience has served as an eye-opener to the nature of the suffering of our people. (Laughter) It is clear from my experience and from interacting with inmates in Luzira that there are many innocent people in Luzira, who are incarcerated on frame up charges. (Laughter)

I came with a memorandum. Some people are arrested at 8p.m. in the night; the courts sit at night and when the accused are there, these court bailiffs connive with the magistrates to sign a warrant of arrest. I have got a written document, which I will forward to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

The conditions in prison are deplorable, the congestion is unimaginable and the experience is dehumanising, yet many inmates have actually been on remand for periods longer than the maximum sentences prescribed for the offences they are alleged to have committed. 

I call upon the government of Uganda to speed up the hearing and determining of cases so that people do not stay on remand for such a long period. Honourable members, today it is me but tomorrow it is going to be you. (Laughter)  There must be an improvement in the Judicial Service Commission. If we do not evaluate our performance within the Judicial Service Commission, which is the authority concerned- to me, if I fail to have security for my life, I think that I am denied justice

THE SPEAKER: Go on with your statement.

MR KAKOOZA: I have been advised that Uganda is a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which sets an international standard against imprisonment for failure of a person to fulfil a contractual obligation. I found a significant number of inmates who are in prison over civil debts. In my case I was imprisoned even when I had no contractual obligation, let alone failure to fulfil it. 

This begs the question, why do we still have on our statute books, laws that allow imprisonment over matters of a civil nature? It is apparent, therefore, that law reform is urgently necessary. We must give our people a decent option. If this can happen to a person of my status -(Laughter)- then there must be a million silent voices quietly languishing in our prisons without hope of ever accessing justice. (Applause) This is a real matter; it is practical and I have experienced it. 

I call upon the leadership in the Judiciary to assist our people to appreciate the operations of the court system and to require its officers to wear a human face. Upon my arrest, I thought that when I reached the Magistrate, that was the time to be rescued. However, I never entered into a plea to even explain and they just pushed me and told me to go out. And when I was freed, I never signed any document of bail or anything else. I was told that there was some confusion and I was told to go out. (Laughter)

It is necessary from my experience that a person brought before judicial officers under a warrant of arrest in matters like this, be allowed sufficient time and opportunity to explain his or her position. If I had been accorded time and opportunity, I would have demonstrated, using documents, that I am not indebted and I would have been saved from this harrowing experience. 

I call upon those in charge of court bailiffs to restrain them in their vicious ways because their operations appear to be unregulated and are undertaken with a lot of arbitrariness. I call upon the Law Council to tackle the apparent problem of errant lawyers because if this was a professional lawyer, and he presented a cheque which had been stopped and he had been told to take it to the owner of the account and he took it, presented it and lied to court, he swore an affidavit which was untrue. 

In conclusion, I want to thank very much, the Speaker of Parliament, Rt hon. Edward Ssekandi, and all other people who prayed for me  -(Laughter)- and assisted me in one way or another to get out of this problem. I also thank my lawyers who helped me to deal with this situation and for exhibiting professionalism and for acting quickly to rescue me. I would like to thank my family who prayed for me and provided what I needed while at Luzira. 

Despite my agonising experience while in Luzira, I wish to reassure the people of Kabula that I remain committed to serve them and that I remain a law-abiding citizen who will only seek recourse to the law of justice in this matter. I will continue to represent the people of Kabula and to perform my legislative role with renewed vigour. Although my body was subjected to repugnant treatment, my spirit has been strengthened more by the injustice I have suffered- (Laughter)- For God and my country. I beg to move. (Mr Tinkasimiire rose_) (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we have any provisions to debate this statement since it is a personal statement. However, my comment on these court documents is that if court documents are served to you, please accept them. I am not saying that they were served but accept them and see how to handle it. Some people just throw them away without even looking at them. 

I have established relations with the CID, and I have told them, never go to my Members of Parliament without routing these summons through me. I must with regret say, I have a number of times got these summons through me and you call a member to come so that we discuss the matter but the member declines. This is a serious matter because if you do, you will say we passed through the Speaker but he did not respond - because I have to return these summons to the Police with comments. I will either have to say that I did not see the member, or the member was not around - something like that. I cannot tell them that the member declined to come. So, to make my work easy and to continue with the relationship that I have established with the CID that they route their requisition of you appearing through me, please respond when you are advised to go to the Speaker’s office. Thank you very much.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure to seek and request for an amendment of the Order Paper because there are two questions that came from the Opposition side. We recognise the time limitation that Parliament has in debating the Budget, and we think that these two questions will take off time that will be required for our Shadow minister to respond and for us to debate the Budget. Besides, the established tradition is that questions are asked and responded to on Thursdays. So, I would like, on behalf of the Opposition, to formally request that these questions be differed so that the other items on the Order Paper are dealt with.

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, I was going to say that the Minister of Trade and other minister from the ministry are not available and therefore that answer would not have been answered because the ministers are not there. Now, that would have disposed of question No. 36 and we will remain with question No. 38. 

Honourable members, you have heard from the Leader of Opposition, he prays that these questions be differed for sometime so that we deal with the important matter of the Budget. I think we can –(Interruption)- you do not have an answer because your answer has been overtaken by the fact that the minister is not here, you will make it some other time.

MR EKANYA: I was seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker. Whereas I agree with you that the minister is not here, I want us to reconsider the request of the Leader of Opposition because if it is adopted that these questions will be answered after the Budget process then – unless he has said Thursday. If it is Thursday, I have no problem but after the Budget process - this country is in a big problem because the government of Uganda is supposed to sign – least developed countries are being compelled by the European Union to sign a fresh agreement before November.

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with these questions listed on Thursday.   

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF 

(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007 
(II) BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2007/008.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, to help you recollect what happened, this motion was moved when the Minister of Finance presented his Budget but it was never followed by debate. The debate, which we now need to handle so that as soon as the debate is finalised and we agree to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply, we shall sit as a Committee of Supply to handle the various estimates for the ministry. We need not move it because it was moved. The position now is that the Shadow Minister in charge of Finance wants to respond to what was presented by the minister on the Budget day and then we shall follow up with the debate.

3.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to make a response to the Budget on behalf of the Opposition. I am aware that each of you has a copy, which you can follow as I make my presentation. 

It is one financial year since the NRM Government exercised power under the multi-party dispensation. Accordingly, the Budget Speech for 2007/08 and the State of the Nation Address by H.E. the President of Uganda attempted to account for its time in power over the past financial year 2006/07. In common with its past practice, Government has avoided giving the people of Uganda the full account of its actions and inactions over the year. 

Last financial year, the minister preferred to use the Budget theme “Enhancing economic growth and household incomes through increased production and productivity”; raising high hopes in the public that Government was going to address their concern on household poverty. The year is gone, and all the minister has told Ugandans is that there was a remarkable performance in the economy with real GDP growth of 6.5 percent and that the Budget performed 99 percent on target. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the minister has not told Ugandans how household incomes have been enhanced in accordance with the theme and resources allocated; what impact the financial year’s spending had on rural poverty; the challenges it faced such as massive corruption in the health, local Government sectors and the lessons learnt.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister has also failed to answer the numerous questions that we put to him in last financially year budget. For a complete year, the minister has found no time, no space and no answers to the concerns of more than 40 percent of the Ugandan population that we, in the opposition legitimately represent in this House. 

Abraham Lincoln once said, “My greatest concern is not whether you have failed, but whether you are content with your failure”. The minister has as usual preferred to gloss over all these serious matters of failed policies, plans and programmes and rushed to yet another theme, “Re-orienting Government expenditure towards prosperity for all.”  

We in the Opposition reiterate our call of last financial year that “the ruling party has a duty not to only hear but also to listen” and acknowledge the alternative voice from opposition parties if we are to build a prosperous Uganda. Themes and slogans whose objectives cannot be measurable and translated into real and tangible results will not move this country forward. Performance figures that conceal the bleak state of the economy will not help this Parliament to advise the minister and the NRM Government to improve when answers are not provided to the numerous questions raised.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in performing our constitutional duty of giving an alternative voice to this nation, we in the Opposition wish to make a response to the statement made by the minister on behalf of the President with a view to highlighting where loopholes are and providing policy alternatives on salient issues that would provide solutions to the now endemic household poverty. Details will be contained in sectoral responses to the ministerial policy statements by the respective sector opposition ministers.   

Mr Speaker, we shall start by clinically examining and taking stock of where the country is. The following information is well known to you, Mr Speaker and Honourable Members.

 Income-Poverty declined from 38.4 percent in the financial year 2002/03 to 31.3 percent in the financial year 2005/06

Real GDP at market prices is estimated to have grown by 6.5 percent in the financial year 2005/06

The share of agricultural production to GDP declined from 42 percent in 1997/98 to 31.9 percent in 2006/07

The low growth rates in the agricultural sub-sector resulted in the low levels of household incomes. As such, Government undertakes to increase resource allocations to the agriculture sector over the medium term.

Only 11 percent of the population has access to electricity. This implies that 3.3 million people have power.

The proportion of communities with access to a Government health unit is 6.7 percent

The Ugandan population is growing at 3.4 percent per annum.

The above figures raise more questions than the answers provided by the minister in his Budget statement: To what extent do demographic trends, such as birth rates, lead to increased incident of poverty? Is the high population growth (third highest in the world) positive or negative to fighting poverty? Does the 31.3 percent of the poor include the children below 18 years who are not working? What is the government policy on this? 

Where are the poor? Can Government see them to ensure the targeted interventions reach them? 

If at all the economy is growing at 6.5 percent per annum, faster than population growth of 3.4 percent per annum, why is the number of poor people increasing?

How relevant is the environment in the fight against poverty? Does deforestation and wetland encroachment, for example, have an impact on poverty?

In comparison with other competitor countries, what incentives does Government provide to attract both foreign and local investment?
What impact does the falling percentage Government spending to GDP in key sectors like agriculture create on the economy?

Has Government learnt any lessons from the excessive debt burden to improve its current debt policy?

How effective and efficient is the current spending on public sector services such as water, health and education? Is it marred with corruption? 

Is there any commitment to and practice of zero tolerance on corruption?

Is the role of women recognised and effectively utilised in the fight against poverty? As a vulnerable group, what legal regime has been put in place to ensure equity in society?

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we shall make reference to these questions both in the ensuing paragraphs and the respective Shadow Minister’s alternative policy responses to ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2007/08. We call upon Government and the Executive in particular to pay attention to these alternative policy proposals whose popularity enabled us to get the mandate we exercise in this House.

Structure of the economy

Mr Speaker and honourable members, although the structure of the economy has transformed slowly during the last five years, the share of agriculture in GDP growth has declined from 42 percent in the financial year 1997/98 to 31.9 percent in the financial year 2006/07. This is a decline of 10 percentage points yet it is the sector that employs 87 percent of the labour force and produces about 90 percent of exports. The table and Chart shown below can clearly explain this sad picture. 

Given its contribution to the economy, the sector is the key determinant of growth and general welfare - poverty reduction and food security. This is the reason why despite the minister’s figures of growth, the percentage of population of Ugandans living in absolute poverty has been rising from 38 percent in 1999 to at least 40 percent in 2006. We have shown you; the tables are there.

Weakness in the budget process

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the doctrine of separation of powers is universally accepted as an important pillar of democratic governance and rule of law. The three arms of Government act to check on the excesses of each other and maintain a balance of power. The various organs of Government must therefore work together to effectively deliver services to the public.

The imbalance in distribution of resources to the three arms undermines the effectiveness in the delivery of services. We note the discrepancy in resource allocation between the three arms of Government vis-à-vis the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary. 

In the financial year 2006/07, the Executive received 97.76 percent, Parliament 1.33 percent and the Judiciary received 0.91 percent. This financial year 2007/08, the Executive has been allocated 97.75 percent, Parliament 1.45 percent and the Judiciary 0.8 percent. This imbalance in budgetary allocation makes the Executive arm overshadow other branches of Government and makes accountability and oversight difficult and therefore service delivery ineffective.  

Mr Speaker, another discrepancy is in the share between the centre and local governments. While the centre receives 67.9 percent, local governments receive only 20.5 percent yet the majority of the population lives in local governments. We therefore recommend that measures be instituted during the budgetary process to reduce these imbalances and weaknesses in budgetary allocation.  This is the only way this country can equitably develop with contribution from all organs and sectors of Government.

ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND FORECAST

Savings, Investments and Export

Savings

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in this budget statement, the Minister calls for increased savings from the rural poor and sets a 20 percent target from the current 10 percent of GDP. However, the Minister is oblivious of the bottlenecks – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Sergeant-at-Arms, members are uncomfortable because it is very chilly here. Can you do something?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He provides no solution. In his view, he blames low savings on the poor saving culture. Honourable members, how can 38 percent of Uganda’s population who live on one dollar per day have a poor saving culture let alone a saving culture at all?

The view of the Opposition is that unless the following issues that result in low savings are addressed, the Minister’s target will remain a dream. These issues are, among others:

a) 	Low returns on commercial bank savings and the limited networks of commercial banks;
b)	Bank charges on deposits, which are a disincentive to savings;
c) 	Low education/high illiteracy levels;
d) 	Insecurity;
e) 	Increasing poverty in which the rural poor are trapped;
f) 	High consumption levels caused by inadequate Government expenditure on public consumer goods such as roads, hospitals, schools, security;
g) 	The regressive tax system which has now caught up with the rural poorest in form of local service tax and high indirect taxes;
h) 	The spiral population growth, which is the third highest in the whole world.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, while Uganda’s average GDP growth was 6.5 percent between 1990/1991 and 2002/2003, per capita GDP growth was at 2.7 percent per annum as the population grew  at 3.4 percent per annum. This fertility rate presents a big challenge to poverty reduction in its own right and to savings for investment. We in the Opposition believe that unless Government comes out with a clear population policy, the savings ratios will remain low and therefore we will have no investments. The different signals sent out by the NRM leadership and in particular by His Excellency the President on population issues will not help the situation. We need to develop a general consensus on population issues if we are to move this country forward.

Investments

Investments are a natural result of savings and without savings we cannot talk about investments.  The major source of capital for investments in Uganda now is savings, given the prohibitive cost of borrowing that favours only the well off in return causing unemployment. The lending rates in the country, which range between 18 to 25 percent, do not encourage investment. The ability of the public to cope with the high borrowing costs is further hampered by lack of/high costs of inputs such as power and transport due to poor roads.

The investment environment also tends to favour foreign investors at the expense of our local investors. It is mostly the foreign investors that get free land and have tax holidays. It is only in Uganda where “foreign investors” access loans from commercial banks, get Government guarantees and get free transport costs for their products. To boost investment, it is the opinion of the Opposition that unless Government addresses these prohibitive lending rates, the poor infrastructure and the investment climate the rates of investment will remain low.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is not surprising that we continue to celebrate the export of traditional raw materials such as cotton, coffee, tobacco and tea.  Fish, flowers and soap now constitute the non-traditional exports. The Minister, however, avoids addressing the major problem, which is the country’s persistent trade deficit.  The deficit rose from US$ 1.1 billion in 2005/2006 to US$ 1.24 billion in 2006/2007 signifying an increase of 15.8 percent in the trade deficit. 

Similarly, the Minister does not acknowledge the contribution of Ugandans in the diaspora to the growth in the export sector. We are left wondering as to what signal he is sending to this important category of foreign exchange earners. If this contribution, which is approximately US$ 1 billion, was not received, our trade deficit this financial year would have been US$ 2.24 billion. 

The above scenario means Uganda is largely a consumer state. However, the Minister neither explains nor proposes measures to counter this chronic imbalance by over-reliance on the agriculture sector whose funding is meagre. The inflationary shocks have to be absorbed using the taxpayers’ money.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we believe that creating import substitution incentives, a good business environment and an investment climate will improve our local industries and offset this trade imbalance. The incentives include:

a) 	Access to medium and long term financing to our industrialists.
b) 	Taxation policies that give incentives to all categories of manufacturers.
c) 	Improved infrastructure in terms of roads, rail, air, et cetera.
d) 	The legal and regulatory framework.
e) 	Effective institutional frameworks.

Competitiveness

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the NRM Government promises to make Uganda a leader in Sub-Saharan Africa in terms of cost competitiveness and ease of doing business. The operational relationships between and among departments of Government such as Uganda Investment Authority (UIA), the Uganda Export Promotions Board(UEPB), the Public Private Partnership(PPP) and the Investment Department under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development remain major impediments to competitive business operation in the country. The Minister falls short of telling Ugandans when he will resolve these institutional and legal framework impediments that are causing redundancy and duplication of work.  

Uganda’s overall performance in competitiveness ranking declined from 79th in 2004/2005 down to 103rd in 2005/2006 to 113th in 2006/2007, and of course it is going to decline further. The key constraints to competitiveness have been identified as:

a) 	The investment climate and macroeconomic environment such as high taxation rates.
b)	Utility and infrastructure services such as power crisis, transport and transit trade facilities and the extension of the oil pipeline.
c) 	Access to financing;
d) 	Poor work ethics of the national labour force.
e) 	Corruption.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister is not categorical on how these bottlenecks will be overcome. There is no way Uganda will climb the competitiveness ladder without following a given roadmap, vision and political will. We cannot move forward when we continue to gloss over issues of corruption by not properly implementing reports of the various commissions of inquiry. The Minister does not inform this House as to when the Competitiveness and Investment Climate Strategy (2006-2010) will be fully operationalised.  

Monetary Sector

Mr Speaker, it is important that at least Government has now accepted that the upward inflationary pressures were compounded by the poor management of the environment. The rise in electricity tariffs was due to the falling water levels of Lake Victoria, the first of its kind since the construction of Owen Falls Dam in 1954. We recommend that Government adopts proper environmental management policies and practices by saving forests such as Mabira and Bugala, which are catchment areas for Lake Victoria, and by funding aforestation programmes.  

As mentioned earlier, the lending rates currently ranging from 18 percent to 25 percent remain prohibitive to the business community. We note Government’s interventions to overcome this problem by:

a) 	Capitalising UDB by Ushs 20 billion over the past 22 years, which is not true.
b) 	Supporting infrastructural development of SACCOs with the hope that they will be able to lend at lower rates. 
c) 	Lifting the ban on restrictions on the commercial banking sector’s entry to enhance competitiveness.

Mr Speaker, we observe that none of the above is a sustainable solution to the problem of lending rates because:
  
a) 	The poor and medium sized businesses cannot easily access UDB lending windows because such loans are only given to people with connections to State House and the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development such as Tri-Star and Bassajjabalaba, among others.  
b) 	Research has shown that the cost of running 	a micro-finance entity world over ranges between 20 and 49 percent of loan portfolios.

The Minister does not explain how SACCOs lending rates will be driven below the average. We hope the honourable members still remember the Entandikwa Scheme that collapsed partly due to high overhead costs that could not be sustained by the low lending rates.
 
Mr Speaker, other than promising Ugandans not to rest until the cost of capital comes down to internationally competitive levels, the Minister does not explain how he will do it. We believe the cost of lending should be addressed through focused measures such as:

a) 	Reducing Government borrowing; 
b) 	Revitalisation of cooperative societies; and
c) 	Reduction of quasi-loans (those given to only people with connections).

We also believe the cost of business finance is still affected by other deficiencies such as the rising transportation and power costs, poor information flows and the legal and regulatory framework which should be seriously addressed. Implementation of the long awaited Credit Reference Bureau (CRB) will also be a relief and we demand a definite date for its implementation.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we in the Opposition wholeheartedly support the idea of SACCOs and the revival of cooperatives. However, we strongly detest the militaristic approach of the NRM Government in the implementation of the programme. Reviving the cooperative movement will guide local people on how best to form societies and will thus encourage saving. 

We all know how Boona Bagaggawale was politicised during elections, but our humble advice to Government is to depoliticise poverty reduction programmes. This will make them more attractive to the whole population, whether they voted NRM or not. In fact, recently it was said the Members of Parliament who lost elections on the Movement ticket were the ones to benefit from Bona Bagaggawale, which is wrong. Bona Bagaggawale should be for all, not for Members of Parliament who lost. It should be for all and not for a group, including those from the Opposition. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we also reiterate our recommendation that the export guarantee facility ordinarily managed by Bank of Uganda be moved to Uganda Development Bank.

Financial Sector Developments

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we welcome the idea of introducing the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. However, honourable members might be aware that this is not the first time the Minister mentions this Bill. Unless Government is buying time to enable its senior members to exploit the loopholes within the present legal framework, we request the Minister to give a definite date as to when he will table the Bill for consideration by this august House. If he fails, we shall sponsor a Private Members Bill.

Social Security and Pension Reform

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the problem of pension arrears for our senior citizens should be a serious concern to all of us. We commend the government proposal to clear the Shs 280 billion arrears, of which Shs 200 billion will be for the long awaited pension arrears. However, we urge the NRM Government to put in place foolproof mechanisms that will demonstrate its pro-people, pro-poor and zero tolerance to corruption credentials in this exercise. 

We further reiterate that Government pays interest on these accumulated funds at commercial rates because continuous “borrowing” from pensioners without their consent and clear agreed terms is tantamount to broad daylight robbery, which should be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Pensions Act, Cap.286, section 7(1) states: “Subject to this section, all pensions, gratuities or other allowances shall be charged on and payable out of the Consolidated Fund without further appropriation than this Act.” This provision clearly shows that pensions are appropriated with salaries every financial year and should therefore be accessed on retirement. Government must not disadvantage the people it is mandated to protect. Pension payment would improve the saving culture and pensioners would not require microfinance support if they get paid all their due arrears.

The need for an elaborate regulatory framework to liberalise the pension sector is not in question due to the lessons learnt from the long and painful experience of the privatisation exercise. However, we note the Minister’s intention to: 

1. 	Resist pressure to move hurriedly; 
2. 	Avoid being stampeded into past mistakes; and 
3. 	Resist pressure to use pension savings for speculative purposes.

Mr Speaker, the Minister does not mention who is pushing, pressurising or stampeding him. Is it the NRM Government or the commonly referred to “mafia”? While the Minister emphasises the need for savings and savings mobilisation, he forgets to recognise that pension funds are one of the major preferred forms of investment capital. We urge Government to urgently provide a legal framework to effect the necessary reforms and innovations recommended in the report of the Social Security Sector Transition Group (STG).         

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we in the Opposition believe that delay in reforming the pension sector is a deliberate move to deny our senior citizens the possibility of living a decent life after retirement. It deliberately keeps them under the gruelling monopoly of NSSF and Government pension plans while denying them a chance of reaping benefits of the much desired investment funds of the new pension regime. 

Mr Speaker, in respect of accumulation of arrears, we support the position of the Budget Committee and call upon Government to urgently table the Commitment Control Bill to replace the Commitment Control System. This is the only way to tame Government borrowing from the public through accumulation of arrears.

Fiscal Performance

The Minister informed the nation that URA performed beyond target, sometimes doubling its targeted collections. It is reported that URA collected a revenue surplus of Shs 59.7 billion while non URA domestic revenue collections doubled the expected Shs 42 billion to Shs 95 billion. Total surplus (URA and non-URA) therefore totalled Shs 102.7 billion. The Minister should guide us on the following:

a) 	Whether the over-performance is a result of star performance, deliberate under-budgeting to portray star performance and/or due to exchange rate developments.
b) 	Since the total excess revenue realised over and above budgeted figures amounts to Shs 102.7 billion and the cardinal principle of Government economic management policy is to keep Government expenditure within the budgetary resources in any fiscal year, can the Minister inform this House as to where he got the extra Shs 195 billion to finance supplementary schedules I and II totalling to Shs 297 billion (i.e. Shs 297 billion minus Shs 102.7 billion, which is Shs 195 billion) other than the budgetary allocations? 
c) 	Given the two supplementary figures, how does the Minister explain the relationship between the 99 percent budget outturn and the perfect overall performance on expenditure? 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we in the Opposition believe that the haphazard way that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is handling the budget will not improve fiscal performance. Instead of planning first and thereafter looking for money to finance these plans, they start with the latter. 

We strongly recommend that the planning function be removed from the Ministry of Finance to a separate ministry of planning, which will handle the planning function and house the National Planning Authority (NPA). We do not support and encourage a big Cabinet but we do believe that any serious Government should take the planning function seriously. The Ministry can be created cost effectively by offloading excess administration costs, which the NRM Government has imposed on Ugandans.

BUDGET STRATEGY FOR 2007/08

Strategy for Prosperity for All

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in an attempt to attain the Prosperity for All Strategy, the Minister has proposed to address all components in the value chain in a wholesome manner. He further affirms that emphasis will be put on all stages in the value chain such as production, processing and marketing. However, we note that: 
a) Although poverty reduction in Uganda is linked to agricultural production, given the role agriculture plays in the economy and particularly in the rural areas, land as a factor of production has never been a constraint towards poverty eradication. The major problem has been infrastructure necessary to commercialise land use, productivity of the land and output per unit of land. Lack of land does not inhibit land use because communities have mechanisms of “renting” land to each other on a commercial basis. Therefore, the allocation of three billion shillings allegedly for land acquisition is ill-thought of, given the current trend of land wrangles in the country.

b) 	The Minister of the NRM Government that presided over the collapse of cooperatives is lecturing Ugandans on the potential of cooperatives in the value chain and provides Shs 2 billion to help form and strengthen them. The Minister does not explain why Government presided over the collapse of the original cooperatives or the lessons learnt. He also does not acknowledge and mention the financial loss caused by the ill-advised and ill-motivated policies of Government.

c) 	The Minister puts emphasis on the development of SACCOs and provides Shs 10 billion to strengthen infrastructure. He also mentions Government plans to initiate legislation to improve and strengthen regulation and supervision of SACCOs. However, the Minister does not acknowledge the existence of apex institutions in the cooperative sector such as Uganda Cooperative Alliance, its network, capacity and the existing regulatory framework.

Mr Speaker, the Opposition recommends that the following measures be taken to strengthen the development of SACCOs:
a)	The handling of SACCOs is transferred from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry in charge of Cooperatives, Department of Cooperatives, which already has an existing network and capacity.
b)	That the Shs 10 billion provided for infrastructural support for SACCOs be disbursed to the Uganda Cooperative Alliance to facilitate the cooperative officers in mobilising people to form their own cooperative societies other than Government imposing cooperatives on the population.
c) The militarization of Prosperity for All (PFA) change agents and the relevance of the coordination office are addressed with the view of allowing the ministry responsible for cooperatives to fully handle their mandate. Civilisation should be allowed to prevail in poverty alleviation programmes for the benefit of the majority poor.

Mr Speaker, the Minister mentions avoiding a haphazard approach of addressing the PFA strategy but he does not state how Government intends to help farmers in marketing their produce.  

THE BUDGET PRIORITIES FOR FY 2007/8

Investment in Energy

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in 2005/06 Government allocated Shs 20 billion to the Energy Fund. In addition, Shs 99 billion was allocated to the Energy Fund in 2006/07 totalling to Shs 119 billion. Since the Minister reported a 99 percent budget performance, it means this money was put aside for a specific purpose. However, rather than using this money the Minister opted to borrow US$ 75 million (Shs 142 billion) for early commencement of Bujagali construction. We demand an explanation about this discrepancy and an assurance about the existence of the Energy Fund. We also demand an explanation as to whether Parliament authorised the Minister to borrow the US$ 75 million..

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this financial year the Minister provides a figure of Shs 119 billion for hydro power plants and infrastructure development. This figure corresponds with the total amount of money set aside for the Energy Fund in the 2005/06 and 2006/07 financial years. We request the Minister to explain as to whether this is a new provision or whether it is the money we had set aside. If it is the Energy Fund money, do we need to appropriate it again? The Minister should produce accountability of the Shs 119 billion allocated to the energy sector in the 2005/06 and 2006/07 financial years. 

Mr Speaker, the Opposition supports Government effort to develop alternative renewal energy generating schemes such as Waki, Bugoye, Buseruka and Kikagati which will commence this financial year. However, the Minister does not make any provision for this activity. As usual, the Minister has again postponed the Nyagak mini-hydro power project, which has remained on paper for long.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is our cardinal duty to remind the NRM Government that planning is crucial to avoid situations such as the energy crisis. We reiterate the need to enhance the capacity of the National Planning Authority to steer the national planning agenda in the country. The Ministry of Energy should operationalise the government strategic reserves as a priority to avoid further crisis.

Development and Maintenance of Transport Infrastructure

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda has a particularly poor ranking with respect to infrastructure compared to its East African and African neighbours. Uganda is 118th, Tanzania is 93rd, Kenya is 86th while South Africa is at the 49th position. However, the Minister has downplayed that situation by saying that only 20 percent of Uganda’s roads are classified as being in bad condition and that 60 percent are only about to become bad. Unless Government recognises the magnitude of the problem, the Minister should forget his dream on competitiveness.

The state of Uganda’s roads today is appalling with only ten percent of the access roads being in fair condition while the remaining 90 percent are in a bad state and in need of urgent attention. Since infrastructure is one of the obstacles to competitiveness, the Minister’s budget focus on providing marketing support and increasing household income will not be realised without infrastructure improvement. The Government should note that as the population grows, village centres are quickly becoming quasi-urban and semi-urban centres and are therefore in dire need of the transport infrastructure connectivity.

Straightforward contracted works have been a problem to the NRM Government for a long time and have left us wondering whether rural infrastructure will yield any results. We note Government failure to meet its obligations and request for progressive reports on the following roads: 

a) 	Jinja-Bugiri Road which has been a menace for five years yet most revenue is from this road; 
b)	Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana/Kyanika Road, which only stopped at launching; 
c) 	Kampala-Kapeeka-Ziroobe-Wobulenzi, which has just been a campaign item; 
d) 	Matugga-Ssemuto-Kapeeka Road, which has disappeared on paper; and 
e) 	Soroti-Dokolo-Lira Road, which is yet to take off.

We welcome the proposal to introduce a road fund, which expands the proposal in our last financial year budget statement. However, the Minister seems to suggest that this will be the solution to providing resources for road maintenance. Unless this is tested first, say using eight municipalities, it may not yield the expected results. It is also good manners and professional to acknowledge sources of any proposal. The Minister should also reassure the public on how he intends to ensure equity, efficiency and value for money to erase our fears that the proposed road fund will not be a collection account for funds to be diverted.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we welcome the Minister’s proposal to strengthen science, technology and industrial development. However, the Minister contradicts himself by allocating only Shs 1 billion for the domestic development of Uganda Industrial Research Institute. The Uganda Industrial Research Institute was built and equipped with machinery by a grant from the Chinese Government. It has the potential of training and equipping our small-scale industries with skills to improve our agricultural products. However, Government has neglected this institute and the machinery has remained idle and been put to waste. We therefore recommend that Government stops paying lip-service to industrialisation by allocating additional resources to the institute to enable more small-scale industries add value to the products they currently produce and export.

On the telecommunications sector, we request that the Minister updates this House on the progress of the US$ 7.1 million project funded by the Nordic Development Fund to upgrade the telecommunication infrastructure in Northern Uganda under NURP II. 

Rural Development

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister has rightly spelt out that prosperity for all will be in vain if the associated necessary infrastructure is not put in place. However, unless priority areas like access roads in rural areas, access to safe water, education and health are addressed immediately this talk will only remain on paper.

Since poverty reduction in Uganda is linked to agricultural production, rural development cannot be achieved with the current allocation of figures of 4.1 percent to agriculture, 3.5 percent to water and sanitation and 8.6 percent to health, compared to 6.9 and 6.4 percent allocated to public administration and public sector management respectively. We therefore recommend the following measures to achieve the above: 

a) 	That the Shs 3 billion for land purchase be used to implement our last financial year proposal of buying two hand hoes for each household in order to increase agricultural productivity in the 2007/08 financial year.

b) 	Government should recast the budget to provide extra resources for rural infrastructure and water for production. This will cater for the decline in the contribution of agriculture to GDP that has mainly attributed to drought and low productivity.

c) 	Government should also diversify raw material sources and rehabilitate plant stock. This is because of the various crop diseases that are affecting our crops. 

d)	Government should consider reduction of production costs through provision of good infrastructure and crop finance. 

e) 	Provision of adequate storage and distribution facilities should be made a priority in Prosperity for All programmes.

f) 	Measures to provide market information to the farmers, particularly in rural areas, and extension services should be adequately funded. 

g)	Measures aimed at quality control of the products should be put into consideration to improve our competitiveness in the market.

Human Development

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we note Government’s intention to invest Shs 24 billion in the Universal Secondary Education (USE) and to critically review the constraints that affected UPE to ensure great efficiency of the two programmes. However, we are of the opinion that the analysis of constraints that undermined the efficiency of the UPE programme should have been given priority before implementation of USE. This would have avoided haphazard implementation, which is a characteristic of the NRM Government. 

In order to make this investment in USE a reality and avoid problems that marred the UPE programme, we recommend that Government addresses the following problems affecting the quality of the education sector:

a)	The Ministry should hire competent policy analysts to always review and give timely advice to Government during the implementation stage to address shortcomings in the policy. 

b)	Motivation of teachers should be improved through provision of staff quarters and exemption of all teachers from PAYE or increasing the threshold from Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000. 

c) 	Shortage and quality of classroom infrastructure should be addressed.

d) 	Provision of feeding for pupils and students is a necessity.

e) 	Mitigate the high school dropout rates affecting especially girls. 

We welcome the provision for implementing the Uganda National Minimum Health Care Package. However, Government should, as a matter of emergency, address the problem of expiry of drugs in the National Medical Stores. Although emphasis has been put on malaria control and immunisation programmes, we recommend that more effort be put in combating the rampant corruption in the health sector.

Mr Speaker, Government continues to spend a lot of money on treatment of senior Government officials abroad at the expense of the majority of Ugandans and yet the Minister has no provision for equipping our hospitals with proper medical equipment and procurement of equipment for Uganda Cancer Institute and Uganda Heart Institute. We note the Minister’s proposal to evaluate the costs and benefits of setting up the National Social Health Insurance Scheme. However, we think such an important scheme should have been implemented yesterday.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in order to improve the health sector we recommend that: 

a)	All reports of rampant corruption and negligence of duty in the Ministry of Health are implemented. 

b)	Funds should be availed from budgetary reallocations to urgently procure equipment for Uganda Cancer Institute and Uganda Heart Institute to save Ugandans the costs of treatment abroad. 

c)	The Minister should give a timeframe as to when the National Social Health Insurance Scheme will be implemented. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister also pays lip-service to the water sector by a provision of only 3.5 percent for water and sanitation. Since water is life and there is need for water for both human consumption and production, we recommend that additional resources be provided to this sector.

Security and Governance

We note with concern that the conditions under which soldiers live in our constituencies leaves a lot to be desired although year in and year out the Minister continuously talks of professionalising the army. We welcome the long overdue and well deserved increase of soldiers’ pay from Shs 140,000 to Shs 180,000. However, in real terms of income for the UPDF, US$ 100 per month does not reflect the remuneration of a professional soldier. We request the Minister to update the House as to how far professionalisation has gone, and we recommend as follows:

a) 	That the increment should be across the whole rank and file in the service as the last increment was in the 1990s. 
b) The minimum pay should be at least Shs 200,000 to match the cost of living. 
c) 	Consideration for both the Police and Prisons welfare as partners in combating local and international terrorism should also be given urgent attention.

Mr Speaker, the above recommendation can be urgently implemented because they do not require extra resources given the fact that a number of soldiers were recently retired, and the ongoing clean up of the payroll to rid it of ghost soldiers and the war in the North which used to consume a lot of funds have almost come to an end. 

We welcome the policy of providing soldiers subsidised construction materials such as iron sheets and cement. However, we know that this facility may be subject to abuse given the past record of Government on tax incentives. We, therefore, recommend that a serious study be carried out before implementing such a programme to ensure that loopholes in its implementation are plugged and only the beneficiaries will receive the items.

CHOGM

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we welcome the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and the massive investment Government has put in to give a facelift to Uganda’s infrastructure. However, our concern is about the reported cases of rampant corruption in the tendering process and the shoddy work being done in the infrastructure development. We intend to clinically audit and document all CHOGM related transactions in order to show our taxpayers whether there was value for money compared to other Commonwealth countries that have hosted CHOGM.

We support Government policy of divesting public enterprises in an orderly manner as per the PERD Statute. However, we note with concern the way Government revised this process by acquiring shares in Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort without permission from Parliament. We therefore demand an explanation from the Minister on this transaction. We also demand that all contractual documents of this transaction be laid before Parliament for scrutiny. 

Pay Reforms

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the NRM Government has finally accepted that they have always deliberately caused supplementaries on salaries and wages by under budgeting. This is the true character of this Government in presenting falsified figures and paying lip-service to corruption. We are glad the Minister has come up to inform the country the causes of supplementaries. We wish to point out that the integrity of Government, its leadership and its membership is highly compromised by these figures. Unless we come up as Parliament to fight this falsification of figures, our integrity is at stake and history will judge us harshly.

Local Government Funding

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we commend Government for the brave act of abolishing graduated tax as per the FDC election manifesto. However, we note with serious concern the attempt by Government to smuggle back graduated tax in the form of the new local Government service tax, which is a clear demonstration of policy confusion within the NRM Government. The new tax is regressive in particular to local traders, farmers, artisans and the poor civil servants such as teachers and hospital workers in rural areas who will suffer double taxation. In addition, the tax is difficult to collect and is a disincentive to savings which the Minister wants to double. 

We strongly oppose the introduction of any new local Government tax that is not service based to ensure equity and improved quality of life. We recommend rationalisation of local Government and central Government levies. Funds to finance local governments can be sourced through:

a)	Fighting corruption and reducing public administration expenditure by 20 percent. 

b) Re-aligning the budget to increase funding to local governments where majority of the population live and work. This should be increased to at least 60 percent of the budget. This would be done by shifting funds from the public administration sector, State House security agencies and presidential donations. This is what countries that have economically taken off have done. 

Peace, Recovery and Development of Northern Uganda

We appreciate the continued efforts of Government to develop Northern Uganda through Northern Uganda Action Fund. However, we note with concern reports of rampant corruption in the implementation of NURP, procurement of resettlement kits and the poor workmanship in the provision of water sources in Karamoja region. We therefore recommend as follows:

a) 	Investigations on reports of rampant corruption are carried out with the aim of bringing to book the culprits. 

b) 	Value for money audit is carried out in the implementation of NURP and provision of water to Karamoja region. 

c) 	The NRM Government should involve all political parties and other stakeholders and should pursue the programme of setting up a truth and reconciliation commission to ensure long lasting peace in Northern Uganda.

Accountability

We welcome the promise of Government to safeguard the judicial process and promote efficient, transparent and timely enforcement of judicial decisions in a professional manner with zero tolerance to corruption. This proposal sounds too good to be true, as it may be lip-service to appease the powers that gave us a grant of US$ 10.2 million to fight corruption. We commend the cooperation between anti-corruption agencies and the intention of Government to rationalise and harmonise public expenditure. We recommend the following measures to strengthen accountability and Government expenditure:

a) 	That Government implements and prosecutes all those mentioned in the previous investigative reports. 

b) 	That Government expedites the longstanding Audit Bill to ensure independence, efficiency and autonomy of the Auditor-General’s office.

c) 	Government expedites the formation of audit committees in all ministries in line with the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

d) 	That under funding of the accountability sector should seriously be addressed in the Minister’s priorities.

Expenditure on Public Administration

We reiterate the need to reduce public administration expenditure in order to improve service delivery. However, we do not agree that the best way to achieve this is to resort to semantics by splitting public administration into public sector management and public administration as the Minister has just done. Excessive public administration expenditure consumes funds that would be channelled to development and to the fight against poverty. We agree with Government that the demand for new districts does not necessarily come with new resources but just exacerbates the high administrative costs. In order to reduce administration costs, which consume about 12 percent of the national budget, we recommend as follows:

a)	 That Government acts on this experience and rationalises the endless demands to create new districts. 
b) 	That rational use of Government vehicles with a view to ultimately replacing them with a more cost-efficient mechanism like car loan schemes for public officers be enforced.
c) 	Abolish the position of RDCs. 
d) 	Streamline and reduce offices of presidential advisors. 
e) Minimise costs of treatment abroad by providing more funds and equipment for our hospitals and by creating incentives for our medical workers through proper pay, among others. 
f) Rationalise capacity building budgetary allocations.    

Revenue and Tax Measures

We strongly oppose the introduction of discriminative tax incentives that distort the competitive mechanism that is already taking root in the country. Competitiveness demands that players in the market are left to compete and succeed or fail on their own without artificial interventions. It is common knowledge that these interventions are subject to abuse, destabilising the tax system and revenue as acknowledged by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Introduction of new tax incentives will not improve competitiveness unless the constraints I mentioned before are addressed.   

Mr Speaker, VAT on residential houses has never been an impediment on house transactions and does not have an impact on 80 percent of the sale transactions of properties. The only problem is failure by URA to capture these transactions in the tax system. We recommend that its enforcement be streamlined or be scrapped other than pretending to reduce the tax. 

We welcome the abolition of road licence fees. It reduces the high rate of defaulters and high costs of administration. However, we note that licence fees, which used to be paid only by a few people, has been replaced by the 10 percent levy on used motor vehicles, spare parts and the increase in excise duty on fuel which affects the majority poor in terms of transport costs. We recommend that the Minister devises methods of implementing and enforcing taxation measures other than resorting to methods that exploit the poor majority.

We commend the termination of VAT exemption on hotel inputs because they were subject to abuse. However, we recommend that a forensic audit report on this facility be tabled in this august House by September 2007. This audit is vital because the information in the corridors is that this facility was abused by some hotels which imported goods beyond the hotel capacity for sale. 

The tax amnesty on arrears is a welcome idea. However, the Minister should indicate how much revenue he expects from this measure and the sanctions for non compliance. This penalty and interests should also apply to compliant taxpayers to encourage citizens who pay promptly. 

Polythene Bags and Plastic Containers

We welcome the government’s environmental concerns by banning polythene bags commonly known as buveera in line with the parliamentary resolution and the decision of the East African Community ministers. However, we note that Government has not sensitised the population on the types of polythene bags banned. We also note the complaints from the business community that the stocks they have will not clear by the end of the transition period of 30th September 2007. This will cause substantial loss of income yet many of them acquired bank loans. We therefore recommend as follows:

a) 	That the Minister extends the transitional period to 31 December 2007 to enable the business community clear the current stock and avoid loss of revenue. 
b) 	That the Ministry sensitises the public on the types of polythene bags banned. 
c) 	That the Minister creates incentives for collection and recycling of polythene and other plastic materials already in circulation.

Tax Expenditures

The Minister applied powers conferred upon him by the Constitution to waive or vary taxes imposed by law. However, the Minister has not provided details of persons from war-ravaged areas from whom these taxes were waived. We recommend that these details be laid on table for scrutiny, so that the House appreciates the impact that this measure will have on the common peasants in the camps.

Mr Speaker, the Minister also waived PAYE tax for health workers at Comboni Hospital. We have always asked Government to exempt health workers from this tax as an incentive without success. Although we acknowledge the great service the Combonis have provided to the people of Northern Uganda, we demand from the Minister details as to who will benefit from this waiver after this tax has been deducted from the salaries and wages of these health workers.
 
Mr Speaker and honourable members, in the view of the negative effects inflation has on disposable incomes of employee categories, we reiterate our call that the PAYE threshold be increased from the current Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000. This will be in line with the PFA strategy, as it will avail great disposable income to the society. This measure will result in expenditure of Shs 93 billion re-distributed at source. It will also result in a multiplier effect because great amounts will be collected through taxes on increased outputs and consumption.

Conclusions

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda is a signatory to the Solemn Declaration on Gender Parity of the African Union. However, apart from using gender as an election slogan, the NRM Government has not put real investment in the budget to improve the quality of the majority of women. This year’s budget theme will not be achieved with the current allocation of 0.3 percent to handle the women, youth, elderly and the people with disabilities. It is common knowledge that the majority of these people live and work in rural areas where 90 percent of Uganda’s export comes from.  

The budgetary allocation given to the women, youth and disability councils cannot allow them to function properly. We strongly recommend that Government immediately implements gender responsive budgeting in line with the AU declaration and the Millennium Development Goals. This should be done by re-casting the current budget to make it gender sensitive. Unless and until we adopt a gender sensitive approach to budgeting, the majority of the poor will not be addressed and this will inevitably lead to more poverty.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, given its contribution to the growth of the economy and poverty reduction, the decline in the contribution of agriculture to the GDP should be of great concern to all of us. The NRM Government continues to act differently from its pronouncement in respect to the agricultural sector. Their policy is not clear. The sector, which employs 87 percent of the population and contributes 31.9 percent of GDP, only receives a miserable 4.1 percent budget allocation.  The political rhetoric in favour of agriculture as the mainstay of the economy is clearly different from the coins placed on the plates of the rural poor. No one can tell Ugandans the progress of the so-called strategic intervention funds that were budgeted for to enhance production of key crops.

It is now abundantly clear that the vision of the NRM Government is to marginalise agriculture and therefore marginalise the poor population so that they are easily manipulated for election purposes.  It is not surprising that the contribution of agriculture to GDP declined from 42 percent in 1997/98 to 31.1 percent in 2006/07, and it is expected to further decline to 14 percent by the year 2025.  We strongly urge Government to increase spending on this sector in line with its contribution in terms of employment and poverty reduction. The policy should be oriented where the majority live and work.

Mr Speaker, the negative impact of poor infrastructure, particularly rural roads and power, are a concern to all of us because of the increased costs of production and therefore the country’s competitiveness. We urge Government to provide additional resources to this sector so as to improve our ranking within the East African and African regions.

The Minister downplayed and/or avoided mentioning the environment sector as a strategic sector in the economy.  Although it is common knowledge that the environment is the primary source of livelihood for the majority of the people, the NRM Government has to be reminded because it is a major culprit in environmental degradation. Recent attempts on Mabira and Bugala Island forests are live examples. The ineffective management and lack of commitment on the part of Government to sustainably use our natural resource potential for development has largely been responsible for the economic decline in Uganda.
  
The economic decline in the last financial year was attributed to persistent drought. However, the problem is not drought but poor Government policy; even desert economies have turned round their agricultural sectors. Mismanagement of the environment by the NRM Government costs our country Shs 1.152 billion per annum, which is enough to finance 25 percent of Uganda’s national budget.

We recommend as follows:  
a)	That Government commissions research findings on the impact of the environment and uses these for better and efficient use of natural and environmental resources.  
b) 	That Government devises robust policies and actions to curb rampant encroachment of fragile eco-systems, gazetted wildlife reserves, forests and wetlands.
c) 	That Government should interest itself and invest in the environment sector instead of leaving policy leadership and administration to “donors” who fund the sector or prospectors under the guise of investors.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, corruption remains a grave concern within the business community in Uganda. Unless we stop paying lip-service to corruption, the cancer will destroy the whole fabric of the society. We recommend that Government puts more emphasis on the fight against corruption by providing more funding to the accountability sectors other than leaving them to the donor community.

The escalating population growth should be of great concern to everyone in this country. We all know that the fertility rate in this country presents a big challenge to poverty reduction. Unless it is addressed, it is likely to present a big challenge to the Prosperity-for-All programme, which focuses on increased household incomes and transforming the economy. We agree with the aspiration for a manageable population growth in tandem with a country’s economic development. However, the Minister does not indicate how this growth will be managed as per the recommendations of Uganda Bureau of Statistics’ (UBOS) population survey study. We urge Government to urgently address the problem of growth rate.  

Finally, Mr Speaker and honourable members, this august House must take a critical look at the 2007/08 budget and provide answers to the many strategic challenges of our country namely: 

a) 	What direction does the 2007/08 budget provide for exporters, traders, investors, manufacturers, the rural population, the youth, women and so on?  
b) 	What economic breakthroughs does the 2007/08 budget provide and what new economic opportunities does it provide? 
c) 	How does the 2007/08 budget promote equitable development in all the regions of Uganda? 

The 2007/08 budget is largely a budget for bureaucrats. In our later responses, we shall endeavour to re-direct the economic resources beyond rationalising the status quo to a budget that provides direction of the economy beyond the MTEF - our common economic feature. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you, honourable Shadow Minister of Finance and the Opposition for this presentation. We now clearly know your position.

5.05
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Shadow Minister for his long statement. I shall be making an elaborate answer to it. However, I would like to take this opportunity to dispel some serious conceptual problems in the member’s presentation particularly in regard to agriculture. There should be a clear difference between the proportion of GDP that comes out of agriculture and the question of whether agricultural output is falling or not. 

As economies progress, the share of agriculture in GDP generally falls so much, and that is why in advanced economies you find that agriculture is less than 10 percent. This does not mean that their output from agriculture has fallen. It means that although total production and total income has grown the share of industry, services and knowledge-based production has increased tremendously. Agriculture also keeps increasing in total, and in our case it has been growing although other sectors have been growing faster. This is a welcome change. This is part of the transformation that we have been aiming at but which in the past we had not been able to achieve. 

Please, let us not say that because the share of agriculture in GDP is declining, agriculture is declining too; no! Agriculture is actually growing and has persistently grown. We will be happy to supply the statistics to show the growth in agriculture over the years. The economy has been persistently growing. There is not a year in which the economy of Uganda has not grown in the past twenty years, and what we are enjoying is a welcome increase in the share of industry, services and telecommunications as a percentage of GDP. These are the areas where we were very behind and where we still need to increase. I look forward to a time when these other areas will grow so much that we can feed our people, export agricultural products and at the same time have a wonderful increase in total GDP. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you heard the budget speech and the response from the Shadow Minister of Finance. Now the motion is open for you to debate and see how we can proceed.

5.10
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all I wish to re emphasise the trend as expressed by the honourable Minister of Finance. When the trend in agriculture reduces vis-à-vis other sectors, that is healthy. In fact, we should look towards a time when there will be fewer people in rural areas engaged in agriculture. 

However, at this stage I want to ask the honourable minister and those responsible for agriculture to rationalise some of the activities. Right now we are running a parallel extension service. We have the traditional extension service and at the same time we have NAADS. The content and approach of the messages they are carrying to the rural areas is exactly the same. The problem is that the traditional extension service is starved of finances while NAADS seems to have more. Because of the disparity in allocations, the messages being carried to the farmers is contradictory to some point yet there is wastage of resources. This area should be streamlined. 

I also clearly support the view that there should be additional allocations to agricultural development. Otherwise, the trend is healthy as it is. 

The second point I want to -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Buchanayandi. For many of the members who do not know, hon. Buchanayandi retired from the Ministry of Agriculture at one of the top most ranks in the ministry. His information in corroboration to what the minister said is also true to some extent. There is no doubt that when agricultural growth picks up and growth in other sectors continues the share in agriculture declines. That is not the situation you are seeing in Uganda. If the Minister thinks he is right, I would challenge that we are given an opportunity to bring to this House statistics that will show you that for the last ten years the production of basic commodities has been declining and also that per capita productivity in agriculture has been declining. That is not transformation within the agricultural sector. 

When you talk about the transformation of the economy, there must be a parallel transformation in the agricultural sector, and that will only come when Government invests in agriculture. This is the basic point we want you to make. (Laughter) Do you remember that I stood up? I am not debating for the sake of debating. The truth of the matter is that if our agriculture was being invested in, you would not see the kind of per capita productivity that you see. Zimbabwe is a very advanced economy but they still depend to a large extent on agriculture because they invested in agricultural transformation. Your agriculture is peasantry and you are saying that the economy is transforming. You are actually deceiving yourself, honourable minister. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Bucyanayandi. If we are to take the senior economics advice, that would be correct, but if that is the case as we are trying to put it, then economically we would be having lesser people involved in agriculture but not to have more than 87 percent still actively engaged and employed in agriculture.  If the picture you are painting, that the manufacturing and industrial sectors are improving, is correct then we would be having more people moving from agriculture to those sectors.  But that is not the case; that is why we are still having more than 87 percent employed in the agriculture sector.  So, what are you saying?  

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that the percentage of people living in rural areas has been falling in favour of those moving to urban areas. In the 2002 census, it was 15 percent in urban areas, up from over 90 percent. Now the people who move to urban areas are not moving there to do agriculture because agriculture is not generally practiced in urban areas. So, the fact that urbanisation is increasing, means that the proportion of people who are engaged in agriculture is actually declining; you should distinguish between proportion and absolute numbers.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of some commodities falling out in quadrative to others, I want to say that this is due to the fact that the structure of agriculture itself keeps changing because commodities that used to be non-cash have now become cash commodities.  For example, at one time it was more profitable to grow cassava than to produce coffee, and so people were switching from coffee to cassava because during that time cassava had a market; it was no longer necessary to grow coffee in order to get cash.  So, you find that the structure of agriculture keeps changing; we are producing and exporting many more of the so-called non-traditional items. I want to inform honourable members that we will definitely produce figures to show that exports from agriculture have increased, are continuing to increase and that our total earnings from the agricultural sector are bigger than ever before.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, as the honourable Minister of Finance has said, it is quite true that when you begin comparing agricultural output with the tons of coffee produced, you will realise that they may have a decline; if you are talking of bales of cotton produced, you will realise that they may have also declined. But if you are considering the kilogrammes of maize being produced to feed 28 million people, if you are talking about the kilogrammes of beans to feed that very number of people, then that is a different story. For example, in Kisoro and Kabale, we are producing so much potatoes but without any factory to buy them; we are seriously looking for a way of industrializing this production. So, that is evidence to show that over all production is going up.

My second contribution is about a critic on the relative allocations made to the three arms of Government. In my view, the allocation to the Executive of 97 per cent, Parliament of 1.5 percent and of about 1 per cent to the Judiciary is a healthy allocation. I am saying this because the Executive is the implementer of almost all the government programmes. Its demand for finance is elastic, while the one for the other two arms - the Parliament and Judiciary- is inelastic. Therefore, I find that allocation healthy.

My third point is an observation on development maintenance of roads and in particular, Kisoro road. I want to voice a concern to whoever is concerned with this road to revise his mind because ever since we signed a contract for it on the 12th of March to date, nothing visible is happening. I am concerned as an individual because I travel on that 50 miles or 80 - kilometre road so often. In the past we used to take about one-and-a-half hours; now it takes you three-and-a-half hours to make that journey of 80 kilometres. According to the contract, the mobilisation period was supposed to be only three months. Now it has taken almost six months.  

My appeal to whoever is responsible for this road is that - once you sign a contract for a road, you clearly do not provide maintenance funds in its budget. So, now that the contractor is not handed over the road and there is no maintenance money available in the budget, the road should not just be abandoned because it is continuing to deteriorate. That is why travel time has moved from about one-and-a-half hours to three-and-a-half hours. The situation is likely to get worse! So, may I request those responsible to do something to rectify this extremely bad situation?

My fear politically is that, people are likely to riot because machinery is also being moved away. I want to point out that machinery such as graders, tipper lorries and so on are being taken away by the contractors. I saw it last week while I was there. So, the situation is serious. I request that those responsible take action because it has got political implications. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I recall correctly, we have just passed a second loan and there was also a loan, which was initially authorised by the Seventh Parliament. Despite this, the work never took off for the last two to three years. As if that was not enough, the honourable Minister of Finance came to this august House and got a supplementary loan to work on the very road.  Now, the area MP has informed us that even the machineries are being moved away. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that we have been paying interest on unutilised loans quite a number of times. The other time the minister actually assured Parliament that the reason why the first loan did not work was because the money was not enough. According to him, that was the reason why he came to this Parliament to get more funds to work on that road. But now if the trucks have been taken away, then as Parliament we are actually surprised.

THE SPEAKER: When was that extra loan authorised?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the minister can answer that. I remember it was about three months ago.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the initial loan request was insufficient because when the bids were received, they turned out to be bigger than the loan, which we had requested. We were forced to look for additional funding and this additional request was brought to this august House and approved. I personally travelled to Kisoro to witness the signing of the contract with the contractors on that road. Subsequently, I am informed that the contractors have started setting up sites along the road and they have been crashing stones in preparation for the payment of compensation after which they will be handed the road to start work.

I am also informed that some prominent politicians have been inciting the people along the road not to accept the values, which had been made by the government valuer and to insist on higher values. This has delayed the compensation exercise and work cannot begin until the road has been handed over to the contractor following the compensation exercise. However, I would like to assure the august House that as far as the Ministry of Finance is concerned, the contracts were signed, the loan is in place and even the money for compensation was provided. Therefore, I hope that this exercise can be done quickly so that the road is handed over to the contractor and they can begin work.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Minister. The issue you have raised on compensation is similar to the problem we have on Soroti-Dokolo-lira road. I thought it would be helpful if you gave us some light on how this compensation is determined. I will give you the example of that road which I am familiar with. The rates that are being paid out to the people whose land, property and crops have been affected are actually rates of 2003! If you had an acre of land in that region, for instance, in Soroti Kaberamaido in 2003, it went only at about Shs 350,000 – Shs 400,000. Today, an acre of land in the same area goes at about Shs 800,000 - Shs 1,000,000. So, you displace this person using values of 2003 and expect the same person to acquire any land? The money that you are giving out now is not enough to buy them land.

So, if people raised that and if that be the position, would you really call that incitement? Wouldn’t we need to revisit the issue of evaluation? How do we arrive at those rates? My understanding of compensation is that, while somebody is giving out a piece of land now, the same person should be able to acquire something to settle him or her elsewhere. I need that clarification.

DR SURUMA: As Minister of Finance, I do not participate in the compensation process. I was only pointing out that the reason I have been given for the delay in the Kabale-Kisoro road is that, people have been asking for higher values. Now if they do not accept the values which were made sometime back, it means that the Ministry of Works will have to request for money and this will inevitably cause delays and this is what I was trying to explain. I was not trying to justify that rates should be low or higher. Thank you.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, information available to me is that compensation on that road is complete from Kilometre four to Kilometre 19. In practical terms that means from Mr Batuma’s home or farm to around Hamurwa area, compensation is complete from Kilometre 34 to Kilometre 49. If these areas, where farmers have been compensated, were handed over to the contractor, they represent a sufficient stretch for the contractor to be working on while Government mobilises additional funds. And in terms of critical path method, this would be the way forward. Why don’t you hand over those portions that are finished so that work progresses?

THE SPEAKER: I think we are now on the issue of that road. I suggest that these issues be addressed by the appropriate committee of hon. Nathan Byanyima with the Ministry of Works so that you solve it.  Otherwise, the point has been taken.

5.32
MR JAMES KIIZA (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): I would also like to start with the roads. The people of Hoima appreciate the work being done on the Hoima Busunju road. But still as far as compensation is concerned, there is a section of people who are not satisfied with how the compensation exercise was done. We would appreciate if the ministry looked at the method of payments so that those who still complain are addressed. 

The Ministry of Finance talks of expecting stronger growth in cash crop production. My constituency is an agricultural area but cotton, which used to be a major cash crop, has been abandoned. This is due to the very low price that farmers who grow cotton are paid and yet cotton is on high demand. I wish that issue could be addressed.

Additionally, most of my people depend on tobacco and yet tobacco is under attack for health reasons. It is being highly discouraged. People would like to be assured about their fate. What is the fate of tobacco in five to ten years? Is this a crop to rely on or is it something that they should abandon? (Laughter) [Hon.Members: “Grow marijuana”]. No, we cannot go for marijuana.

Mr Speaker, my people grow maize but the cost of maize is only Shs 150 per kilogramme. Yet maize flour costs up to Shs 800 per kilogramme. So, value addition would be okay but power is a big problem to the millers. We need more rural electrification so that people can have power to run their flourmills. 

Rice is now the major cash crop and the district emerged the first in NAADS just because of the rice that is being grown. I encourage honourable members to come and buy our rice. It is very tasty -(Laughter) - and it will probably be a good replacement for tobacco.

Tea is also grown and there were many people who were out-growers in the past but since the new company came, it has not encouraged out-growers to participate in tea growing. People would want to go back to this crop.

Sugar is very near in Kinyara and the people of Hoima would also like to participate in out-grower schemes of sugar production rather than giving away Mabira for sugar production. I think we have the land for that crop. 

Mr Speaker, on Bonna bagaggawale, the minister responsible for this ministry has been to the district; he gave out motorcycles to the chiefs, but they feel this facilitation only is not enough and besides the strength of these motorcycles cannot manage the terrain. I think we did not get value for our money as far as these motorcycles are concerned. 

Besides, the political leaders in the districts are not happy that the government is only interested in the chiefs and neglecting them. Therefore, their inputs as far as this programme is concerned –(Interruption)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the honourable member, first of all, that the political leaders -the LC III chiefs - requested in the last budget framework to be trained in the same way the gombolola chiefs had been trained. We committed ourselves to train them and we are indeed going to train them in accordance with their request.

Secondly, the motorcycles, which were given to the chiefs, as far as the information I have is concerned, are the strongest available on the market. In fact, I was rather happy because I thought the contracts committee had really over spent on each motorbike. But they said they were the best, and the spare parts could be easily found for those Honda motorbikes. So, I do not think there are better motorbikes on the market. In fact, my view is that they should have chosen cheaper ones, but since this is already done, I cannot reverse it. But as far as I know, these are the strongest motorbikes available on the market. 

MR KIIZA: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. But if these are the best motorcycles available, then God should have Mercy upon us; we shall have the results very shortly. 

Mr Speaker, on education, UPE has been appreciated, but the problem again is the high rate of dropouts. I think in my area it could be higher than elsewhere. When you look at the number of pupils who start primary one, and those who sit for PLE, you see that more than 65 percent of those who start in primary one do not complete primary seven.  

Then, as far as secondary education is concerned, we appreciate that many children were registered for this free education. My concern is the high rate of strikes in secondary schools. The ministry is suggesting that the headmasters serve for seven years in a school, but I think these seven years are also too many. The longer the headmaster stays in a school, the more it becomes personal property and the more they stop listening to anybody. Therefore, the only available course of action for the students is to go on strike. Personally, I blame strikes on head teachers. I do not think the students would want to go on strike really but they do it as the last resort. Unfortunately, the Minister of Education always thinks it is the students in the wrong. If I were the Minister of Education, I would not think that way.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I think the problem of strike to longevity in the office of headmaster or headmistress - you better study what happens in the period of June/July every year. There seems to be something in that period of the year relating to strike; there is a lot of hysteria. If you check in your records and your memory, you would find that strikes happen in that period. I think there is a need to study that period in relation to children’s behaviour.

MR KIIZA: Thank you, honourable minister. But in the four years I have been an RDC, in all the strikes, which I was able to put off, I found out that the problem was the head teacher. So, if it is June/July or whatever it is, the problem still goes back to the head teachers. 

Mr Speaker, as far as health is concerned, Hoima Hospital was built in 1992 and that same ward is still serving the population, and it is now too small and the people would appreciate if another ward is constructed there. 

On water, whereas they are near the water (the lakeshore) that region still does not have safe water.

On oil, my constituency happens to be the oil constituency and we call it our oil. But the people of the area promised to co-operate with Government in all its endeavours to get this wealth. Our worry is the environment. At first, we were very eager to have the oil refinery built in the area, but the information we are getting is that this oil refinery may not be to our advantage. The gas that is emitted might cost us heavily as far as our agriculture is concerned. Although the fishermen on the lake are being told that the oil is not hazardous to fish, they have not yet felt comfortable about it. So, before the oil refinery is built, we would like to be assured that we are 100 percent safe and that we will receive the best refinery as we got the best motorcycles. 

Lastly, as we get new districts, I am getting a feeling that shortly the cry for more and more sub-counties is going to come up. The reasons that caused people to demand for more districts are the very reasons that we shall have to clamour for more new sub-counties and that again will be increasing the cost of administration. It is something we have to think about.  

5.42
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the shadow minister for local Government, my attention has been drawn to page 4 paragraph 12. 

It is noted that the bulk of services delivery takes place in the local governments. But paradoxically enough, the bulk of the funding is held at the centre. Can the minister explain this apparent paradox?

Again, I would ask for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, this threshold of Pay As You Earn has persisted. Last year, we seemed to have struck a gentleman’s agreement that come this financial year, this matter will be handled conclusively. But I see the minister is becoming very dodging. Could he be emphatic this time?  I thank you.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the paradox of the central Government spending more money on the local Government is not a paradox at all. The fact of the matter is that, the central Government spends money on all the people, nationally. So, the division is artificial in a way. The roads on which the money is spent are for the whole country although the money is spent by the central Government. The water is for all; the services, the security and the law and order are for the whole country. So, there is no surprise that it is the government providing these services to the country. The fact that it is the government spending the money does not mean that it is spending it in Kampala. The money is being spent throughout the country for the whole country. 

The issue of the threshold is very important. The Government of Uganda is one of the lowest tax collectors; the percentage of GDP that we collect is only 14 percent compared to an average of 18 percent for the whole of Africa and much beyond 30 and 40 percent and even 60 percent in advanced countries. 

We all have a responsibility, Mr Speaker, to teach our people that in order to improve public services, taxes must be paid. The cheap popularity of telling people that they should not pay tax is precisely that; it is cheap because it encourages irresponsibility and no Government can provide services without taxes. It increases dependency on the outside world, which in the long run means crippling of the interests of the people. 

I would like to appeal to all Members of the House and all parties to encourage responsibility on the part of all citizens, that we all have an obligation to pay our share of taxes and not encourage people to avoid or not pay taxes in order to be popular. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from the minister is, we know that there are two types of taxes: there are indirect taxes, which I pay when I consume a good or a service and there are the direct taxes. Are we telling people not to drink sugar? Are we telling people not to eat food so that they do not pay indirect taxes? What we are saying is that, taxes should be low and if they are low, the consumption will be bigger and many people will pay. I do not want us to make taxes whereby very few people are able to pay and the taxes are put on very few areas and not the whole or the entire area. In fact, the consumption taxes are the easiest to collect because you pay as you consume. 

You are talking of direct taxes, that is, PAYE and Corporation Tax. I will give you an example of a company, MEHTA, which has been here for 27 years and has never paid a single shilling but exists. Who has exempted them from taxes? It is the Ministry Of Finance! So, who is responsible for not paying the taxes? It is you!  

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can we go on with the debate?

MR NSUBUGA: I want to give him information –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Because it is becoming a ping-pong.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the information that I want to give the minister is that, the culture of paying taxes in this country is just developing. That is why during the budget speech, he gave an incentive for people who were not declaring all their tax obligations to declare from 1st July to 31st December such that they can get an amnesty from the penal tax. 

Mr Speaker, you will also recall that the Ministry of Finance also remitted the VAT, which the local Government was supposed to pay. So, the issue of paying taxes and the appeal of Members that we should vary the threshold is not that Members of Parliament will encourage people not to pay taxes. We are just saying that instead of the threshold being 130, we should vary it. The moment you vary it, because these people are not very rich, they will actually consume the money; you just increase the disposable income. Actually, that is a very varied point to be considered and as parliamentarians we should continue because what we want is to see people get out of poverty. There is no way they will get out of poverty if their disposable income is very low. 

So, I want to appeal to the Ministry of Finance, because we should actually set precedents, that the idea of remitting the VAT for local governments is good, but we must also think about our economy. Very many local Government officials collect these taxes and fail to remit it and instead of the Ministry of Finance and the Treasury punishing them, they just come to parliament. The local governments have paid – so, what incentive will we give to those who have fulfilled their obligations? We should set precedents; those people should be put to book. So, the idea of paying taxes is developing and I want the Minister of Finance to send the same signal to other Government departments such that they can pay their taxes and maybe in subsequent years, they should think of varying the threshold. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the shadow minister of finance, for his presentation. I would like to give some few preliminary remarks and also seek clarification from the shadow minister. 

On page 2, he raised several questions and I would like to give obvious answers to these questions. Question No.8 (d): How relevant is the environment in the fight against poverty? Does de-forestation and wetland encroachment, for example, have an impact on poverty? The answer is an obvious yes. First of all, Mr Speaker, degradation of the environment impacts almost on all sectors of the economy. It impacts on health because once the environment is degraded consequences like floods, droughts impact on health, on agriculture, on roads and on everything. Even bridges are washed away when the environment is degraded. You suddenly get heavy rains, the roads are spoilt, the bridges are washed away and communicable and water-borne diseases affect the people. 

Also, the environment impacts directly on poverty because when people do not have fuel, for example, after all the forests nearby are destroyed or cut down, the women spend more time looking for wood fuel for cooking food, hence they have less time to spend on gainful activities. Also because of lack of fuel, particularly in areas where forests have been degraded very much, malnutrition has been registered to be very high. This is because sometimes mothers tend to serve cold food to their children since they do not have enough fuel to boil or re-boil the food or even cook the food properly. 

It impacts on the quality of water because when you look at water bodies these days, most of the streams have dried up because of silting. On the water quality, when you look at water that is flowing, it is brown and in some places where we do not have protected sources people drink very dirty water. Sincerely this impacts on the health of the people. I could go on and on and on.

On page 8, the shadow minister mentioned that they recommend the government to adopt proper environmental management policies and practices and that we do have an elaborate policy on the environment. There is a lot of restructuring that Government has put in place. You are aware that in 2003, Government set up the National Forest Authority and the National Environment Management Authority was also put in place. The last financial year, the Ministry of Water and Environment was given a specific mandate and the restructuring in the ministry is still going on. More mandates have been given to different structures within the ministry. Mr Speaker, this is in line with the government policies on environment protection. As I said, I am just giving preliminary information –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: I thank the minister for giving way. The problem we are faced with is the relationship between a very good policy on paper and the practice. The clarification I am seeking is that, what is the problem? There is a very good policy on paper, but the practice shows something very different. All the wetlands are taken and these are filters of Lake Victoria. So, Lake Victoria is no longer filtered and yet you cry that you are having green water. Now, if you have killed the filter, so what? In Kalangala, a forest was cleared and someone is building some hotel and just pouring red soils in the lake and here you plead a very good policy. What is the relationship between a good policy on paper and the practice under your ministry? Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable minister. I am happy that the minister is keen on making a preliminary response. However, I think this question is not asked for the sake of asking a question. I would like the minister to contextualise this question because it is not that we, in the opposition, did not know the problems caused by environmental degradation; we are asking your ministry and indeed the government of Uganda to give us the cost implications of the environmental degradation that is now harassing this country. 

What are the monetised implications? We are dealing with the budgetary implications here. Are we becoming poor and by what percentage? Are we benefiting, by what amount of money as we continue to cut down these trees? Once you do that, we will know the financial cost involved in destroying our wetlands, in cutting our forests, in doing all the things that are happening as opposed to the policy which you so well articulate. You say we have a policy, but now that we have a policy and we are continuing to destroy our environment, how much is that destruction costing this country? That is the response we are looking for.

MR OKUPA: In that area, I would also be happy if you educated us on the policy you are talking about as regards carbon trading. What is the Ministry of Environment doing regarding carbon trading?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Minister, we put questions which we were saying were lacking answers; we knew the reasons. If you look at page 23(85), we are even telling you the cost, which cost the environment Shs 1,152 billion, if you do not deal with environment. We were asking Government not to leave it to the donors but to take interest in the environment. In short, we are concerned about the environmental degradation.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, colleagues. I am not disagreeing with you. As I said earlier on, I am giving preliminary responses to your questions. You are also right to say that the environment and natural resources sector has received a lot of support from the donors, which is the same with a number of other sectors like the road sector and the education sector, which have all received some support from the donors. 

As I speak, we are about to bring to this Parliament the revised Environment and Natural Resources Sector Investment Plan which outlines clearly what needs to be done and gives the budgetary implications. I want Members of Parliament to know that Government is not just sitting because of these issues. All the questions you are raising will be answered in this report. 

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the shadow minister to give a little bit more clarification on some of the allegations that he has made. First of all, on page 23 he is saying that the mismanagement of the environment by the NRM Government costs this country Shs 1.152 billion per annum. I would like him to elaborate on that. He is also saying that the NRM Government should be reminded because it is the major culprit in environmental degradation and he gives the example of Mabira Forest and Bugala Island. 

On this one, Mr Speaker, I would like to respond to the shadow minister that the National Resistance Movement Government is very much concerned about environment protection. In 1987, the Movement Government took a bold decision to reverse the policies then and correct the mistakes then made, which resulted into degradation of the environment, encroachment and so forth. We are still suffering with those problems. The Movement Government, as I have said, has done a lot of restructuring over the years in this area. The Government has put in place an elaborate policy, laws and regulations to follow. That is why it is not very easy to change the land use in forest reserves because of the laws and procedures that this Government has put in place. If those laws were not in place, probably parts of Mabira would not be standing now; Bugala forest would not be standing now. And now all stakeholders can use these policies and laws to debate. 

I would like to say that not only in Uganda but also in so many other countries, there is always a balance between conservation of the environment and industrialisation. If you say we are not going to touch the forest, we are not going to touch the wetlands, we are not going to touch the protected areas, how then are we going to boost the economy? That is why there is a debate, and there is a process of changing the land use and all stakeholders participate in the process, including Parliament. 

In the case of Mabira, for example, even before Cabinet discussed the issue, there was already a lot of hullabaloo, which cost this country life and property. This is very bad. I only wish Members of Parliament would understand the process, and procedures to be followed and guide the constituents and other stakeholders not to simply jump into some actions without understanding the procedures followed. Even before Government takes a decision, you want to make a decision for Government. Mr Speaker, I would like to refrain Members of Parliament from this kind of practice. 

Policy on carbon trading

We already have prepared a Cabinet paper on climate change and carbon trading, and this will come to Parliament very soon. In the meantime, the meteorology department in the Ministry of Water and Environment is handling matters related to carbon trading. We also have a number of other stakeholders and NGOs that are collaborating with the ministry. Lecturers in Makerere University, especially in the Faculty of Engineering and Kyambogo University are working together with our technical people in the meteorology department. They have helped us a lot in developing the proposed policy on carbon trading. 

I also want to state here that a number of farmers in tree planting have already benefited in carbon trading, especially those that have sought the assistance of the ministry and the lead NGOs like ECO TRUST. So, before Parliament discusses this policy paper, departments that I have mentioned can continue to offer some assistance to Members of Parliament and other people who want to participate in carbon trading. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you look at the country where we said that 1,150 billion per annum, there is subscript 19 what it means, when you read further down - we have directed you where to get the information. This I think is unfortunate but they have made a correction, they have sent an addendum on the correction. Where you see 1,500 per annum, there is 19 that is supposed to be up there. If you read in your report, you will see 19; those are the citations we are getting. And the causes are very simple, madam minister: soil erosion, wetland encroachment, deforestation and biomass. These documents are with you. If you read the environmental report of your ministry, they quote the same values. In all these figures we have used the ministry’s report.

MS ERIYO: Precisely, the ministry has this information and that is why I was doubting why in your paper, you seem to indicate that Government is not concerned about the environment sector. That is why these issues come out and we have these reports indicating statistics. For you to simply give an allegation against the NRM Government, without proper substantiation – because there are a number of other people not just the government –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I must assure you is that, you are not going to agree. (Laughter) Just state your position as you know it and as you have it but the question of convincing him to abandon his position may not be easy. (Laughter) Just give the information you have and then we proceed.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need help. I very sincerely do. I have been hoping that after this submission, and as per the communication that we were given some time during the State of the Nation Address, that we submit if we would like to engage in the general debate on the State of the Nation Address, and that if we do not want then we go to the budget - what is happening now? Are we first proceeding by way of a response to the general response and then we will open it up for the backbenchers at some point? That is the help that I really need. 

THE SPEAKER: This is what the arrangement should have been. There was a motion that was moved by the minister when he presented the budget. The shadow minister of finance is also entitled to respond to what was stated by the minister and he has done it in the speech, which he has given to us so that we have a balanced position on the budget for the financial year 2007/08. We would have benefited from this debate if the various committees had already issued to us their reports in respect of various estimates given to their ministries so that when you come here to debate a motion for you to resolve into a committee of supply, you tackle those points that have been tackled in various committees. Unfortunately, this was not done. I only understand that it is only the Committee on Foreign Affairs that has managed to produce a report and I have seen a copy here. 

In view of this, what is going to happen is that, after he has presented his position and maybe the chairperson of the Committee on the Budget – because he has to work together with the Ministry of Finance in spearheading this budget - then we have a fully-fledged debate on the motion by the minister and after some few days, we put a question. Once we agree that we resolve ourselves into the Committee of Supply, we shall then be assisted because various committees will have made their recommendations. Then we adopt those recommendations, we go on passing one by one and then the budget is finished.

But I think the minister came in to reply to his counter minister, the shadow minister, in order to clear certain issues and the ministers are in to point out this.  Otherwise, the debate should be on the motion that we resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply. I hope I am clear.

DR SURUMA:  Mr Speaker, I just wanted to clarify a point raised by the shadow minister of finance. He gave the impression that we are attempting to rely on income taxes rather than direct taxes. I wanted to indicate that in fact, the bulk of our tax revenues come from tariffs on imported goods which is 15 percent for the whole region because now we are moving as a community and we are not at liberty to raise this rate of tariffs on imports. We would have to re-negotiate the treaty with our partners in order to raise that rate.  But currently it is the major source I think more than 35 percent of our revenues are coming from these tariffs.

Secondly, the next major source of income is VAT particularly on fuel but also on other commodities. These are the major sources of income not income tax. But there is a need to increase the income coming from the population as the honourable shadow minister knows that we need to increase the tax base so that more and more of our people are participants in the tax revenue of the country.  And developed countries depend largely not on these direct taxes as he calls them, but on income taxes and this is where it will be most opportune in the future for us to increase the incomes of Government. Otherwise, we will remain at a very low level of tax collection.

Finally, I would like to inform the shadow minister that actually direct taxes are regressive. He may not be aware of this - he did not take my course in economics. But actually sales taxes are regressive and not favourable to the poor.  Thank you.

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRANSPORT) (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also want to thank the shadow minister for his response.  However, I would like to talk about a few issues on pages 13 and 14.  For purposes of saving time, I will start with No. 45 about Nyagak Mini-Hydro Power project. I just want to assure the shadow minister that the Nyagak power project is on course and it will be completed in December 2007. So, we are expecting to commission it in January. And you are also aware that it has not actually been Government alone but also Aga Khan has a lot of shares in that project and that should not worry you because I have also been watching it and I am a direct beneficiary of that project. (Applause)

Now to come to development and maintenance of the transport infrastructure, you compared us to Tanzania, Kenya, et cetera. Really, I feel we should appreciate where we came from and the fact that we have achieved an additional 2000 plus kilometres of permanent tarmac roads since 1986.  And also the fact that we have opened very many other roads, really it speaks for itself.

On page 14 No.49 about the Jinja–Bugiri road, they have been explaining this every time but for the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana road, I want to assure the House once again, as the Minister of Finance stated, the compensation is going on. I do agree that there were some delays especially in the approval of the evaluation of the SDI by the government valuer but the compensation is on. And as to why they should not start with the other part first, I think that is a technical thing and we cannot conclude right here because it may have some cost implications.

Now, on the Matugga–Semuto-Kapeeka road, I think the pre-qualification has been finished and we are waiting for a no objection from the Nordic Development Fund. 

Then on the Soroti–Dokolo road, yes, I just want to once again say that the compensation is on. You know on that road there has been some politicking at times, which the NRM has not been really encouraging. So we want to make sure that we are careful. The compensation is on, the contract has already been awarded to China Beijing –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Actually on the Soroti–Dokolo-Lira road, there is one thing we have been talking about, and which we feel great for but taking too long even if it is finally coming. But the concern is about compensation and I see you just going over it. You are not telling me why you are giving people rates of 2003 when you are displacing or affecting their gardens and crops in 2007 and the people who are charged with compensation on that road - (Interjection) - I am seeking clarification, hon. Member, you would let me finish. Are the people not being cheated by being given rates of 2003 when they are actually losing part of their land and property in 2007?  That is what I would like to hear from the minister.

MR EJUA:  Mr Speaker, I think if there are some issues to be sorted out maybe owing to time, they need to be brought across.  The Minister of Finance is always there and there can be an assessment, a consultant can be engaged to see whether whatever you are talking about is true or false. I think normally there are valuations in these contracts - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, two weeks ago, while in a meeting of the Committee on Works, I brought this matter to the ministry but no answer was given to us.  Today you are giving us the same answer and you are referring us back to the ministry. I thought by now you would have consulted the ministry and come up with an answer that we should take to the people who are concerned. But I am surprised that they are saying, “These are matters which will be taken by the ministry.”  I wish even the chairperson of the Committee on Works was here.  Can you tell us really what we shall take back to the people who are affected because you have not answered this for the last two weeks?

MS EKWAU: I very well remember, Mr Speaker, that in July last year, the Minister of Transport came and told this House that the work will have started by August. But up to now if you are meandering around compensation as if that is convincing enough and if you still don’t give clear answers to this House then to whom are you going to give clear answers?

MR EJUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, I had not come across this appeal to the ministry but I will take it up -(Laughter)- and soon you will be informed. I also want to say that the contract for the Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road has now been awarded. We have given 28 days for performance guarantee. Soon the contract will be signed and there will be another 56 days for the commencement. That is how these road projects go; they need a lot of patience. Furthermore, we will expect the road works for this road to start effectively by November this year. It is a process that really requires a lot of patience and as you know this funding is also borrowed.

Finally, I wanted to comment about the road fund. I think the Road Fund Bill will soon be introduced and brought to Parliament. It will be managed by a Road Fund Authority, which will be created and brought to Parliament for discussion. I think the Minister of Finance will agree with me on that. Therefore, all the information will be at your disposal soon and you will have a lot of input in it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to get clarification from the shadow minister of finance because I know in the general debate we might not be able to tackle this issue. When you look at pages 2, 3 and 22, the shadow minister of finance seems to indicate that the fact that percentage contribution of agriculture to the GDP is declining, is a bad event. It was explained but I would do with more explanation because in the developed world like the US, you find that services constitute over 65 percent of GDP. I thought that as you develop as a country the proportion of agriculture reduces, the proportion of industry goes up and the proportion of services also goes up. Therefore, I wanted some clarification if it was not already made on that point. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I will just use figures so that you understand the clarification. If you are saying the service sector is improving, that means that many people are being drawn from the agricultural sector to the service sector. Is that what is happening in your constituency, that people have left agriculture and are now in the service sector? (Laughter) I wanted to give you that example. It would have been right if the service sector was going up and the number of people who are employed in the agricultural sector was reducing. 

But the percentage is 87 percent of people in the agricultural sector. If we went by percentages it would have meant that only 31.9 percent would be employed in the agricultural sector in direct proportion. However, since the population is still there, that shows that people are still badly off. I know that the Minister of Finance before he became minister was pro- people and -(Laughter)–even made a presentation about rural development to the Committee on Finance while we were there. Now he has abandoned that and I am wondering what economics he is applying now. Having said that, I am not against the service or industrial sector improving but it should be in proportion to the population. As employment is being created, people should be employed but the agricultural sector still employs 87 percent of people in this country. I thank you.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, just to clarify on that, the percentage share of a sector in GDP is not proportionate to the number of people in that sector. This is not how things work. Investment in capital, for example, may cause the industrial sector to produce more than other sectors because the opportunities for increasing output are much greater in industrialisation than in agriculture. In China, for example, there are more people in the agricultural sector than in any other sector, about 800 million people, but the share of agriculture is less than 20 percent yet there are more people in that sector and the Chinese economy has grown. Actually, it is now probably the third or fourth in the whole world but industrial output is far greater even though it has fewer people. Therefore, the shadow minister really needs to get his facts correct. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I told, we have received the official position of the Opposition by the shadow minister of finance. We received his position on the budget day and now I think it is balanced, therefore, we can debate his motion. You may recall that it was his motion that was on the Order Paper and which we are supposed to agree or disagree to. Once we agree, we shall resolve into a Committee of Supply. I think we should stop here so that you can consider his statement, the minister’s statement that was made on the budget day and any other report that you may have received from the committee so that tomorrow we can concentrate on the motion for the House to resolve into a Committee of Supply so that we can deal with the estimates. 

I think next week if the committees have completed their reports we might have to sit morning and afternoon to be able to finalise this matter soonest. There is also a matter, which was raised by hon. Okupa after my Communication from the Chair. I am glad to inform you that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill No. 2 of 2007 has as of now been delivered to the Clerk and we shall have the first reading tomorrow. This concerns the election of LC I, II and others. Therefore, the matter is addressed. 

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 August 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)
                 

