Thursday, 21 August 2003

Parliament met at 10.25 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this morning we have pupils from Kadungulu Primary School, Kasilo County, Soroti District. You are welcome to Parliament. Please feel free to enjoy what is going on. (Applause)

Honourable members, tomorrow at Hotel Africana there will be a seminar, which has been organised to discuss the issue of abolition or retention of graduated tax. It will start at 9.00 a.m. till 5.00 p.m. However, also here in Parliament we shall have the Committee of Supply to consider a report from a committee. 

I advise that some of us attend the seminar, but definitely Parliament will have to transact business. Since the seminar will go on up to 5.00 O’clock, and on Friday we only sit in the morning, those of you who will not have attended the morning session will be able to follow up the seminar in the afternoon. Maybe you will be able to contribute to the conclusions that you will make as a result of the discussion you will have there.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE ON THE EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

(ii) THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/2004

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Mr Chairman, Article 155(4) of the Constitution mandates this committee to discuss and review the estimates of revenues and expenditure of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament. This report is being presented in pursuance of the same article and Rule 154(a) of the Rules of Procedure. 

The committee examined the policy statement and budgetary estimates for MAAIF, Vote 010, and National Agricultural Research Organization (NARO), Vote 043. I now beg to present the report to this august House for consideration and adoption.

Mr Chairman, the committee invited and held discussions with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the ministers of state in the ministry, and the technical team led by the Permanent Secretary. 

In addition, the committee invited and interacted with leaders of semi-autonomous bodies such as the managing directors of Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and Coffee Development Organisation (CDO); the executive directors of Dairy Development Authority (DDA), NAADS and the National Agricultural Genetic Resources Centre (NAGRC); and the Director of PMA Secretariat. The Acting Director General of NARO also led his team to interact with the committee. 

Members also attended a three-day workshop, in an attempt to understand PMA in the context of the agricultural sector.  

Mr Chairman, the committee considered the vision, mission, mandate and objectives, including policy framework of MAAIF and these were the findings:

The vision of the ministry remains, “to support the national development goal of poverty eradication by providing an enabling environment in which a profitable, competitive, dynamic and sustainable agricultural and agro-industrial sector can develop.”

The ministry’s mission is, “to support efforts to transform subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture by ensuring that the agricultural sector institutions provide efficient and effective demand-driven services to the farming community”. 

The mandate of the ministry is “to support, promote and guide production of crops, livestock and fish in order to ensure improved quality and increased quantity of agricultural produce and products for local consumption, food security and export.”

The statement of the objectives of the ministry is in two categories: One, the sector objectives, which include: 

• To increase the income and quality of life of poor subsistence farmers through increased productivity, value addition and an increased share of marketed products.  

• Improve household food security through the market other than emphasising self-sufficiency.  

• Provide gainful employment through secondary benefits arising from the implementation of PMA, such as agro-processing and provision of services to both forward and backward linkage industries.

• To promote sustainable use and management of natural resources by developing land use and management policies and by promoting environmentally friendly policies.  

To achieve those broad objectives, MAAIF adopted 12 specific objectives:

1. To provide decentralised, farmer-driven private sector-serviced agricultural advisory services

2. To generate and disseminate problem-solving, profitable and environmentally sound technologies on a sustainable basis. 

3. To promote the utilisation of water for increased and sustainable commercial agricultural production.

4. To establish sustainable agricultural development institutions, working in partnership in a decentralised and liberalised framework.

5. To develop supportive policies and regulations, set standards and provide enforcement mechanisms for the smooth functioning of the agro-industrial sector.

6. To ensure poverty focused prioritisation and effective performance of public agricultural development programmes through strategic planning, capacity building, monitoring, and well functioning inspection services.

7. To put in place viable measures and mechanisms for epidemic pests and disease control.

8. To promote profitable and sustainable agro-forestry, which is integrated in agricultural and non-agricultural sectors.

9. To promote environmentally sustainable agricultural practices.

10. To develop and establish a decentralised flexible market information system bringing on board all the main stakeholders.

11. To provide appropriate infrastructure to facilitate development in the sector.

12. To support the production and addition of value to strategic agricultural commodities so as to enhance earnings and employment.

Policy Framework:

The major policy frameworks and principal initiatives and actions include:

• The operationalisation of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), and Government interventions intended to promote production, processing and marketing of selective strategic export commodities.
 
• To continue to ensure that interventions in the dairy industry will aim at streamlining the Dairy Development Authority.

• To develop and implement a revised national research policy, and review several other agricultural statutes, policies and regulations.

• MAAIF also hopes to implement animal disease control programmes and to ensure the adoption of MAAIF’s development strategy, as well as the operationalisation of the animal genetic resources centre and data bank.

General Observations:

Mr Chairman, these were the committee’s observations in these key areas:

1. There is need for the ministry to redefine the vision in order to ensure development and poverty eradication by promoting an enabling environment for a profitable, competitive, dynamic and sustainable agricultural and agro-industrial sector.

2. The mandate ignores the function of spearheading the production of crops, livestock and fish, and instead it emphasises support, promotion and guidance of the sector. As noted in the last financial year, the ministry continues to pursue the decentralisation policy, over-divesting itself of its primary function of monitoring agricultural extension services, thus leading to poor co-ordination and ineffective supervision and accountability.

3. The objectives of the agricultural sector are mixed and confused with objective outcomes, distorting clear and effective implementation programming and execution of duties.

4. The committee also learnt that one of the problems experienced in decentralisation has been the financial support for the decentralised functions from the centre to the local government being retained at the centre. This made it difficult for agricultural extension workers to know where they should relate. 

However, the problem is being addressed through fiscal decentralisation, which will also transfer the monitory control for decentralised MAAIF’s functions to the districts. But the committee wishes to caution MAAIF to ensure that the district local governments do not abuse this function.

5. The committee was concerned that PMA’s multi-sectoral approach has diverted necessary resources from direct agricultural production to subsidiary sectors. As a result, PMA is not being seen on the ground in the form in which the public has been made to understand it. 

Further, not enough sensitisation on PMA has been done in order to sensitise and inform the public. In addition, the resources disbursed as non-sectoral conditional grants to districts under PMA are being spent on what is considered to be district priorities, which are not necessarily the sector priorities. 

6. The committee also noted that although NAADS was started with good intentions, in its present form the programme is too expensive for a poor country to sustain for a long time. For instance, NAADS’ budget for over seven years is supposed to be 108 million dollars and it involves disbursing 31 billion shillings annually to every district, and all this money is supposed to come from donors! This cannot be sustained. It is over-dependent on donor support and much of the money is spent on workshops. 

In addition, lack of appropriate mechanisms for supervising funds disbursed to the districts has resulted in some wastage and abuse of funds and no impact can be seen on the ground. The responsibility of the funds disbursed from the centre is left to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) who is only accountable to the Minister of Local Government and not to MAAIF.

The committee therefore recommends that: 

• MAAIF should revisit its vision, mission and objectives and amend them in order to take into account the need to remain not only as a supporter but also to spearhead the production of crops, livestock and fisheries and the transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming while enhancing the natural resource base.

• The committee further recommends that MAAIF should present to Parliament, by the end of October 2003, a status report on the sector performance including PMA, NAADS and strategic intervention programmes. 

Failure to comply with this recommendation will prompt the committee to demand from this august House an appointment of a select committee to look into the sector priorities and alternative programmes, to respond to the demands of the people of Uganda. This is in light of the fact that any agricultural programme at the moment appears to be supply rather than demand-driven.

Mr Chairman, the committee was able to consider issues raised by Parliament the last financial year and the responses from the Ministry. The committee was generally satisfied with their responses and action taken on the issues raised by Parliament on the policy statement for the Financial Year 2002/2003.

However, more concerns remain on PMA strategic intervention for export programmes and the Vegetable Oil Development Project (VODP). In particular, there are concerns about the lack of clarity on the agreement between Uganda Government and VIDCO Oil Refineries, a private sector firm interested in palm oil development.

Animal and Crop Diseases in the Country:

The committee was concerned with the apparent neglect by the ministry of the control of animal epidemic diseases and pest management in the country. The consequences of this is the resurgence of foot and mouth disease, CBPP, African swine fever, banana bacterial wilt and coffee wilt disease all over the country.

The committee was alarmed to learn that the ministry was unable to allocate more funds for disease control, which has now resulted into the current situation. 

The committee expressed doubts on the status of Irish potato as a crop for strategic intervention for export, and the level of support being given to it at the expense of cocoa and vanilla. The Irish potato should be basically emphasized as a food security crop.  

Fisheries Resources:

The committee was satisfied with the progress made on the fisheries sub-sector. They urged Government to provide more funds to support this sector, which is producing quick results in the economy. Special attention should be paid to regulatory and monitoring activities in order to control smuggling, over-fishing using wrong gear, and quality assurance as a way of improving the sector’s export volume.  

Furthermore, more attention should be put in the accelerated development of aquaculture as a viable commercial enterprise. A strategy and plan for the development of aquaculture in the country should be developed and presented to Parliament.

Semi-autonomous Organisations:

These include, Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), Cotton Development Organization (CDO), Diary Development Authority (DDA) and National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank. 

The performance of these organisations was affected by the budget cuts and under-funding of the entire sector. For instance, it may not be possible for CDO to attain its set target of 400,000 bales per year to achieve the magic one million bales by the year 2006. At the moment, Mr Chairman, the organisation is stuck at producing only 100,000 bales, and we have gone half way the year in the framework.  

Work on coffee wilt disease control was conducted, with a contribution of the Shs 3.3 billion reallocated by this Parliament in the last financial year from seedlings to research. The privatisation of Diary Corporation is still being awaited.

The Ministry’s Budget Performance:

After critically examining the policy statement, the committee observed that the contents were more of a narrative and expressed opinions that did not comply with the Budget Act, 6.2. There was no quantitative input in the report, which would show value for money in content and form.  

The committee further observed that the sector was under-funded and that in terms of funding, the actual amount released to MAAIF was just Shs 57.86 billion against the revised budget of Shs 111.61 billion. This represents a budget outturn of a mere 51.85 percent. However, the committee was grateful that NARO’s actual release was Shs 32.99 billion against the approved budget of Shs 34.62 billion, representing a reasonable budget outturn of 95.29 percent.  

This under performance is aggravated by the fact that the strategic interventions aimed at expanding export of a number of key agricultural commodities are embedded into the MTEF ceiling for the ministry. Similarly, the NAADS programme is being stifled by under-funding, a factor being constrained by the MAAIF ceiling.  

The decentralised functions of MAAIF should be supported by fiscal decentralisation, except for specific critical interventions such as PMA, Strategic Intervention for Exports, Epidemic Diseases and Pests Management, all of which require oversight supervision by MAAIF. 

The committee also learnt that MAAIF’s headquarters in Kampala were never started due to budgetary constraints. Mr Chairman, we had approved 300 million shillings to initiate the process in the last financial year but because of the budget problems, it was unable to be realised.  

The committee was happy that new policies are being formulated to cover national agricultural mechanisation, food and nutrition, meat and fisheries, irrigation, soils and farmland and soil fertility improvement. Most of these are in draft form and are awaiting approval and eventual clearance before they find their way to this august House.

National Agricultural Research Organization (NARO):

Mr Chairman, the committee examined and discussed reports and budget proposals from NARO. The committee wishes to report that during the last financial year, NARO did a commendable job and made remarkable progress. A number of new varieties and other technologies were released by NARO and many similar technologies were transferred to farmers.  

In addition, the committee was pleased to report that in line with the policy to modernise agriculture, NARO developed a sorghum variety known as Epuripur specifically for brewing beer. This variety is being used by Nile Breweries to brew Eagle beer. 

Mr Chairman, on a special note, I wish to recognise a major contribution made in this field by our colleague who was head of the research institute in Serere during the time when this technology was being developed. That is none other than hon. Dr Peter Esele. He was in charge of the exercise. Hon. Peter Esele, Mr Chairman, has done a lot of work. He has produced a lot of crop varieties and left them for the farmers. 

The committee, however, notes with concern the tax on beer with locally produced inputs, which will undermine the demand for sorghum beer and adversely affect the production of Epuripur.  

Similarly, Mr Chairman, NARO has developed an apple variety that can do very well in Uganda. This has been passed over to farmers, and Kabale District local government has began to commercialise it at a wider scale.  

Mr Chairman, Uganda imports a lot of apples from abroad. The development of the apple variety for Uganda is certainly very welcome news, and we must thank and congratulate NARO and our scientists for this noble job.

Recurrent Budget Submissions for NARO:

Mr Chairman, the committee examined and discussed the recurrent budget proposals for NARO, amounting to Shs 2.93 billion, which was the ceiling for last financial year. The budget was re-adjusted to Shs 1.93 billion to be in line with the ceiling provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MFPED). This was a disaster, because a loss of one billion shillings for a small organisation like that one is really a very serious matter.  

Mr Chairman, I wish to report that through the initiative of His Excellency the President, the Government of Uganda committed itself in 1998/1999 to join and contribute, annually, US$0.5 million to the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). This is a powerful global agricultural research body affiliated to the World Bank. 

Since the year 2000, the Government has fallen short in meeting its promise because funds allocated by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this activity have fallen shorter and shorter every subsequent year.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government meet at least 50 percent of its annual promise. Therefore we request that the equivalent of US$250,000 or Uganda Shs 0.5 billion be provided for this activity, in addition to what is already provided this financial year. 

The committee also recommends that the ceiling for NARO’s recurrent budget be increased from the current one Shs 1.93 billion to at least Shs 2.43 billion to accommodate the contribution to CGIAR. These funds should be committed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development during this financial year, which will be in line with the presidential pledge.  

Development Budget Submission for NARO:

Mr Chairman, the committee examined and discussed the budget proposals from NARO. The budget was tailored to the ceiling provided by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. At the beginning, the Minister of Finance provided an MTEF ceiling of Shs 5.47 billion to NARO under its development budget, from where most of NARO’s activities are funded including operations and staff salaries.  

Total estimates for salaries of 840 members of staff amounts to Shs 3.88 billion. Considering that there are other development projects under this vote, NARO considered this allocation grossly inadequate. They appealed to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, to increase their ceiling allocation from Shs 5.47 billion to Shs 6.922 billion. 

This increase would take care of the need for tea research, which is very vital for our economy. It would take care of recruitment of additional staff to cater for research for tea improvement, coffee wilt and banana wilt diseases control, and the tissue culture laboratory, which supports the work on coffee wilt disease.  

Their appeal was not considered at all by the Minister of Finance, and NARO was directed to modify its budget to fit within Shs 5.47 billion. They submitted their revised budget as instructed, and they indicated tea research (Shs 403,201,000) and the tissue culture laboratory (Shs 108,170,211) as spending pressures, hoping that the Minister of Finance would subsequently consider them. This was not considered by the ministry. 

The ceiling earlier promised to NARO was instead reduced further from Shs 5.47 billion to Shs 4.93 billion. These figures have all along excluded taxes for which Shs 260 million has been provided for this financial year. Further, to fit within the new ceiling NARO reduced its staff proposal from 840 to a mere 652, which is the current head count in NARO.

Mr Chairman, NARO is an effective organisation and needs all our support for it to play its role effectively. There are threatening diseases, such as bacterial wilt of bananas and coffee wilt disease, and there is the need to revamp tea research and work on the tissue culture. The committee therefore wishes to recommend that the following provisions be made to NARO’s budget:  

• Staff salaries: Increase allocation from Shs 3,337,812,457 to Shs 3,880,992,642.

• Operating expenses should also be increased from Shs 372,200,000 upwards.

• The tissue culture laboratory should also include Shs 108,170,211. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me; are these recommendations for this year or next year?

MR ODIT: These are recommendations for the next financial year.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR ODIT: The tea research should include Shs 403,201,000. These are the increments, which we hope will enable NARO to perform effectively. This is already part of this year’s shortfall, and the total is Shs 1,490,292,401.

This is a colossal shortfall, and as we speak now the tissue culture and biotechnology laboratory had already been disconnected from Uganda electricity development connection power grid. This could result in an irreplaceable loss of research materials and experiments to which a lot of funds have already been invested.

Mr Chairman, the committee was informed that the national agricultural research system policy will soon be tabled to Parliament and that a draft bill to operationalise it is being prepared. The committee hopes that these reforms will not substantially undermine and impair progress made under the current NARO.

The committee wishes to report its concern on the high rate of resignation of scientists in NARO due to poor motivation. The situation is grave and needs to be looked into carefully and urgently.  Since 1994 to-date, over 180 members of staff, including 65 highly trained scientists, have left NARO due to poor pay and job uncertainty created by the NARS reform process. 

The committee would be happy if the total development budget ceiling is revised upward.

The factors that constrained the ministry’s performance over the last year were:

• The overall budget allocation to the sector continued to remain at two percent. This was exacerbated by unexpected cuts in the already limited budget during the year.

• The committee notes with displeasure that the Minister responsible for Finance did not even for once mention livestock - a vital sub-sector - in the entire budget speech. This was regrettable.

• Although ongoing projects have been reviewed for PMA compliance, their full integration into sector PMA priority areas is yet to be undertaken as part of finalisation of the MAAIF development strategy.

• Insecurity continued to be a major limitation because a cross section of the population were displaced from their homes and were unable to carry out production and other farm related activities. The situation deteriorated in Katakwi, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, Apac and Pader districts.

• Common occurrences of diseases and pests impacted negatively on the performance of the sector. Foot and mouth disease, giant loopers, and coffee and banana wilt resulted in low yields and impacted negatively on access to markets.

• The control of diseases is a mandate of the central government, so is the importation of vaccines for rinderpest, CBPP, FMD and rabies.  The importation has been beset by inadequate provision of funds hence only limited disease control was implemented. The country has witnessed an upsurge of FMD, CBPP, rabies, lumpy skin disease and the African swine fever.

• FMD outbreaks were reported in 20 districts, which put more than 2.5 million heads of cattle at risk, with some deaths. Similarly, the CBPP outbreak put 3 million animals at risk. There were no rabies vaccines procured in the year.

• Weaknesses at the local government level meant that there was inadequate capacity for implementing decentralised sector programs.

• High staff turnover arising from poor staff salary, and uncertainty on the future of NARO as a result of the NARS reform process is also a cause for concern.

I now turn to this year’s budget proposals.

The overall requirement:

The committee now presents the overall requirement for MAAIF for the financial year 2003/2004:  

Vote 10 – MAAIF: the total recurrent expenditure is Shs 4,880,400,000 and development expenditure is Shs 4,667,613,000.  

Vote 03 – NARO: recurrent expenditure is Shs 1,935,000,000 and development expenditure should be Shs 26,744,908,000.

Recommendations:

• Government should take affirmative action to respect and protect budgetary allocation in support of agricultural sector.

• Government should also consider agriculture as a major foundation for economic development for sometime to come, and they should treat it with that understanding in mind. Accordingly, the budget ceiling for MAAIF should be revised upwards to enable the ministry make a more meaningful impact on the modernisation of agriculture, poverty eradication and economic growth.

• MAAIF should quickly develop and present to Parliament a well-considered sector investment plan based on priorities for improving productivity and household income, in order to justify the increase, which we are battling for, in the budget ceiling allocation.

• PMA in its present form will not deliver the anticipated transformation of the sector from subsistence to commercial farming. It is not seen on the ground because of its multi-sectoral nature. 

For PMA to make a meaningful contribution to poverty eradication, it should shed off other sectors that are currently encroaching into the basic primary agricultural programme. It should therefore concentrate on supporting research extension services, markets and agro-processing, rural finance, soil fertility and land resource management.

• The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should prepare a White Paper on the entire sector and present it to Parliament for debate in the shortest possible time. In the meantime, a special situational report on PMA, including NAADS, should be presented to the House by October 2003, to update Parliament on the progress.

We have taken into account the process involved in preparing a White Paper, and it takes some time. So, we want the minister to present a quick situational report for Parliament to keep abreast of what is happening on the ground.

• Specific programmes such as NAADS, Strategic Intervention and the National Genetic Resource Centre should not be suffocated by the low ceiling imposed on MAAIF by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Provisions should be made for these programmes to access the additional funding needed for them to operate more effectively, particularly since development partners are willing to provide additional funds for those programmes.

In conclusion, Mr Chairman, I beg that MAAIF’s budget for the fiscal year 2003/2004 be approved as follows:

Vote 010 MAAIF: 

• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 4, 880,400,000.
• Domestic development expenditure, Shs 64,667,613,000.

Vote 043 NARO: 

• Recurrent expenditure, Shs 1,935,000,000.
• Domestic development expenditure, Shs 26,744,908,000.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for the report. I invite brief comments, if any.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr chairman. I would like to commend the committee for a very well considered and presented report. My first comment derives from a position on page 7, the third point, which says, “…a factor being constrained by the MAAIF ceiling”. Then on page 11, regarding allocation of two percent of the national budget to MAAIF, which is also related.  

Mr Chairman, I think the question of national priorities is continuing to nag this country.  Hopefully, the National Planning Authority will assist us in this. 

I do not want to underrate the capacity and ability of the Cabinet to set global priorities for this country. But in the meantime, I would like to urge and advise that the setting up of these percentages and global priorities for this country must be a shared responsibility between the legislators and the Executive. 

Therefore, I am insisting and appealing on this, and I will raise it in the Budget Committee. The Budget Committee’s scrutiny of participation in determining which percentage of the Government budget should be allocated to what sector must be a tripartite arrangement.

Our scrutiny of the individual ceilings as already determined by the Ministry of Finance or the Cabinet, and the concerns of the ministries, which are to be addressed within the ceiling allocated to them, by setting their own internal priorities, are not adequate. I think we must tackle the problem from the global setting up to national priorities. 

In my own view, I would think the first priority should be given to social services: one, education and two, health. The second must be given to the productive sector, and number one would have been agriculture in that sense, as far as I am concerned.

Defence should be given high priority only in case of emergency. We cannot go on allocating big resources to defence when we are not faced with an emergency. So, on a continual basis, I think I would follow that approach.

My second comment is on PMA. My view, and I have said it here many times, is that the holistic approach to the PMA is not useful. A holistic approach adopted on PMA and a holistic approach adopted under the poverty alleviation programme, to me, are not suitable. 

My sincere advice, in tandem with the committee’s view, is that PMA should be reviewed and focused specifically on the issues that directly concern agriculture. Let us abandon the holistic approach, and then we can begin to believe in PMA. In any case, nobody understands what it is; it is neither a plan nor a programme. It is an academic document, at best, and that is how it was put up. It was put up by a bunch of academicians with a lot of ideas. 

We should tackle the problem of agriculture more seriously. I think if we are going to rely on PMA for this purpose, it must be reviewed and focused on issues of direct concern to agriculture.

My final comment is on the two policies that have done agriculture a lot of disservice. Decentralization is one of them. Decentralization of agricultural services without adequate physical facilities to districts will never be useful to agriculture. 

In fact, the district officials concerned with agriculture, in particular those of animal resources are not felt in the rural area at all. Even the extension services, which are sitting in the sub-counties, are literally eating up money for nothing. They are ineffective, they are unfelt; if anything, they could be buried and nobody would even shed a tear or go for the funeral service.

The second policy, which is really doing a disservice to agriculture, is this question of putting everything to the private sector - liberalisation.  Honestly, how can anyone convince us and force us to liberalise the agricultural sector, when even America and all developed European countries have not done it, and we blindly follow this line! This completely reduces us to people who do not think about the welfare of our own people. 

You tell America not to subsidise agriculture, they will refuse because that would be politically explosive. In any case, since they have a lesser population producing for a greater population, anything that touches on the productivity of agriculture would be too delicate and unbearable. So, the few people who have remained in agriculture must be encouraged to do so in those developed countries, and they can only be supported and encouraged to do so through subsidisation. 

We are here benefiting, and that is why we can afford to sit back and think that we are comfortable with this policy because the majority of our people are still producing for themselves. Ninety percent of our population are still producing for themselves and that is why we relax and think that this policy is useful. 

I do not know whether we want to pursue this policy; I would never pursue it if I were a leader of this country. But if we should pursue it, I want to suggest very strongly that at least we do not pursue it with respect to agriculture. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): I thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I also want to thank the Minister for Agriculture and the ministry at large for the good work that they are doing for this country. 

Last year, the Ministry of Agriculture, through the fisheries resources, got the country US$90 million from export of fish. I think that the Minister for Finance should think twice before he cuts off any allocation to the Ministry of Agriculture.  

Mr Chairman, I would also like to thank the minister for this programme of building 30 modern landing sites, which are going to cover the whole country. I believe that once this is done, the proceeds from the exports of fish for this country may go up to over 200 million per year.

I would also like to thank the minister for the Statutory Instrument No.35 of 11 July 2003, which is in respect to the Fish Management Rule 2003.  If this is implemented, there will be a lot of sanity at the landing sites. Currently, fish is being handled in a very poor way; there is a lot of smuggling, no latrines at the sites and so forth. So, if this can be implemented expeditiously, I believe that this country will progress very well.

Mr Chairman, the zoning of agricultural products, in particular if I can give the example of North and Eastern Uganda where citrus fruits and mangoes are being singled out, is a policy in the right direction. But the ministry should ensure that the extension workers do give their support to the farmers. 

There is an example in Soroti where there is a citrus farm of only one acre belonging to a certain Mr Okia who is a director in NAADS. From that one acre alone, he is getting over Shs 15 million per year, and this is because he is using the correct methods. 

He mulched the whole acre using grass, and he traps all the water that comes into that farm. Through that, he is also able to control diseases. So, what he is producing is export quality, and people go there to buy for the shops in Kampala and for export. If we had about one thousand or ten thousand of those, we would eliminate the importation of fruits from South Africa and other areas. 

Mr Chairman, I will comment on the issue of mangoes. Right now there are three varieties of mangoes that are for export; we have got the Alphonso variety, Tommy and Ketie. These have got a very high export value. But right now, the production of the seedlings, apart from being very expensive (Shs 3,000 per seedling) is also not sufficient. I urge the ministry to ensure that the prices come down and that more and more of them are given out. 

Right now India is the highest exporter and is producing up to 10 million tones per year. I think 52 percent of world’s production comes from India, and yet India has only one season. Now, in Uganda here we are capable of having a minimum of two mango seasons. If this was done, I believe that the cry that the Minister of Finance has been having, of less resources, would be history. The export of mangoes does bring in very good income.

We also have the issue of bee farming. Right now the population of bees in this country has gone down very heavily and this has a negative impact on crops, which require cross-pollination. So, if bee farming is emphasized in this country and the population of bees is improved, this will have a positive effect on the issue of pollination, and therefore, general production of crops in this country.

Mr Chairman, currently a beehive costs about Shs 30,000, and from each beehive one can get a minimum of about Shs 100,000 in a year. If the ministry was given Shs 3 billion, we would be in a position to get about 100,000 beehives and this would bring in a gross income of Shs 10 billion for the farmers. Definitely, this would be very good income for this nation. 

If there was Shs 30 billion, we would be in a position to assist the Ministry of Finance with the issue of this deficit that is arising either through expenses or through lack of income.

Mr Chairman, there is also the issue of gelatine –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: There is limited time for you, so wind up.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I am winding up. There is the issue of gelatine. When we export hides and skins in this country, we do not extract the gelatine, which is being used in pharmaceuticals, food industries and the photography industry. I believe the ministry should be in a position to advise this nation on how we can get this gelatine and export the hides and skins minus the gelatine.  

Mr Chairman, if there was time, I would have talked about rural electrification. We should ensure that we have linkages of agriculture into industry. I thank you.

MRS MARY AMAJO ORIEKOT (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would also like to start by thanking the committee for doing a very good diagnostic job on such an amorphous ministry. I would also like to thank the ministry for the few interventions that have had an impact on this sector. Having said that, I would like now to go straight into the report.  

When I was reading the report, I was struck by the great ambiguity of the mission and vision of the Ministry of Agriculture. I said to myself, no wonder the ministry is doing so much and doing so little, and doing everything and very little of everything. The mission and vision are so ambiguous that I could not relate it to such an important ministry. They have so much ambiguity in what they are set out to do.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, on page 6, I read about something in connection to the enterprises that should be encouraged in this country. I was wondering why there is no emphasis on some of the programmes that were started way back in the 1960s and 1970s. Things like the cashew nuts, the citrus - like my colleague has mentioned - have so much potential but they have been abandoned. In the Teso region, for example, the cashew nut trees are still there but there seems to be no effort to make them commercial crops.

Mr Chairman, I must say that agriculture is the key sector in almost all the programmes that we are trying to encourage. For example, under the Ministry of Finance now, there is the programme on micro-finance outreach. You cannot talk of micro-finance if the demand side of the financial system is not being well articulated and attended to.  

Many financial institutions fear to go into agriculture because there is no support in the agricultural sector. We cannot start advocating for financial services in the rural areas when at the household level there is no indication that a farmer who borrows from any financial institution will be able to have enough surpluses to pay back.  So, I think the agricultural sector had better re-focus.

I support additional support to NARO in terms of salaries, but I must emphasize that that is not the ultimate aim. Support to NARO would be almost a waste if the delivery mechanism that takes whatever NARO comes up with to the household is not attended to. 

I would like to support my colleague, hon. Okulo Epak, for his concern about the PMA extension service and the fact that delivery in the agricultural sector is so poor. You really wonder, for example, why we are still talking about appropriate technology.  

Sometime this week, we saw something being opened in Mbale called, the Appropriate Technology Centre.  These are things we talked about in the 1960s and 1970s when I was at university. We are still talking about appropriate technology for the households today and it makes news! Why is it still news to talk about appropriate technology at the household level? It should not be making news in the 21st Century. Appropriate technology should now be a household name in all the households.  

I support hon. Okulo Epak, and I am wondering why the presentation of the White Paper should not be given a timeframe if we are to really concentrate on having a diagnostic analysis on what is happening in the agricultural sector. The statement in the report, saying that it should be presented at the shortest possible time, should be modified to give it a precise timing - it should be presented on such and such a date. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and honourable members. I also wish to add my voice to those who are thankful to the committee and the ministry for all the work that is being done to promote the agricultural sector. I will bring out four observations that could even take us another step ahead. 

The first one is in the fisheries sector. The ministry needs to think more about being in partnership with the private sector in fish production. I say this because with half an acre of a fishpond, one can have the capacity to deliver up to 7,000 fish in a season. This means, if you had 200 out-growers tied to one private investor, you could have the capacity to deliver up to two tonnes of fish everyday. But the private sector is handicapped in putting the infrastructure in place, and it will be my desire to see the ministry going into partnership with the private sector. 

The US$90 million earned from exports is very commendable. But there are many communities in this country that do not think of exports, yet there is a real need for fish. In Kinkiizi, for example, I know we have depended on Lake Edward, but the fish is very small because of over-fishing. I would love to see private investors supported to get fish for local consumption.

My second comment is that we have not emphasized producing for export. Studies have indicated that some of the Ugandan products actually do not stand a chance in the export market. I will refer to the study done by DFID and Tropical Whole Foods, which was launched at Hotel Equatorial early this year. In this study, they showed the title of the CDEs penetrating mainline food markets in the UK. In here they show the prices and make a comparison between the cost of production in Uganda and the supermarket prices in the UK.  

This study indicates that with products like honey, we do not stand a chance because honey costs 50 percent less in the UK than what it costs in Uganda. Zambia has got into the market before us and they have got lower production costs. I want us to put emphasis on capturing the local market. I would like to see the ministry emphasizing that if we avoid importing certain things, by implication the impact is likely to increase our exports. 

An important product that I would like to bring to the attention of the ministry is fruit juice. In Kinkiizi during the mango season, mangoes are a real problem. When I am driving from Kinkiizi, I find people digging pits to bury mangoes because if you do not bury them, the cows will eat them and die. While these people are burying mangoes, the first thing I do as soon as I am in Mbarara is to look for a supermarket and buy one litre of juice imported from South Africa, at a cost of Shs 3,000.  

I would like the ministry to know that one tetra pack machine, which the South African Ceres Company uses, costs the equivalent of just Shs 80,000 from Sweden. I would like to see rural communities empowered to can juice such that we cut down this cost of importing mango juice and banana juice at Shs 3,000 a litre, when both bananas and mangoes are growing widely and being brewed into tonto. 

I would like to see the ministry thinking equally about marketing and production. I would like to bring to the attention of the ministry that schools are a primary unit of consumption, where people learn what they eat. I want to thank the Diary Development Authority because they have really marketed milk; you see pictures of ministers drinking a glass of milk and below the poster they say, “drink milk, it is good for you”. But we have not encouraged our people to consume our local products in schools.  

Last year I was in California and I saw a film star on the television saying,  “I am proud I do not eat mangoes, I do not eat oranges, I eat California oranges”. That was a message meant to motivate the local people, that by producing and consuming the local products, they are actually building their economy. I would very much want to see milk bars in our schools.  

I know the President has tried to supply milk to schools, but for anyone involved in discussing our budget, we know that there are serious budgetary restrictions and this is not something we can hope for. We are a pocket money culture, and by establishing milk bars in these schools - our schools take 50 percent of our population - we can teach our people to take those things that boost the local markets.

Finally, I would like to make a comment on the remuneration and support of the National Agriculture Research Organization. In a globalised economy, the secret of breaking through is innovation. People are on the Internet looking for the new products that have been invented. As long as we continue underpaying our researchers, we shall lose them to other countries along with the good ideas that would attract the whole world to Uganda as a place of investment and a place that is on the cutting edge of research. 

Yesterday we approved the Ministry of Finance budget and remuneration for the National Planning Authority. I would like to see a comparison on how much Government is spending on the National Agricultural Organisation and the National Planning Authority. Both are equally important and so there should be a relation in the people who do the work.  I want to thank you very much, and I hope that we can work together and make the agricultural sector the hub of development in this country. Thank you very much.

MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. My observation goes to the issue of fishing. The report is very silent about the problems at the border in the waters of Kenya and Uganda. This issue has created a problem. 

Ministries have failed to interlink amongst themselves. The problem in Eastern Uganda, in the lake region, is basically because of the communication problem between the Uganda mainland and the Sigulu Islands. We are aware also that the East African Legislative members are looking into this issue. I would therefore urge the committee and the ministry as well to look into the problems of the people of the island.  

The report is emphasizing fishing as a source of income for the economy, but they have not looked at how much is being lost in channelling fish through Kenya. I urge members in the House to support this. I believe if there was an interface between the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Agriculture, they would have urged the Ministry of Works to improve on the communication between the mainlands of Uganda, that is Bugiri District, and the Sigulu Islands.  

I request the Ministry of Agriculture together with the Ministry of Works to come up with a plan to initiate the construction of ferry services. It may not come tomorrow, it may not come after five years but please initiate the construction of ferry services that would connect Bugiri mainland and the Sigulu Islands. It will solve a lot of problems. 

The economy is losing a lot of finances through smuggling of fish to the borders of Kenya. As if that is not enough, people are being beaten up while they are taking the fish across to Kenya, and no alternative has been put forward by Government to receive fish on the Ugandan side. I therefore request that intervention be made, because there is no way you can refuse a person to take fish to Kenya when you are not providing alternatives for him to bring the fish to Uganda. I urge the ministry to really look into this matter, if we are to be consistent with Government policies and Government objectives.    

About PMA, I would like to agree with my colleague, hon. Okulo Epak, that one of the reasons various programmes that have been put in place to assist the people in the villages have failed is because of supervision. Whereas PMA has failed, PEAP is on the way. There is also another programme coming called PRCS. 

All these programmes will fail for as long as they are not really addressing the household, because the channels they go through are not impacting on the real household people. I therefore urge the Government to come up and work out their programmes in as far as the reduction of poverty is concerned. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS SARAH NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report they produced. I also thank the Minister of Agriculture for the interventions he has made regarding agriculture. 

I want to raise only one concern, that is, the banana wilt and coffee wilt disease in Mukono and Kayunga districts. I want to inform the Minister of Agriculture that the coffee wilt and banana wilt in Kayunga District and Mukono District is really beyond our control. We have to carry out research and control these diseases. The researchers have not gone to the people who are really affected. I wish, at this moment, to beg the Minister of Agriculture to look into this problem.  

We have vanilla, which is now marketable. The Ministry of Agriculture should put the money that was set aside for coffee seedlings into vanilla, so that vanilla growing can expand to all areas where the coffee and banana wilt affected. 

I would like to inform the House that the people of Ntenjeru North are almost failing to pay graduated tax because they do not have any income from coffee and banana. Almost all the coffee seedlings have wilted. Now that it has been indicated in the report that our development partners are willing to provide additional funds, we could put some funds into vanilla vines because they are doing very well in Kayunga. That is my humble plea. Thank you very much.

DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Ever since I came to this Parliament, I think this is the first time the agriculture committee has produced a very comprehensive report – (Applause). They have made it very simple so that even a man without a background in agriculture, like myself, can understand it. I hope they will keep up the good work. In the past, the Committee of Agriculture was the centre of controversy in this House, and at the end they were not very productive.

I am going to concentrate on my traditional interest, and that is animal husbandry. If only we had continued with the work of John Babiha, who in the 1960s refused to import Kenyan milk and said Ugandans must be self sufficient in the production of milk. 

Secondly, he had a plan to eradicate ticks in this country. He built dips in each sub-county. All these were abandoned, to the extent that in the eastern region – at least in Pallisa where I come from - there is no functional dip to combat ticks. Tick borne diseases, like East Coast fever, Plasmosis and so forth have invaded the area. There are quite a number of deaths of cattle and yet there is no reaction from the relevant ministry.  

When I look at the ministry, it is stands out, obviously, that animal husbandry has been neglected in the country. I think we have to plan to combat tick borne diseases in the country. 

It is a shame that in the ministry the control of diseases was decentralized. When you go to the districts where decentralization was supposed to have taken off, there is absolutely nothing. So, what was it that was decentralized in combating tick borne diseases? 

Even at the district level, the services to the countryside have been decentralized. If you want a veterinary officer to come and see your cow, you have got to pay him. But peasants in the country cannot afford to pay for veterinary services. They cannot afford to pay the veterinary officer; they cannot afford to pay for drugs. This is where Government should take interest.  

Mr Chairman, at the moment we are producing quite a lot of milk in this country but there is no plan for marketing. It is left up to the individual peasant to market his milk. And the prices are so different in the different parts of the country. I understand in Mbarara a litre of milk costs Shs 200. I am fairly fortunate because I am able to sell my milk in Pallisa for Shs 400, but I understand that in some seasons milk is sold at Shs 100 a litre.  

Mr Chairman, those of us who are old enough remember what happened in the United States. Diary farmers demanded that their government should subsidize milk, and they carried their milk and poured it on the streets of different cities to demonstrate this. They refused to sell milk but they went and poured it on the streets until the Government agreed to subsidize diary farms. 

It is high time we demanded in this country that the Government subsidizes milk production. Farmers should receive free drugs and Government should take the responsibility to market milk.  

It is a shame that in a country where 80 percent, – listen to this carefully – 80 percent of the children are malnourished, we cannot even sell milk to them! There are many NGOs interested in combating malnutrition in developing countries, especially in Africa where you see children with potbellies and brown hair almost everywhere you go.  

In Teso, this never used to happen; it was a shame to see a child who was malnourished. Now when you go along the roads in that area, you see malnourished children. It used to be a curse, and it was usually due to lack of spacing - (Interruption)

MR MAURICE KAGIMU: Thank you doctor. I appreciate that point. In Kenya, President Moi ordered that each child must take a litre of milk everyday. So, I challenge the Government of Uganda to do the same. Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: I hope our friends are listening. We should direct the nutrition of our children in schools. We must have lunch programmes. We must give these children porridge mixed with milk and then we shall not have a problem of marketing milk.  

We should learn how to process milk. Let us make powdered milk, cheese, buttermilk, and make it available. Buttermilk is actually a Karimojong style, and as someone has mentioned, decentralization has had a very negative impact on animal husbandry. It is high time we reviewed what we should decentralize and what we should not decentralize.  

In decentralizing animal husbandry, we have decentralized corruption and laziness. We get equipment and then send it to the districts but what do you find there? The equipment is stored and locked up in warehouses and it is never used. This happened when Pallisa was audited; equipment had been lying there for about five years and yet it was meant to be used for animal husbandry. 

Mr Chairman, energy is central in agriculture. It is a shame that every year we have been increasing the price of fuel in this country without really considering the fact that more than 90 percent of our people in rural areas depend on subsistence agriculture for both food and money. 

It is high time we seriously considered the price of fuel in this country, which has a negative impact on agriculture. It is high time we considered this when we are negotiating with the people who are coming to generate electricity in this country. It is necessary to lower the prices of electricity so that more people in the rural areas can have access to electricity to help them in the production and processing of agricultural products. (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I am sorry but I do not intend to go beyond 1.00 p.m. today because we have another giant committee’s report, the Committee on Social Services. As I see, there a number of members who want to contribute, please let us restrict ourselves to not more than four minutes so that many people can be able to make contributions. Please, wind up.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We should not have killed the co-operatives. Let us revive the co-operatives tomorrow to help peasants market their products in the countryside. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for this report. This report is an eye opener on many issues regarding agriculture. I would like to recommend to members to read through it report again after this debate. 

Unfortunately, the Minister for Finance entered when the report had been read. I want to recommend to him, in particular, to read this report as Minister of Finance and as Member of Parliament representing Bushenyi. There are a number of very important issues, which he should look at. 

I want him to appreciate the serious observations that the committee has made under paragraph 4, and also the various issues that have been raised under paragraph 5. I also want us to look at the issues with regard to budget performance of this ministry under 6. 

Mr Chairman, I think, generally, there has been a problem of presentation of ministerial statements. In particular, they did not pay attention to the issue of value for money. This has been a common shortcoming in most of the statements. I am happy that the Prime Minister has now taken this matter up and has commissioned a group of people to begin looking at the format of presentation of the ministerial statements. I believe next year this matter will be sorted out.  

There are still other issues that need to be addressed under NARO, which is facing a lot of problems. One of our colleagues has just said that we are losing scientists and researchers, which is tragic, because we are losing these people to other countries. They will go and do research in agriculture for the benefit of other countries. 

They are doing this because the outturn on their budget was only 50 percent. They were promised so much money. They had a big number of staff, so they had to reduce staff in order to work within the available resources that were made available to them. This is very sad.  

Yesterday, fortunately, when we were discussing the ministerial statement of the Ministry of Finance, some of these issues were raised. Issues have been raised, for instance in this report on page 9, with regard to problems of NARO and their inability to address some of the critical issues, including diseases that are attacking our plants and livestock.  

I think the minister agreed, and I am sure he will confirm, that he will have to look at the budget generally and try to find a way of how they can help NARO in particular. They can then overcome some of these very critical problems, which they are facing at the present time.

Mr Chairman, hon. Okulo Epak made a proposal, and this is the first time such a proposal has been made. He said that the minister, in consultation with the Budget Committee, should do the setting of budget ceilings for various sectors. I think this would be very useful because Parliament would be involved at that particular level of setting the ceiling. 

Once these ceilings have been set, the best we can do is to lament. There is very little we can do about it. But when we get involved in the settings of ceilings, we shall be in a position to look at the various critical issues, sector by sector. We shall make sure that within the limited resources available to us, we cater for those critical areas.

I think this will be advantageous to the Minister of Finance because whenever things go wrong in various sectors, it is the Ministry of Finance that is accused. If we democratise the setting of these ceilings, it would be much better for everybody.  Everybody would know that we are getting little from the very small envelope for the various critical areas. 

I hope when we come to the amendment of the Budget Act, we shall look into the possibility of ensuring that actually the ceilings are set in consultation with the Budget Committee.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for such a good report. However, I have a few concerns arising out of it. 

One of my concerns is about the relocation of the ministry headquarters from Entebbe to Kampala. A few days ago, we heard a report from the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications. They talked about a building that Government is going to sell off, and now the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is going to construct new buildings in Kampala! I need some clarification on this. 

Is Government now building new offices, or they are going to take over some of these new buildings that they are planning to sell off, like Crested Towers? I would like some clarification on this.

My other concern is the Vegetable Oil Development Project. This project was launched about six years ago, we have been eagerly waiting for it to take off but nothing is going on, and yet it has a lifetime of eight years. It is remaining with only two years. 

The major component of the Vegetable Oil Development Project is palm oil growing. When you plant a palm oil tree today, it will be productive in three years’ time. That means even if you plant it today, palm oil will start being produced when the lifetime of the project has expired. Can we get clarification about this?

We have also learnt that two districts are going to be involved in this palm oil project, Kalangala and Bundibugyo. The biggest plantation is going to be around Kalangala. The contracting company, VIDCO, is planning to put up a refinery in Jinja. What is the explanation for this, when the product is really bulky? Why has this company not planned to take the refinery to where the nucleus is going to be? The area would also benefit maybe –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you mean instead of Jinja they take it to Masaka town? (Laughter)

MR BADDA: In fact, we would even be happy if it is near because we would share some developed infrastructure like roads, schools and power.

Another concern, Mr Chairman, is about some new –(Interruption)-

MR MULENGANI: Thank you Mr Chairman, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. 

In economics, one of the location factors for industries is source of power, and another one is accessibility to the main road. Mr Chairman, by locating the factory in Jinja, the investor looked at, amongst other factors, the most expensive factor which is unlikely to be attainable in those two areas mentioned, that is Kalangala and Masaka.  I thank you.

DR KASIRVU ATWOOKI: Thank you Mr Chairman, and I thank you, hon. Badda, for giving way. I want to thank hon. Badda for raising that very important concern. The same concern has been raised over and over again by the people from Bunyoro who grow tobacco. The factory is located here in Kampala. 

Tobacco is also grown in Arua but the factory is in Jinja, and these people do not know how a tobacco leaf looks like. So, these factories actually should be located where the raw material is being produced. I thank you.

MR BADDA: Thank you hon. Kasirivu for answering hon. Mulengani’s concern. Indeed accessibility of power is important, but we have learnt that we are even exporting to neighbouring countries, which are not near the source, anyway, but they are using it for factories. So, I do not think being near the source is still an issue.

My other point concerns the high value crops that are coming up in this country. One member mentioned vanilla. I would also like to add another crop called cocoa, which is really adding a lot to the economy of this country. We do not know what intervention Government is going to make so that it boosts the production of these high value crops that farmers are struggling to start growing. We would like to know what specific steps Government is taking as intervention measures for these crops.

About NAADS, I have some few fears. One fear is about the demand driven theory. Almost 80 percent of our farmers are peasants and they grow for consumption. I do not know how such a farmer, who is not a commercial farmer, can really demand for the services that are supposed to be given. I hope the minister will clarify on that.  

The farmers’ fora are said to be institutions that are going to contract out the services. Don’t you think they will be manipulated by politics and local situations? 

Lastly, Mr Chairman, I would like to comment on fish. We have learnt that the economy has really gained a lot from the fishing industry but we are also losing a lot to the neighbouring countries. 

I come from a border district, Kalangala, which borders Tanzania. I have seen very big ships take immature fish from Uganda. I do not know what our Government is doing to correct this problem. There are strict measures put on our fishermen to control them from using low-sized nets. Many fishermen from my constituency have now gone to start their businesses in Tanzania because they have no strict measures there. 

I want also to inform the minister of fisheries that we have so many organizations involved in the control of fishing malpractices. The major threat comes from State House. When you go to the landing sites, nobody from the district headquarters can talk against these people, not even the staff of fisheries. They come, posing as people from State House, and they cane people. Can we get clarification on these matters? Thank you very much.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think there is an imbalance on this side. I will do this, hon. Twarebireho and hon. Nathan Byanyima will contribute and then I will invite the Minister, because what we really need is the reaction of the minister. We have to finish this report before 1.00 p.m. so that we have a sufficient break before we deal with another report.

CAPT. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. I also would like to thank the committee for a job well done. As we all know, agriculture supports 80 percent of our population. I am therefore shocked to note that Government has allocated very little money to that sector.  

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I wish to agree with hon. Mulengani and my colleague from Kinkiizi on the issue of fisheries. I wish to add that the ministry has not done enough to intervene in the fisheries sector in respect of restocking. 

As I have stated before on the Floor of this House, in Bunyaruguru we have 52 lakes, but to-date only three of those lakes have been restocked. I am sure if the others could be re-stocked, we would really have some fish for consumption and for sale and our people’s lives would be improved.  

Thirdly, Mr Chairman, Government has encouraged the growing of vanilla, Moringa and other crops. But Government has not gone ahead to make the price of seedlings cheap for the farmers. These crops have proved to be good, but then the farmers cannot afford the price of seedlings.  

Lastly, Mr Chairman, I wish to urge Government to put more money in the field of research, especially with the view of fighting banana wilt and all these other animal diseases. I thank you.

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also join others to thank the committee for the good work. I hope this will be the last time this Parliament is lamenting about agriculture. 

We all depend on food. When we are in our respective constituencies, we all have food; we do not buy it. So, why don’t we have money for agriculture? 

The problem with the Ministry of Finance is that as soon as we finish this budget, they will go back to the Ministry and draw another programme. They do not go out to see where they put the money. Hon. Rukutana, leave your offices and go and see where the money goes. These people have suffered for so long. They have had so many odds against them. 

At this juncture, I must thank the Minister of Agriculture for keeping the candle burning, because the ministry does not have the money but everybody is blaming them. At one time, Mr Chairman, one Member of Parliament said that if one day they woke up to hear that the Ministry of Agriculture had been scraped off, the people of Kashari would not be affected. It is because they do not see Ministry of Agriculture there! Members have talked so well about agriculture, but we need a backing from the Ministry of Finance. Let them be given money and we see what they can do.

Mr Chairman, about the ministry officials, let us stop these so many workshops and conferences. Let us move to the ground and discuss with the people.  One colleague talked about some methods of agriculture, which were used in the 1960s and 1970s; that is when some of us were being born!  

Why don’t we discuss with the people so that by the time we come out with a White Paper, which they have mentioned in the report, we have everything at our fingertips. We should own PMA, NAADS so that we do not start blaming the minister for failing us.  

Someone yesterday was talking about blue paper, pink paper and the white paper. A White Paper is supposed to be a paper that has a pool of ideas and judgments, and it goes through Cabinet. When it comes to Parliament, we give it a blessing and at the end of the day, we all own it. Otherwise, we shall not move very far if we do not go down to the people who are the end users, the ones who have the food; and then we think of modernizing agriculture!  

Mr Chairman, I would like to talk about animals. The people of Mbarara have suffered for so long with foot and mouth disease. At one time, I heard the minister talking about killing all the animals as a solution. I hope you have rescinded that step. 

Our people rely so much on milk and selling cows for school fees, but there is this foot and mouth disease that we have suffered with for so long and we feel something should be done. I agree we do not have money, but let us change our priorities a bit so that hon. Rukutana can go back and release money for their ministry.  

Finally, Mr Chairman, I must thank the Minister of State for Animal Industry for bringing coolers to the areas where the milk is, rather than leaving some coolers in some areas where there is no milk because they were there before. I think if we modernize and make sure that services go to the right places, we shall move ahead. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, I do not know whether you will summarize for the entire ministry, but definitely by 12.45 p.m. I need to wind up this report. So, see how to divide your time.

THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you Mr Chairman. I am going to be very brief. I wish to thank the chairman and the members of the committee for this well-balanced presentation. Most importantly, I thank them for having caused concern, so that this Parliament will, at an appropriate time, give us a hearing.  

I recall, Mr Chairman, some time back I came here to give a ministerial statement on some of the issues that were raised about my ministry. I was shut down and asked, “Is that important?” and yet what I wanted to do was to bring to the attention of Members of Parliament what was happening in the ministry.  

Now that all the concerns expressed are focusing on agriculture, I think this is a blessing, which we are going to exploit. If it were possible, I would not mind if we are allocated a day, even within a fortnight; I think we would really satisfy this House. The papers are available. What, actually, has been expressed are not differences; we are at par, except that there is some gap in communication.  

Hon. Okulo Epak said that this holistic approach is going to be doomed. Hon. Mallinga also said electricity is very fundamental to agriculture.  So, if we were to be in a room, open-minded, and we discussed what the issues are, you would find that electricity, infrastructure in terms of roads and even agricultural infrastructure all affect you. You would find that marketing, processing, attitude all affect you. The holistic approach is being criticised yet it is one way of handling the problem of diversity, which is affecting the sector. 

When it comes to zoning the country, again we need a systematic approach. Through NAADS, we are trying to get enterprises, which are market-oriented, per area. Already under NARO they have come up with the zoning according to the farming system. We are going to put up agricultural research development centres. The Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment is also coming up with a land utilisation policy. 

When all this data is put together, I think we shall finally zone the country to increase productivity and also sustainably supply the markets available. 

The issue of liberalisation, privatisation, decentralisation, the mission and the mandate: These are overall national policies under which we are operating. When we came to power, the focus was on attracting investors to these areas - which is good - to provide an enabling atmosphere so that investors come to this country. Those who are weeded off from agriculture can be observed in these growing industries, and those who are efficient will remain in agriculture but come up with them. 

Things may not be happening the way they were happening, and maybe 10 to 12 years down the road it is time to review and see how agriculture fits in. Otherwise, liberalisation, privatisation and decentralisation are the policies under which we have been operating. When you are a minister and you have the mandate, you have to work to see how you fit in these policies.  

The mandate actually came as a result of a Civil Service review, which was carried out some time back. The mandate is to promote, support and give technical guidance. If you think it is lacking something, then we are open to examine it with the committee and all stakeholders and see how we can move on. 

However, despite the weakness here and there, the crucial thing is that we have a limited national resource envelope. If those areas, which are protected under PAF, are also affected eventually, then everything becomes a priority. When everything becomes a priority and you are asked to reallocate, you end up almost doing little on everything without satisfying anybody.  

This is a national issue and we need to discuss it. And as we are discussing the agricultural sector, this will surface. It is not that we are mentally broke in the Ministry or we are just not listening to all these voices, it is just that this is the environment under which we operate. We are doing our best to see that we get out of these problems.  

It is true some functions were decentralised, like extension, but you know that we are dealing with weak institutions both in the public and the private sector. So, you may have decentralised, but the public sector at the district and sub-counties is weak, they do not even supervise. So, you find that we will have many seminars and workshops on capacity building, not necessarily in my ministry but I think in every sector. This is a requirement. 

When it comes to things like cashew nuts – someone said we are not doing anything - agriculture was affected like any other sector. Those who are from Soroti at least can testify that there is a factory, which had been constructed. It was vandalized and later when we wanted to rehabilitate it, the yield of those trees that were planted was so low. They do not justify an investor to come in. 

So, what we have done is to get NARO to focus on researchable areas on cashew nuts, so as to come up with a quick maturing type of cashew nut tree, which will be sustainable and have better yields and enable us to penetrate the market.

It is true that there is a problem with the micro finance outreach; it has not reached those areas. But if NARO is generating a technology, and if you have good extension workers in some areas, working with farmers hand in hand, at the end of the day these farmers of mine are also investors and they will need capital for this. How are they going to get capital from their meagre savings? They need to have some access to credit. Access to credit is also becoming crucial, and this is what makes PMA a holistic, multi-sectoral, sector-wide approach.  

Fishing: We have a paper on this; I think we shall have to circulate it to members also, to show you the crux of the matter. We have just circulated it to the Cabinet as an information paper. 

Fishing on Lake Victoria is done by various people. Traditionally, the Ugandan side never bothered about who fished on that lake, and those people have been fishing almost up to the shores of Uganda. But when we came to power, we started the fish factory at Masese and now there are over nine operating factories and four others are coming up. So, this side, we have understood the value of fish in the market. That is why the honourable member was saying that he brings in an average of about seven to eight million US dollars.  

As we are enforcing regulations pertaining to fishing on the lake, other neighbouring countries are not enforcing it. And if we enforce, then these people go fishing elsewhere and it is acceptable.  So, I hope this will be solved through the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization and the East African Community. Actually, we are sitting on an iceberg; it may cause much more conflict than we can imagine. 

I am happy that a mission of members of the East African Legislative Assembly are due to come to Uganda -(Interjection)- Oh, they are already here. They are going to discuss this issue because if it is not properly tackled, it may bring us more conflicts.  

On disease control, like Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), I can say that these come about because of the nature of our country. It has very porous borders. We have an influx of people from DR Congo; Tanzania expelled some people of Rwanda origin, they never found their way straight to Rwanda but they came to Uganda. All these came with animals. 

When I sent a team to Bundibugyo, they discovered that the people who came from Congo to Bundibugyo have some blood relation and you cannot distinguish who is who. They also could not distinguish the animals that belonged to the Ugandans and those that belonged to the people from Congo, until we worked with them to identify them. 

The same is true with Hoima. A number of animals have come in. The animals are coming from areas where there has not been systematic treatment and vaccination. Definitely, you are bound to get diseases. 

Secondly, even within, this issue was decentralized. The main diseases are a responsibility of Central Government, those are, FMD, rabies, rinderpest and CBPP. The main measure in controlling diseases is first to control the movement of animals, but this regulatory issue is for the local authorities. Enforcing these regulations, not only regarding livestock but also crops like coffee in terms of quality, is becoming questionable. It is something we need to look at. 

How can we build capacity, or how can we bring back some of these issues to the centre? We have no differences on these issues. The question is; why are we taking that decision and not the other? I think that is where communication will need to be built.  

Regarding FMD, it boils down to the amount of money that we have. We do not have the money in our ministry. The money for such diseases was lumped under a vote called “emergency” and it is in Ministry of Finance. So, when you get a report from the rural area, which can take three days or so, you inform Ministry of Finance and then you place the order. By the time you respond, if it were a gorilla, it would have already overrun that area. 

For FMD, we do not have a systematic vaccination system. We work on an ad hoc basis. But when you total up the funds we are spending, it is quite much. That is why hon. Byanyima was saying we said we are killing all the animals. No, these have come on my table as some of the options. In some areas, they condone a sub-county, but you do not kill all the animals. You can kill those animals that are affected and compensate the people. 

You find that the money we are spending may be even more than the compensation, but there is a debate; we are developing a disease strategy in the livestock sector and that issue is going to be discussed. If that issue which was raised by the technocrats sells, it can be part of that strategy. So, I am not saying that tomorrow we are going to undertake mass killing of the animals just like that.

Bananas: I think this period is a period of diseases. We have pests and diseases, we have been hit by coffee wilt, but good enough that wave is going. The rate at which the trees are dying is not the same as it was. 

Scientists have come up with some resistant varieties, but they have not released them because they have to test, because the importance of the coffee is in the cup. In that way - I can see, Mr Chairman, you are looking at the time, but I think banana wilt –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I am actually looking at you, not the time. (Laughter)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: There are so many things and we cannot finish, but for every disease we have taken two dimensions. One dimension is to prevent and the other is to study, especially in terms of coffee wilt and banana wilt. We want to study them and see how we can overcome them in the long run; and I can assure you, we can overcome this.  

In the report, they appreciate the initiative made by His Excellency the President to contribute to the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, where we have been contributing funds. They say funds should be raised. Yes, and that money has been ploughed back. This Saturday we are going to commission a bi-technology laboratory, which is very fundamental in coming up with disease-free varieties, resistant varieties, increased productivity, high yielding varieties and others. 

I think we are on the right track, but maybe we have not come out to blow our own trumpet very much. We may not be seen on the ground, but it is important that we avail that opportunity to the people. We are going to prepare the papers to be circulated in advance and then we can see the best way to undertake this as a country. I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. I want to promise you that as soon as possible, we shall allocate you time to have further debate on this important subject of agriculture, which is the main activity for the people of this country. I shall do that.

Now, honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and NARO be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I thank you, chairperson and members of the committee, and I thank honourable members for the contributions you have made this morning. I now propose that the total sum of Shs 4,880,400,000 under Vote 010, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 64,667,613,000 under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - be provided for as development expenditure for the year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,935,000,000 under Vote 43, NARO, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the year 2003/04.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 26,744,908,000 under Vote 43, NARO, be provided for as development expenditure for the year 2003/04.

(Question put and agreed to)


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Vote 010 for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Vote 43 for NARO and passed them without amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE – GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question on the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for the work done. I think it is appropriate to suspend the proceedings now so that you go and have your lunch, and come and deal with the report from the Committee on Social Services at exactly 2.00 p.m. House suspended.

(The proceedings were suspended at 12.38 p.m.)

(The House resumed at 2.13 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGETARY ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/04

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRMAN: We have some visitors in the Strangers Gallery. Unfortunately, I do not know them, but they are our children. I will introduce them when I get to know the name of their school.

Honourable members, this committee is the biggest committee we have. I do not know how we should proceed. I would like to know, chairperson, how you intend to present your report since you are covering three ministries.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and honourable members. As I have indicated, the Committee on Social Services covers three ministries, the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and the Ministry of Education and Sports. The report is also sizeable, 80 pages. We also have quite a number of semi-autonomous institutions, which are self-accounting. 

Mr Chairman, given the size of this sector, I am proposing that today we concentrate on at least two sectors, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We can consider Ministry of Education tomorrow morning. 

I propose we tackle Ministry of Education tomorrow morning because I have just received some communication from the ministry indicating some significant changes in the figures of one of the institutions, which we need to reconcile. There is a proposal from Finance that the budgetary allocation of this institution be adjusted from 16 billion shillings to five billion and that is quite big. 

Therefore tomorrow morning at 9.00 a.m., before we come to the Floor, we need a meeting between Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance and Makerere University to have this reconciled, then we can proceed with the debate at 10.00a.m. 

If members have the report, I propose that the Hansard takes a record of the report, while I highlight major issues as I present the report. This is how I propose to proceed, Mr Chairman.


THE CHAIRMAN: Your suggestion is good because if you are to read an eighty-page report, people will sleep and they will miss the important points. So, this report will be part of the Hansard. We can summarise it now so members can really follow. Otherwise, if you read this one, they would definitely not be able to physically follow it from the beginning to the end. So, you can proceed like that. The report is tabled and it becomes part of the Hansard.

MRS HYUHA: I thank you, Mr Chairman, for your wise guidance and ruling. As I requested earlier on, this afternoon we shall concentrate on two ministries, Health and Gender. The report about these two ministries will run between page one and page 39. From page 40, we have Ministry of Education and we can debate that tomorrow morning after we have reconciled the figures, as I have requested. 

I also want to use this opportunity to invite all the members of the Social Services Committee to make it a point to attend the meeting tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. We shall meet to reconcile some of these adjustments and then at 10.00 a.m. we can proceed with the report. 

Mr Chairman, I invite the honourable members too. I also want to request the Minister of Education to invite officials from his sector, from the affected institution and also the Minister of Finance so that we can reconcile this recent development.  

Having made those remarks, Mr Chairman, I draw your attention –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But I have a problem, maybe the Prime Minister will help us here. We are acting on a motion by the Ministry of Finance; he moved a motion that this becomes the Committee of Supply. I do not know which minister has been assigned to take charge of that ministry, because there will be questions. In any case, when we complete the work here, somebody has to move for the House to resume.  Can you explain please?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Chairman, I want first of all to apologise for this embarrassing episode. But you have heard from the Ministry of Finance before and it is not possible to condemn them because there are always problems, which afflict all of us. 

Meanwhile, I have asked the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs to take charge, and of course I am near her, I should not hesitate to assist her when necessary. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Technically yes, but it becomes a problem. Can we proceed.

MRS HYUHA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Straight away, honourable members, we turn to Page 3 where the report of Ministry of Health begins. 

Just to give an overview, honourable members, the report of Ministry of Health will touch on the following key issues: The preamble, which mainly reflects on the vision and mission of the Ministry of Health, and also the framework on which Ministry of Health chooses priorities for expenditure. It is also mentions the overall resource envelope of Ministry of Health and it outlines the major constraints.

The report also highlights the priorities of Ministry of Health, which are, productive health, drugs, human resource development and health infrastructure. It also touches on the national disease control programme, mainly emphasising malaria, HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis (TB).  

This report looks at four key issues under health. It looks at hospitals, which are supported by the Government budget. It is also looks at other agencies under Ministry of Health - the Health Service Commission, National Medical Stores, National Drug Authority and professional councils.

We have attached annexes; Annex I is a list of health centre IVs, which were constructed during the previous financial year. These were mainly emphasising the construction of theatres and doctors’ houses.
  
Annex 2 is a list of health centre IIIs, which were upgraded in the previous years, and then Annex 3 is a list of health centre IIs, which were constructed. Annex 4 is a list of the donor support health centres under EU. Annex 5 is a list of the donor support projects under the Spanish project. Annex 6 is about hospitals for priority rehabilitation. Therefore, the report about Ministry of Health’s policies and its budget runs from Page 3 to Page 25 of the report.

Having said that, I want to go to Page 4, where the health priorities begin. Mr Chairman, I want us to reflect on the last bullets. The health sector priorities this financial year include: 

• Reproductive health 
• Drug supply 
• Staffing, with a focus on hard-to-reach areas.
• AIDS, TB and malaria 
• Hospital policy; and 
•  Capacity development.

Mr Chairman, across the sector, priority needs are funded under various votes, programmes or projects.  In some cases, it is the vote holder to determine them according to the needs of the institution. This applies to the district primary health care recurrent, non-wage, hospitals recurrent, non-wage and Mulago. 

Mr Chairman, the health sub-sector allocations in percentages since the financial year 1999/2000 to-date are indicated in the table below. 

Honourable members, from this table you can see that the sub-sector that takes the highest allocation is the district services, under primary health care. This financial year, if you can look at the last column, Government is going to spend 54 percent on district services. The Ministry of Health headquarters will consume 24 percent. National hospitals, Mulago and Butabika, will consume 12 percent. Regional hospitals - they are ten of them - will consume eight percent, and other agencies will consume two percent. 

I would like you to note that the allocations of the district health services (primary health care) have gradually increased, as you can see from this table, while allocations to national and regional hospitals have decreased.

Honourable members, you can look at that table and look at the budget performance. It indicates the item, the amount of money passed here in Parliament, how much was released, and then the percentage. When you look at this table on budget performance, I want you to note how much Parliament allocated on each item, how much was released and what percentage it was.

I beg you, honourable members, to go to Page 6. Note that the wage under-performed because of the vacancies in Ministry of Health, particularly in Butabika Hospital and regional hospitals. Non-wage releases were at 96.6 percent because of PAF protection. The committee therefore appreciated the relatively good budget performance of Ministry of Health during the last financial year, 2002/2003.

Mr Chairman, I now move to the observations and recommendations on the health sector priorities. 

Reproductive Health:

The proportion of sector expenditure for reproductive health is 21 percent. Reproductive health is a focal priority area, where resources are directed to most strategic interventions within the Reproductive Health Plan.

However, there is still low utilisation of maternity and reproductive services. Some reproductive health indicators have slightly improved while others stagnated. For instance, maternal mortality rates slightly improved from 700 mothers dying out of every 100,000 who produced in 1989. By 2000, it was 506 in every 100,000. This is a slight improvement, but those are still very bad figures; we need to improve. 

Adolescent pregnancies have changed from 45 percent to 32 percent, and the infant mortality rate has stagnated at 88 in every 1,000 children.  

Recommendation:

The Ministry of Health should continue to focus on reproductive health as a top priority funding area.  

Drugs:

Mr Chairman, the second priority for expenditure under Ministry of Health is drugs. Funding for procurement of drugs is yet another focal priority area in the Ministry of Health. The proportion for drugs is 21 percent of the sector expenditure. I want you to note that there is a steep increase from Shs 38.2 billion to Shs 68.22 billion this financial year because of the Global Fund. 

Some funds for drugs are centralised while others are decentralised to the various sectors. The funds, which are centralised for drugs are mainly, 

• to support the essential drugs management. This is a DANIDA supported project; 

• for emergency cases, for example when we have outbreaks like Ebola and Cholera etc.  

The decentralized funds, honourable members, are distributed as indicated in the table. For every shilling that goes for primary health care, 50 percent is for drugs. Out of the funds sent to district hospitals, 30 percent is for drugs. For those funds that go to regional hospitals, 30 percent is for drugs. For NGO hospitals under PHC, 50 percent goes for drugs, and under hospitals 25 percent. 

Mr Chairman, I want the honourable members to note this because quite often we feel that the drugs, which go to hospitals, or go down to health centres II or III, are purchased by Ministry of Health. Those drugs that go to the lower health centres are monies sent under primary health care. 

Whatever allocation is sent to that health unit, 50 percent is supposed to purchase drugs. These regional hospitals receive the funds. Out of the total envelope of the funds sent to a hospital, 30 percent is supposed to purchase the drugs. I thought I should emphasise that.  

However, Mr Chairman, the committee observed that the abolition of user-charge fees in government hospitals and health units has increased the number of patients. The drugs procured cannot meet the demand of the high number of the patients. There is an increase of 40 percent of new patient attendances in government and private not-for-profit health units. The drugs procured can only last three weeks a month on average. 

The committee was also concerned about some end users/patients may not be receiving the drugs as planned for, instead the drugs are diverted elsewhere. 

The committee, therefore, has come out with the following recommendations:

• Government should increase the budget allocations to the procurement of drugs. 

• The drug tracking system should be strengthened to ensure that the end users/patients receive the drugs. 

• Strengthen the insurance schemes as alternatives to government support services. 

• Strengthen the private wing in government hospitals for those who can afford.  

Human Resource Development:

Mr Chairman, the third priority is human resource development. General staffing levels in hospitals and other health units is still relatively lower. However, with recent recruitment of health workers by the Health Service Commission, the staffing levels in national and regional referral hospitals is expected to improve from 42 percent in the financial year 2001 to 77 percent this financial year. That is if the staff who have been recruited are deployed. 

This financial year, staffing with a focus on hard-to-reach areas will be a top priority. This financial year, Shs 69.5 billion is earmarked for the wage recruitment sector bill. The committee supported this, Mr Chairman. 

The Ministry of Health has intensified on the in-service training programmes for health workers as a stopgap measure to improve on staffing levels and quality in the lower health units. Mr Chairman, I will not go into the numbers, but I wish to emphasise here that this kind of arrangement has improved staffing levels and quality in lower health units.

Challenges and Recommendations on Human Resource Development:

Honourable members, the approved structures of staffing levels do not match with the patient load/demand for service in hospitals. Government should therefore improve on the establishment of staffing structures in hospitals and lower health units, to provide for more realistic staffing levels that match the patient load/demand. 

Some health workers who were posted failed to report to their duty stations due to various reasons, for instance, accessibility, lack of accommodation, insecurity, et cetera.  

We also noted that many professionals, especially medical workers, are off their stations, away on training. Hospitals and health units are deprived of staff yet vacancies are filled.

The committee therefore recommended that vacancies for medical staff who go for training courses for a duration of more than one year be filled. I want to emphasize this, Mr Chairman. The salaries or wages of the affected medical worker should be transferred to the payroll of the Ministry of Health headquarters.

Mr Chairman, the committee had an opportunity to move upcountry. You are aware that health centre IVs are supposed to have a theatre and each one at least should have a medical worker. But we noted that many of them were empty. Many of these medical workers were said to be on training and their training courses last three years. Therefore, they leave the districts and these health centres in difficulty. 

We are would like to recommend this as a solution; if they go for training, we support them, but then let their salaries be transferred to the payroll of Ministry of Health headquarters so that these health units have an opportunity to recruit other workers to fill in.

The committee recommended that medical workers in hard-to-reach areas should be accorded top priority for further training on government sponsorship. 

Morale of health workers is still low. The committee recommended that incentives of health workers should be further revised upwards.

The committee also noted the lack of accommodation for health workers. The policy on accommodation of health workers should therefore be reviewed. Staff quarters should be constructed or provided near the health units, and the existing staff quarters should be rehabilitated/renovated. 

When we moved upcountry, it was really very sad to find that the staff quarters in some hospitals were in an appalling situation. When government comes out with programmes of renovation and rehabilitation, they do not consider the staff quarters; they mainly consider the wards. We are therefore saying that when making programmes of renovation, staff quarters should be part of the plan. 

Staffing in hard-to-reach areas is low. The committee supported this as one of the top priorities in the ministry.  

Many new cadres of health workers have been trained but are not yet recognised by Public Service. The new cadres of health workers, namely, graduate nurses, comprehensive nurses, nursing assistants, medical laboratory scientific officers should be recognised by Public Service, the Health Service Commission and local governments. 

When we talk of recognition, we mean that their salary scale should match their qualification, and when people are advertising they should bear in mind that we have such cadres so that they also compete favourably.

Health infrastructure:

Under the development budget, Mr Chairman, health infrastructure is a priority area of funding by Ministry of Health, especially the construction and equipment for lower health centres II to IV because they provide health services near the population.  

I would like us to go to page 11, Mr Chairman. These are the various categories of health infrastructure. We considered the construction of health centres II up to IV. In the financial year 2002 to 2003, a total amount of Shs 6.37 billion was allocated to primary health care development funds for upgrading health centre IVs, health centre IIIs, and the construction of health centre IIs. 

The work is at various levels of completion in the respective health units; you will see the list in the annex that we have attached. Honourable members, if you want to see the status of your health centres, those are health centres IVs, look at Annex 1. For health centre IIIs, where government spent money, look at Annex 2. For where government constructed health centre IIIs, look at Annex 3. 

I want you to take time to look at those lists, so that you see what is recorded here, because you are the people on the ground and you crosscheck. It indicates the district, the health sub-district, the health centre, the amount of money and the status – whether it is completed, whether the money was for completion of a doctor’s house or for completion of the theatre, and the general status. 

In the financial year 2003/2004, the Ministry of Health will continue to consolidate the upgrading of health centre IIIs and health centre Ivs, and the construction of health centre IIs in greatly underserved area. A total of Shs 9.2 billion, including 17 percent of taxes, has been allocated for various constructions at health centres countrywide.

The donor project:

Last financial year, a lot of construction and rehabilitation of equipment was done. I want you to note that 326 health units under the Local Government Development Project (LGDP) were constructed. This is one area, honourable members, which I wanted you to note so that you encourage your sub-counties to vote for money for construction. This is one area where we can expand the ceiling of Ministry of Health. 

Twenty-eight health centres were constructed/rehabilitated under the Spanish loan and 57 under EU/MPP. 

Equipment:

I would like you to note that last financial year the Ministry of Health purchased equipment under the Spanish loan. They have been supplied to 54 health centre Ivs that are complete or those that are near completion. The instalment of this equipment is on going and the commissioning will soon be done.

Transport and Communication:
 
Last financial year, honourable members, a total of Shs 1.25 billion, without taxes, was planned for to procure 88 vehicles. However, only 60 vehicles have been procured; this was as a result of appreciation of the dollar against the Uganda shilling. According to the Ministry of Health, these vehicles will be distributed to health centre Ivs, especially those that are completed and lack transport facilities.

Designs of Health Centres II and III:

Many of you have been complaining about health centre IIs and IIIs, saying they are designed too small. People have complained that the rooms are very small. But these designs have been revised and the building infrastructure has actually expanded, including medical staff houses and sanitation facilities. However, the cost has changed as you can see.  

Challenges to Health infrastructure (Health Centres II-IV):

• Mr Chairman, we noted with concern the delay of tendering systems in districts. 

• We also noted some shoddy construction in some centres due to poor supervision by the technical staff. 

• We noted that some tenders are taken up by local councillors, which conflicts with their supervisory role.  

• The committee observed that the health units in hard-to-reach areas lack special communication facilities. 

We therefore recommend as follows: 

• That the Ministry of Health should consider purchasing special communication facilities for health units in hard-to-reach areas. 

• We also recommend that the tendering system be reviewed in the future. 

• Politicians/civil leaders at all levels should observe the law on the tendering system.

• That Ministry of Health should purchase vehicles for district hospitals and for health centres IVs as well.

National Disease Control:
 
Mr Chairman, the programme on control of specific communicable diseases encompasses some of the severe problems in the country. The interventions are against target diseases and respond to various emergencies and epidemics.

Malaria Control:

Mr Chairman, malaria continues to be a major cause of ill-health and death in the country. The goal of the programme is to prevent mortality and reduce morbidity caused by malaria. 

Health workers in public and private facilities were updated on the new anti-malaria drug policy. Home-based management of fever activities was started in 16 districts. This involves provision of pre-packed unit doses of anti-malaria drugs at household level and community levels.  

A total of US $368,000 was mobilized to purchase home packs. Mr Chairman, out of this, 3,647,200 doses were procured. The target group is the pregnant mothers. This financial year, malaria control remains a top priority. The remaining districts will be catered for under the Global Fund grants, which will start this financial year.

Sexually Transmitted Infections, HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis (TB), control:
 
The country continues to sustain the declining trends in prevalence and new infections. The HIV prevalence, honourable members, is at 6.5 percent. Among the achievements was procurement of drugs for opportunistic infections, sexually transmitted infections and Tuberculosis under the MAP project. So much money was spent, as indicated.

On strategies, honourable members, at least two health workers in each regional referral hospital have been trained in clinical management for such cases. 

Twenty-one sites were accredited to provide Anti-Retroviral drugs (ARVs). These include mainly regional referral hospitals, NGO hospitals, private hospitals/clinics and research centres. I want to you to note that the ARVs have now reduced from Shs 1 million per month in the financial year 2001/2002, to Shs 55,000 per month this year. This is a reduction of 94 percent, Mr Chairman.

Additional financing of US $36 million is expected from the Global Fund against Aids, Malaria and Tuberculosis, where Uganda’s application has been successful. 

Hospitals:

The budget allocations to hospitals support these categories: 

• Two national hospitals, Mulago and Butabiika. 
• 10 regional referral hospitals.  
• 43 district general hospitals; and 
• 19 NGO not-for-profit hospitals.  

Hospital Policy:

Currently, there is no hospital policy. The draft report on a hospital policy is expected early 2004.

Funding:

Honourable members, hospitals get delegated funds from government, which are received regularly on a quarterly basis. On average, the 100-bed capacity hospitals receive Shs16 million monthly. Remember I told you that 30 percent of the money that goes to a hospital is for purchasing drugs. 

The 200-bed capacity hospitals get Shs36 million per month, and the 380-bed capacity hospitals - these are regional hospitals - receive on average Shs50 million per month. These funds are spent according to the guidelines given by the Minister of Health, as you can see below, Mr Chairman.

I want you to note that in this financial year, district hospital budgets will be under PAF. This has been a very big challenge because these funds have been subject to budget cuts. We need to thank the Minister of Health for at least protecting the funds of district hospitals. They will be protected and we thank you. 

Allocations have been increased by 18.9 percent in order to increase their role on strengthening primary health care. Therefore, the budget of the district hospitals has moved from Shs 8.71 billion to Shs 10.36 billion. 

I also want you to note that the proportion of funds that goes to lower NGO health units is 31 percent whereas the NGO hospitals receive 69 per cent. This is to subsidize the expenditures of NGO health facilities and reduce expenses to patients and also provide health services where Government cannot reach.

Mr Chairman, I wanted to emphasize this because some members have been expressing concern as to why Government cannot construct health centres but instead sends money to NGOs and yet we have constituencies with such NGOs. 

Funding to NGO health units increased from 16.61 billion to Shs 18.72 billion. 

The committee appreciated the cleanliness and service delivery of many of these NGO health units. The committee recommended that the management committees of NGO health units, which are subsidized by Government funding, include local communities/local authorities. 

The committee appreciated efforts made by government hospitals to provide health services to the people of Uganda. Inspite of the limited resources allocated, some hospitals are clean and still have some hardworking staff. We appreciate that.  

The committee noted that some expenditure items have remained the same despite the increased costs.  The purchasing capacity of hospitals has reduced in terms of items purchased especially drugs, medical equipment and food.

Mr Chairman, the committee used the case study of Mulago. We analysed the budget of Mulago and noted that drugs and sundries are allocated Shs 3 billion this financial year and yet they require Shs 6 billion per year. The food for patients has been allocated Shs 270 million, yet they require Shs 600 million. The maintenance of equipment has been allocated Shs 230 million and yet they require Shs 600 million.  

Mr Chairman, I want you to note that this case study cuts across; it was the same story when we met with officials of all the hospitals. We invited all the 10 regional hospitals and the two national hospitals, and we also had an opportunity to visit some of these district hospitals.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that government should revise and increase the budget allocations of priority areas in hospitals to match with the dollar appreciation.  

The committee appreciated that Lira Hospital was recently upgraded to a regional referral hospital recognised by Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance. However, Ministry of Public Service has not yet recognised Lira as a regional hospital. I hope the Minister of Public Service is here. We want this point to be noted and emphasised, Mr Chairman. 

The Minister of Finance read out the budget allocations and it is indicated, but Public Service up to now has not yet opened up to Lira Hospital or recruited the expected staff to match the level of a referral hospital. So, we want Public Service to address this urgently.

The committee recommended that Ministry of Public Service recognise and adjust the staffing structures of Lira Hospital to match with a regional referral hospital.

The committee was concerned about the minimum budget allocations to hospitals along highways with frequent road accidents/traumas, for example, Kawolo Hospital, Jinja Hospital, Iganga Hospital and Masaka Hospital. Hospitals or health units along highways should receive special additional funding to cater for frequent traumas and emergencies.

Mr Chairman, the committee was also concerned about the operations of the parking yard in Mulago Hospital, where clients are charged Shs 500 whenever they drive in and out. This is very expensive to attendants of patients who drive to Mulago park yard several times a day. The committee therefore recommends that Mulago Hospital review the tendering system of the park yard.

Infrastructure in Hospitals:

Mr Chairman, many hospital buildings are in a sorry state. The sewerage systems in some hospitals are blocked. The equipment in most hospitals is old, non-functional or needs constant repair especially x-rays, incubators and beds.

Last financial year, Parliament recommended the phased-approach in rehabilitation and re-equipment of hospitals because of the limited resources envelope. I wish to report that a budget provision of Shs 3.12 billion, without taxes, and Shs 6.34 billion, with taxes, has been identified for rehabilitation of hospitals in a phased-approach. 

This is the work plan for utilisation of the funds allocated for rehabilitation of hospitals under the District Infrastructure Support Programme for the financial year 2003/2004: 

• Kaabong Hospital, an estimated amount of Shs 700 million. 
• Mubende, an estimated amount of Shs 150 million. 
• Kiryandongo, an estimated amount of Shs 500 million. 
• Itojo, an estimated amount of Shs 500 million.
• Arua, an estimated amount of Shs 200 million.
• Abim, an estimated amount of Shs 600 million. 
• Lyantonde, an estimated amount of Shs 150 million. 
• Fort-Portal, total rehabilitation is estimated at Shs 320 million. 

Mr Chairman, we want to thank the Government for these efforts.

ADB Butabika hospital; those of you who were in the Sixth Parliament remember that we passed this ADB but because of counterpart funding, it has not taken off. And if you look at page 4, you will see that the allocation for Butabika Hospital has been increased to about Shs 15 billion. So, six mental health units will be constructed in Arua, Gulu, Soroti, Hoima, Kabale and Fort-Portal.

The Kamuli-Kisoro Project:

This is a Spanish loan project, which we passed in the Sixth Parliament but is being implemented now. The project will construct/rehabilitate health infrastructure in Kamuli and Kisoro districts, and will equip some health units as follows: 

• Two district hospitals will be constructed 
• Six health centre IVs 
• 21 health centre IIIs 
• The office of the Director of Health services in Kisoro 
• Specialist equipment for three regional referral hospitals. 

Mr Chairman and honourable members, for the details of this project look at Annex 4.

Under ORET, imaging equipment for four regional hospitals will be procured. The JICA project is also expected to rehabilitate more hospitals. We hope that by next financial year, we should have concrete plans for the JICA project. 

The Ministry of Health should develop a master plan on renovation and rehabilitation of hospitals.  

The Ministry of Health should purchase ambulances and special communication systems for hospitals/ health units in remote areas especially in high mountainous places.

Other Agencies in Ministry of Health:

Mr Chairman, I want honourable members to note that these received only two percent of the total expenditure of Ministry of Health. They include: 

• Health Service Commission 
• National Drug Authority, 
• National Medical Stores; and 
• Professional councils.  

Health Service Commission:

This is where we get a lot of concerns from members, when they say that the ministry has not recruited staff. I want you, when you read, to understand where each institution falls so that we can explain to our constituents properly. The Health Service Commission has the mandate, Mr Chairman, to hire and fire staff of the following institutions:

• Ministry of Health headquarters,
• Mulago Hospital, 
• Butabika Hospital; and 
• The 10 regional hospitals of Gulu, Arua, Mbale, Soroti, Jinja, Masaka, Kabale, Fort Portal, Hoima and Lira.
 
The Health Service Commission plays an advisory role and gives guidance to the District Service Commission. The District Service Commission is the one that is expected to recruit staff for the lower health units and district hospitals. 

So, if it is a district hospital, do not come to the Ministry of Health to say that, “My hospital does not have enough staff”. They do not have that mandate. They can only supervise. The mandate lies with your districts; the Health Service Commission remains at national and regional level.

We note a lot of under funding for the Health Service Commission. Mr Chairman, despite the meagre funding to the Health Service Commission, the committee was happy to learn that the recruitment of health workers has been on-going in the national and regional hospitals. 

By June 2003, the Health Service Commission had recruited the following medical cadres: 65 doctors, 586 nurses, 93 allied health workers and 241 other staff. This, we hope, will improve the staffing level from 42 percent to 77 percent.

National Drug Authority:

Mr Chairman, the mission of National Drug Authority is, “to ensure that only good quality, safe and efficacious human and veterinary medicines are available and are correctly handled in Uganda, and to contribute towards their accessibility, cost effectiveness and appropriate use”. 

Challenges and Recommendations:

The National Drug Authority is constrained by the current statute, which limits the fulfilment of its mandate. The plans to protect the public from the mushrooming drug shops require the speeding up of the revision of the current National Drug Authority Statute to improve enforcement.  

The committee, therefore, recommended that Ministry of Health expedite the process of amending the National Drug Authority Statute 1993 to empower the National Drug Authority management to exercise its mandate.  

The committee noted that National Drug Authority is grossly under-funded. Mr Chairman, National Drug Authority required Shs 1.5 billion and only Shs 375 million was provided. The committee recommended for increased funding to the National Drug Authority. 

Thirdly, Mr Chairman, last financial year National Drug Authority faced a wave of allegations of corruption by the management. The committee was equally concerned about the state of affairs of National Drug Authority.  

The committee was informed by Ministry of Health that National Drug Authority has undergone organizational restructuring. A new Acting Chairman and Executive Secretary have been appointed to take care of the offices pending a court decision.

National Medical Stores:

National Medical Stores’ mandate is, “efficient procurement, storage, sales and marketing of quality medical drugs and other medical supplies to the public and private health sector throughout the country.”

Mr Chairman, the committee visited National Medical Stores storage facilities in Entebbe. The committee also visited some hospitals and health units and commended National Medical Stores for ensuring continuous availability of essential drugs of high quality at affordable prices. 

When you go to the districts, it is very alarming; when districts are given money and they order for drugs, the prices are four times higher than the original price! That is why we are commending the work of National Medical Stores. There are many conflicting laws whereby there is liberalization and the districts are free to purchase on open market.

Before I go further I should emphasize that the Ministry of Health informed the committee that overall, National Medical Stores maintained a net profit of over Shs 15 billion and, therefore, improved its services by 80 percent in the last financial year, 2002/2003.  

The committee was also concerned about the alleged plan by National Medical Stores to re-export anti-retroviral drugs. The matter is still under investigation by relevant organs.  

Mr Chairman, last financial year the committee recommended that National Medical Stores should not be privatised. The committee was informed that a Cabinet memo by the Ministry of Health has been submitted to move National Medical Stores from class II to class I under the PERD Statute. The committee still stands by its previous recommendation that National Medical Stores should not be privatised.

Professional Councils:

Mr Chairman, professional councils in the Ministry of Health are charged with the mandate of ensuring professional standards of practice. The professional councils are listed on page 23. I wish to emphasize here, Mr Chairman, that the committee’s major concern was the escalating illegal clinics being opened countrywide yet there is no clear mechanism in place to protect the public.  

The committee was informed by Ministry of Health that the mandate of ensuring professional standards of practice falls directly under the Office of the District Director of Health Services.  

Honourable members, I think that is what I could summarize on health and the attached annexes.  Before I read the vote, I wish to make some observations on Ministry of Gender.  

THE CHAIRMAN: No, why don’t we deal with the Ministry of Health first?

MRS HYUHA: So, should I read the figures of Ministry of Health?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, and then we shall see how to proceed.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I expect you to have received a loose sheet with some adjustments to the figures.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Chairman, this report is so long that I wanted to request you to allow her go through it first and then we tackle another report. A lot has been said. We have got a lot to comment on this report, if we go straight to the next item, we may forget many of the points in this report. I am only requesting, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I entirely agree with you and that is what I said.  

MRS HYUHA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish hon. Kalule Ssengo could receive a copy of the figures.  I now want to move to the amount of money we should vote for each section in Ministry of Health. The Committee of Social Services recommends to this august House the budget estimates of the following sectors for approval:

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health:

Under recurrent expenditure, we recommend approval of Shs 36.644 billion and under development Shs 196.396 billion. We recommend a total of Shs 233.013 billion to be approved for the Ministry of Health. (Mr Rukutana rose_)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us receive her report and if there are corrections, we make them.  

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much for protecting me from the Minister of Finance, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana.  I, therefore, wish to proceed.

Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital:

We do recommend that Shs 17.61 billion for recurrent expenditure, Shs 2.621 billion for development, a total of Shs 20.23 billion be approved for Mulago Hospital.

Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital:

We do recommend that Shs 2.5 billion for recurrent, Shs 25.21 billion for development, a total of Shs 27.175 billion be approved for Butabika Hospital.

Vote 134 - Health Service Commission:

We do recommend that Shs 1.2 billion for recurrent expenditure, Shs 0.44 billion for development and a total of Shs 1.44 billion be approved for the Health Service Commission.

Mr Chairman, Vote 163 to Vote 172 are for regional hospitals and we are recommending approval of Shs 17.88 billion for recurrent - there is nothing for development - and a total of Shs 17.88 billion to be approved. 

These votes fall under various regional hospitals which include, Arua Hospital, Fort Portal Hospital, Gulu Hospital, Hoima Hospital, Jinja Hospital, Kabale Hospital, Masaka Hospital, Mbale Hospital, Soroti Hospital and Lira Hospital.  

Vote 500 - Other (District Support):

The committee recommends to Parliament to approve recurrent expenditure of Shs 95.61 billion, development expenditure of Shs 9.2 billion, a total of Shs 105.1 billion.  

Mr Chairman, with your guidance, we still have Uganda Aids Commission being reflected under Ministry of Health. I am aware we have made a recommendation several times to this august House that this vote be transferred to President’s Office, but we still have a reflection of its funds under the Ministry of Health. 

By activity and function, Uganda Aids Commission falls under President’s Office, but by vote we see they are reflected under Ministry of Health. I would like to seek your guidance before I move this vote, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Move it as you received it. The transfer will be done.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also found some difficulty with the vote. We invited the Director General, Uganda Aids Commission, and he told us that the correct vote is 107 but what is indicated in the expenditure book is reflected as Code 106. Therefore, I am finding it difficult; should I read this as 106 or 107?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you should follow the text, which you received from the Ministry of Finance.

MRS HYUHA: No, we see it is 106 – (Interjection)- Mr Chairman, can you protect me from the Minister of Finance?

THE CHAIRMAN: You see; we are acting on the motion by the Minister of Finance, who gave us the votes, books and so forth. If there are corrections, we shall make them but I think you should follow the document, which you received.

MRS HYUHA: I thank you. I, therefore, wish to move that Vote 107, Uganda Aids Commission, be given Shs 1.24 billion for recurrent, and Shs 22.926 billion for development expenditure. The total of Shs 24.16 billion should be approved for the Uganda Aids Commission. 

Mr Chairman, the total recurrent expenditure I do recommend to this august House for approval is Shs 172.985 billion for the Ministry of Health, and a total of Shs 256.307 billion for development expenditure. 

For the total budget of the Ministry of Health, including direct project donor support, I do recommend to this august House that we do approve Shs 429.360 billion. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think you will agree with me that this has been a very impressive presentation and, therefore, I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the work done.  

MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank the chairperson and her committee members for this good report.  

I have one issue to raise and it concerns the spread of cancer, which is increasingly going on. However, this has not been cited at all in this report. The Government has gone ahead to gradually increase taxes on cigarettes and even put a ban on the importation of cigarettes. Although this was intended to act as a deterrent, we realize smoking is habitual. What is most dangerous is that medically, the non-smokers are the ones who are affected most because they inhale completely unfiltered smoke.

Mr Chairman, Uganda is a member of the World Health Organization (WHO). I want to be clarified about when the Minister is going to put up gazetted places where somebody can smoke. Smokers have continued to smoke in public places, exposing the non-smokers to this health hazard. I, therefore, want to be clarified about this. It is very serious and very many people are becoming victims of this circumstance. I thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee for this very good report. It is a very impressive report and I hope all the other committees will emulate this special one and produce such good reports. I am told that it is because the committee is headed by a woman, so I hope –(Applause)   

In the same vein, I want to commend the Uganda Government for the efforts they have put into developing our health services. I appreciate the good job that they are doing. There is a lot of construction going on in that sector and if we continue at this rate, I hope Ugandans will taste a very nice future.  

I am, however, a bit concerned about this problem of drugs. I notice that the allocation on drugs is going up but then the problem is that you can hardly find drugs in government hospitals. I do not know where the problem lies. Money is voted for, but when patients go to hospitals the drugs are not there. They write a prescription for you and you have to go to private pharmacies to obtain these drugs. 

There must be a very serious problem in our hospitals. I do not want to say that these drugs are disappearing, I do not want to commit myself to that extent, but we ought to be told what is happening to the drugs. 

Mr Chairman, I remember very well that when we still had cost sharing, the drugs were available in hospitals. But the moment the Government decided to introduce a policy of free drugs, the drugs disappeared. If the Government can accept, I would appeal that these user fees be re-introduced so as to improve the services in the hospitals. 

I do not know why the Government is taking so long to implement this “Window A” for those who can afford it? I believe if this window were re-introduced, the hospitals would be able to collect at least some revenue, which could be passed over to the medical workers. This problem of drugs disappearing to make up for the shortfalls in their salaries would then be sorted out.  

I also want to commend government for the credit they are extending to private hospitals. This is a very good gesture. I am convinced those private hospitals are treating Ugandans so, if the Government decides to lend them a hand, then they are doing the right thing and they should continue doing it.  

In the same vein, Mr Chairman, I also request that when it comes to private schools, government should also be able to lend a hand. Those schools are also training Ugandans. 

Mr Chairman, I also want to comment on –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But, honourable member, the rule is that you spend four minutes.

MR KALULE SSENGO: I will oblige, Mr Chairman. I also wanted to comment on health centres of level IV. There are some counties where these health centres were constructed in places that are not centrally located. I have in mind a county like Gomba. The Health Centre IV should have been at the Ssaza headquarters at Kanoni, but incidentally it was constructed at Maddu, which is about 25 miles away from the centre. This is a bit of a problem. 

I want to appeal to the Government that in future when you are planning new health centre IVs, consider those counties that are very big. You should at least have a second centre at the Ssaza headquarters so that people are not inconvenienced.

I also want to comment briefly on the problem of the disabled people. We have so many disabled people in the rural areas, but these people do not have wheelchairs. I do not know whether the Government cannot come up with a policy of looking after these people who are deep down in the villages. They do not have wheelchairs, they are crawling, and these are Ugandans. So, in next year’s budget, I want to see the Government take a deliberate effort to reach these people in the rural areas.

On the question of renovations, I want to request that government comes up with a programme of looking at all the hospitals we have in the country. I have in mind Gombe Hospital in Mpigi District; it is in a very sorry state and no renovations have been carried out on it. If government does not come to the rescue of that hospital soon, it may fall to pieces. 

With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I do not want to be stubborn, let me stop here. Thank you very much.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also want to thank the committee for the good work done, and also the Ministry of Health for their efforts to upgrade especially health centres in rural areas. I have been to my constituency and I think they are doing a tremendous job.

My concern is about the supervision of doctors and medical staff. There are many instances when I go to public hospitals and get complaints from patients that doctors are unavailable. They are paid to do the work but when patients want their services, they are in their private clinics.

I really do not know what policy the Ministry of Health has put in place to supervise doctors and medical staff to ensure that the money we pay to them is utilized effectively. They should attend to patients. 

There is even an incident where people were abducted - the incident of Alito sub-county – and people were brought to a public hospital and I went there but the doctors were not there. Then when you ask, they refer the patients to their private clinics. 

What are the policies that the Ministry of Health is putting in place to supervise these people? I am sure this is not only in my area, but there are also incidences when upcountry patients go to Mulago and the same incidences are recurring.

The second issue I want to comment on is the policy of the Ministry of Health in places where there are internally displaced persons. They are too many to access the regular budgeted Ministry of Health services. For example, now there is a report from NGOs stating that HIV/AIDS is increasing in camps, yet there is no additional attention to curb and contain such incidences. 

Even in my constituency, the Northern part of Apac where the insurgency has occurred, there are women who are abducted. When they come back, they cannot access testing services for STDs and HIV/AIDS and they do not have access to psychological counselling and so on. I want to know what particular provision the Ministry of Health has to pay special attention to the internally displaced persons in the camps, and those who are internally displaced in other areas.

Lastly, the issue of a regional referral hospital for Lira; the Ministry of Finance budgets for it, it is recognised by the Ministry of Health, but Public Service does not recognise it. First of all, can I know whether money goes to a hospital if the status is not recognised by Ministry of Public Service? 

Could we be given a reason as to why the Ministry of Public Service has refused to recognise this hospital? We really have so many problems in this sub-region and this referral hospital would be helping us a lot with internally displaced persons and other cases that cannot go beyond that sub-region. I thank you.

MS OLIVER WONEKHA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the Committee of Social Services for a report well prepared and well presented. (Applause). I hope everybody has noted that it was presented by a Woman Member of Parliament.  

My concern about this beautiful report is the observations of the committee on the health sector priorities, especially reproductive health. Ten to twenty-one percent of the expenditure in this sector goes to reproductive health, but the utilization of maternal and reproductive health services remains very low. We would like to know why. 

Adolescent pregnancies have perhaps fallen, but this is in areas probably where people are still enjoying peace. What about in those parts of the country where there is no peace? 

I would like to add my voice to that of the hon. Member of Parliament for Apac. What extra steps are being taken to ensure that people in these areas also access reproductive health services? Where they are now, they are not being accessed. What about areas where there is insecurity? Mr Chairman, that is my contribution.

MR FRANCIS MUKAMA (Kigulu North, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also wish to add my voice to my colleagues who have thanked the committee for this good report. I have only three areas that I want to touch on.

One, I have not seen in the report any mention of treating some of the deadly diseases we have in the country. One of diseases is sleeping sickness. I do not see it in here and yet certain areas of the country, especially the area I represent, have a problem of tsetse flies, which cause sleeping sickness. 

We have a unit, a place called Namungalwe Health Centre. This health centre was developed with the assistance of the British Government. All the infrastructure is there, but the real treatment of sleeping sickness from that place is very minimal. 

I would like to find out from the hon. Minister of Health about the plans he has for that place. There are even houses for doctors - well equipped– but there is no single doctor. We only have a health assistant; there is nothing! And yet that unit helps people all the way from Pallisa and other neighbouring districts. I would like to know; what arrangements do you have? Infrastructure is there - water, power, telephones and everything you want - but there is no doctor and no proper service delivery.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the designs of health centres II and III, which is mentioned on page 12 of the report, point 6.5. I am happy that the committee has looked at this issue. I am one of the beneficiaries of a Health Centre II, but it is like a lock-up and yet it cost Shs 34 million. Even the PAC Committee wanted to go and see that health centre. 

If it is still a Health Centre II with that kind of vision - and you said the designs have been made and the committee looked at them - are the designs good or we are improving the lock-up structure to cost Shs 148 million as given in this report? Please, look at that, because even these NGOs put up health centre units - small ones - at a good amount, not from these inflated amounts!

Lastly, the committee talks about the Health Service Commission, and the chairperson said that when you want staff for the health centres that are under local governments, you do not go to the Health Service Commission but to the district. I wish to inform the chairperson that this will not work. I have tried, I have cried, and the answer is one - they do not have money to pay for the people they will recruit. So, you are wasting time by telling us to go to them. 

Let all the personnel of health centres be handled by the Ministry of Health, the same way the teachers are being handled by Ministry of Education. Do not shift this responsibility. If you want to, please send the money there first and then those people will be ready to recruit. Thank you.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to add my voice to those who have spoken before me in thanking the committee for a well-prepared report. 

Before I proceed, I would also like to thank you and my friends who came to see me in hospital while I underwent an operation on my knee. As you can see, I am still limping, but I am on the road to recovery. I should put to rest the fears of my sister and friend hon. Baba Diri; I am not going to be a competitor. (Laughter).

Mr Chairman, as my friend said here, when she was contributing to the policy statement of Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, we need to have facilities for people with disabilities here and elsewhere where people are expected to reach for any kind of services. 

I would like to thank the Ministry of Health, and particularly Mulago Hospital, for providing physiotherapy services to the people of this country. However, I would like to say that the few times that I have been to the School of Physiotherapy, I have seen that the place needs renovation. Also, there are very few staff there. I was told that very few people are trained in physiotherapy annually, yet I think this is a service that we really need in this country. 

I am also reliably informed that when many people are trained in physiotherapy, because our people are not sensitised very well in its usefulness, most of these physiotherapists find their way out of this country. They go and serve people in Europe and yet we use our meagre funds here to train them! 

I would also like to encourage the public that even in places like gyms, the people who work there should be trained properly in physiotherapy. This would help to reduce on the number of people with disabilities and also other related diseases like hypertension and others. I am reliably told that hypertension and other diseases could be controlled through physiotherapy. So, I would like to encourage my colleagues to visit these places. 

I am told that one highly placed person in government at one time had a problem with his back. When he went to see the doctor, the doctor said he should see a physiotherapist, and he asked, “What is physiotherapy?” But when he was offered the service, he actually thought it was a very good thing. 

So, I want to say that we need sensitisation on some of these services because our people do not know about them. There are many people who get dislocations or fractures and because they do not get physiotherapy, they end up with disabilities.

Secondly, I want the Minister to answer me; what is the standard of a district hospital? Is it 200 or 100 beds? In the report, I see it stated that district hospitals have 200 beds. I ask this because Adjumani has only one hospital with 100 beds and it is flooded with patients. Even the thin staff base in the hospital is overwhelmed because of the work. Sometimes when you go to the hospital, you do not even find staff because they are tired and have gone home! 

In addition to that, they do not have enough staff houses. Most of these people stay very far away from the hospital. So, if they want to go and cook and do other things, they just abandon the hospital. 

One Sunday evening my uncle got an accident. When I rushed him to hospital, there was only one staff member in the maternity ward, a nurse. There was no other nurse anywhere in the wards, not even in the private wing. I had to run around myself to look for the Senior Nurse and other staff to come and look at him. 

I think the ministry should also intensify on their supervision at the district level. They should give strict guidelines to the districts and the districts must follow these guidelines. Otherwise, sometimes people die not because they were destined to die at that particular time but because they are not cared for and the morale of staff is very low. Sometimes a district has only two doctors and if they are not in the hospital, then there is no single doctor.

Mr Chairman, I thank the committee for raising the issue of a parking fee at Mulago Hospital. I think it is very unfair to people who go there driving. I may be a victim and I go to Old Mulago and then I am supposed to come to New Mulago. There is no internal direct route between New Mulago and Old Mulago, so I have to enter and pay parking fees twice. 

If you go to Old Mulago you have to pay, and when you come to New Mulago you also pay. If you go back to Old Mulago, you end up paying Shs 2,000 just for mere parking, say, within two hours. I think that is unfair to us.  

I also thank them for raising the issue of communication for hard-to-reach areas where MTN and Celtel and the rest have not yet reached. In such places, patients usually die before they reach the hospital. So, the Ministry should help us with this. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for a very well written report.  

Mr Chairman, I will start with the challenges on human resource development. I will start by thanking the Ministry for the effort they have put in rehabilitating health centres, and even upgrading health centre IIIs and IVs. I will give a case study on Buvuma Health Centre IV.  

Last financial year, the Ministry budgeted for Buvuma Health Centre IV and a theatre was constructed, and up to now the centre is not complete. When I checked the list of theatres, which are under progress, it is not there. So, I want to know whether what they called a theatre is just a building, which is not finished. 

Secondly, most health centre IVs are supposed to have a resident doctor. Buvuma is one of the hard-to-reach areas and last year we had a resident doctor who would visit the island for just one hour. He would arrive at Buvuma by boat, see the patients who are there, maybe look at the files and then board the boat and go back to Mukono. He served for about six months and then he was transferred to head office. 

My appeal to the Minister now is that there is need to supervise these health centres. If we just say we shall be having resident doctors and there is no follow up, it will be very bad. Up to now we do not have a resident doctor, but everything is there. The doctor’s house is complete, but we do not have the service of the doctor. (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to supplement with this information; when we visited Bugiri and some other places, we got the Health Centre IV personnel officer who did not even know the names of his staff! It is a serious problem that the ministry should address. These Health Centre IV doctors stay in urban areas and just go to pick up their salaries. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Mr Chairman, I would also like to inform the Minister that as much as we are putting in a lot of effort to construct these health centres, especially health centre IIIs, there is need to match the programme with concurrent construction of staff houses. 

I will give an example; in one of my sub-counties, Bugaya, a maternity ward was opened last year in October, up to now it is not in operation. When you go to the district, they just tell you “Do you have a house here? You do not have houses, so what can we do?” 

That also goes for the work done. When you visit that health centre, the maternity building has not been used but you just see cracks and dust inside. That means that the supervision for hard-to-reach areas is actually very poor. People just do shoddy work. 

There must be a mechanism put in place so that as you put up health centres, construction of the staff quarters is in progress. So that as you are commissioning the centres or maternities, the nurses have a house, other than commissioning a maternity and it takes two to three years before being used.

Mr Chairman, I also want to add my voice to what hon. Mukama said. Buvuma is one of the areas, which are well known for tsetse flies, but nothing has been mentioned in this year’s report. Since Buvuma Hospital was upgraded to Grade IV, it is supposed to have a resident doctor. 

My appeal is that we move the drugs for sleeping sickness nearer to the people in Buvuma, rather than having to take the patients to Numungalo in Busoga. Some of these people are poor so they cannot afford it. So, you should really think about that.  

Lastly, I appeal to the Minister - since prevention is better than cure - to strengthen the Entomology Department. Maybe you could increase on the nets allocated to those areas or if need be, you can even spray with a helicopter. I was told that Quality Chemicals imported a small aircraft, which can spray. If you give them a tender, they can spray Buvuma and tsetse flies will be forgotten. I thank you.

MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also thank the committee for the report. I know the committee is headed by a teacher, and I think being a teacher you have to present properly. I think that is why the report is really well prepared.  

Mr Chairman, I have some two issues to raise; one is on page 4, under the health sector priorities for this financial year. In my constituency, there is a disease, which the committee has not yet realised, but it is a very dangerous disease. The disease is called kalazar, where you find children or even adults with swollen stomachs. The stomach swells and somebody looks as if he is pregnant. 

This disease kills. Over 14 people died in my constituency this year in June because of this very serious disease called kalazar. There is a fly, which comes from the anthills, and it bites people and they get that disease. I feel the committee should at least recommend to the Ministry of Health to come in and solve that issue of the disease. 

In Amudat Hospital, we have an NGO under Medecins Sans Frontieres, that is NSF. This NGO has helped us, because the drug itself costs Shs 150,000, which is a bit expensive for our local community. As you know, in Karamoja we cannot afford Shs 150,000. 

We buy this drug from Kenya and when we bring it to Amudat Hospital, it is very expensive. So, I appeal to the ministry to come in and assist the local community to at least reduce the price of the drug for this disease called “Kalazar”, otherwise the community there will not have –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you please spell it?

MR LOLEM: It is K-a-l-a-z-a-r in my local language; that is Kalazar in English. 

When you go to page 6, the committee comments on the issue of transport. The only hospital we have in the whole of Nakapiripirit District is Amudat Hospital, but there is no transport, no ambulance. Medecins Sans Frontieres has only three vehicles and they cannot afford to bring somebody from Loro sub-country, which is 48 kilometres away, or Karita, which is 94 kilometres away. 

The Ministry of Health should come in and assist at least the Medical Superintendent with transport. As I speak now, Dr Julius does not have transport. He comes in a taxi up to the Nakapiripirit District Headquarters, and he comes with a bus up to here. Now, how do you post a medical superintendent there with no transport, not even a motorbike! So, I appeal to the ministry to at least assist the Amudat Hospital Medical Superintendent with transport to reach Loro in case of some emergency.  

Last week I was there and this business of cattle rustling occurred, I had to use my own transport to get the ambulance to bring patients from Loro to Amudat. So, I appeal to the Ministry of Health to come in and assist Amudat Hospital with transport. Thank you very much.

MS ISANGA NAKADAMA (Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee for this beautiful report. 

I also thank the Government for the upgrading and new constructions being done. But I would like government to consider some of the new districts like Mayuge, which does not have a district hospital. The only hospital we have is private, that is, Buluba, where people pay money. And the health centres where they have allocated theatres are not in the centre of Mayuge, they are all at the boundaries.  

Another thing, which I would like to request government to consider in future, is allocation of more money for prevention of malaria. Instead of allocating money for drugs in hospitals, they should allocate money for prevention, because drugs enter the hospital through doors and get out through windows. Serious measures should be taken to prevent this. Maybe we should spray or use any other method of controlling malaria because it is one of the diseases, which is disturbing our people.  

I would also like to thank the committee for considering the parking fee at Mulago Hospital. People are charged Shs 500 per parking yet these people who go to Mulago do not go there for leisure; they have problems. They have patients but they are harassed because of not paying Shs 500. I thank you.

MRS HARRIET KAGABA (Woman Representative, Kyejonjo): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would also like to thank the committee members for the work well done and for the smart presentation of their report. 

Mr Chairman, my comment is about the health centres that are being upgraded. Time and again I have complained about the health centre IVs, which are constructed and spend quite a long time without being operational. An example is the Health Centre IV in Kyenjojo called Kyegegwa, which was constructed in 1998. Up to now, it is not operational. There is no electricity and water, though the equipment and the doctor are in place. 

I just want to find out from the Minister what he has put in place for such health centres, which have taken long without being operational.  

The second one issue is about the district hospitals. Kyenjojo is a new district, which has no district hospital and even the health centre IVs are not operational. You can imagine what disaster is in this district. It is a district of 346,000 people. So, you can imagine such a population having no district hospital or operational health centre IV. 

Mr Chairman, I just wanted to find out from the Minister what he has put in place for such a new district, which has no health centres, right from health centre II up to district hospital. (Interruption)

MRS NANSUBUGA NYOMBI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform the House that most members are complaining of not having hospitals in new districts, but Kayunga, which is a new district, has a hospital, Kayunga Hospital. It serves almost seven districts but the allocation of drugs is only for one district.
 
MS KAGABA: Thank you very much my colleague. You are lucky that you have a district hospital, but I am saying I do not have a district hospital at all.  Mr Chairman, I would like to recommend that in future when the Government puts a policy in place, the ministries should make sure that there is proper supervision down there. They should find out exactly what is happening. I thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: We have some visitors who I wanted to introduce at the commencement of the proceedings.  We have pupils from Busuga Primary School from Bugiri District. You are welcome. There are also others; I am trying to find out the name of the school so that I can introduce them. But you are welcome. (Applause).
 
Honourable members, I will not be able to give opportunity to all of you because we have got another ministry to cover. Let me have hon. Okumu Reagan and then the minister will respond. We shall have further debates on this matter.

MR OKUMU REAGAN (Aswa county, Gulu): Thank you Mr Chairman. I also want to thank the committee and the chairperson, and you know behind every successful woman there is always a man.  

Mr Chairman, mine are four very brief points. One, now that government and the Ministry of Health are supporting some NGO hospitals, I wish that government, especially the ministry, could sit down with some of these NGO hospitals and agree in as far as costs in these hospitals are concerned. They should sit down and agree on minimum rates so that the people of Uganda are able to benefit from them as well.

Two, Mr Chairman, I want to appeal to the Ministry of Health to consider the situation in the protected camps as not normal. They should take it as an emergency situation and push in a little bit more resources. The people out there are suffering. 

In one of my camps, in Chwero, between the months of May and July they lost about 53 young children, and these children died of something, which could have been prevented. There is rampant malaria, pregnancies and STDs in these camps. I wish that the ministry, in addition to what they are doing could treat these camps as part of an emergency situation.

Lastly, Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Ministry of Health, which continues to make this country very proud. The professional staff and the leadership in the Ministry of Health have exhibited a very high degree of responsibility in this country (Applause). If you compare it with other ministries, sometimes you wonder. 

Many people have argued and said the Ministry of Health is working like that because they have projects. But I know there are ministries like Finance, Education, which also get project money, but they have not been able to perform to that level of the Ministry of the Health. 

I only want to thank the Ministry of Health and urge the professional staff to continue with that spirit. I urge the leadership to encourage the professional staff so that we can deliver this country from where it is. I have seen it right up to the district level, but there is a problem as you go lower. I only wish that the Ministry of Health could improve its professional supervision up to the grassroots level. We will be extremely happy.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Brig. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members for giving me this opportunity. 

I would like to begin by thanking my colleague, hon. Hyuha, for a very good report and the very good recommendations. I would like also to thank honourable members for their good contributions and concern. Because of the short time I have, I may not touch on everything, but I can assure you that our office is open and we are available at all times. We have taken note of everything and we shall interact with you with the view of addressing the problems you have raised.

Mr Chairman, a question was raised by hon. Lule on the problem of smoking. He asked when government would gazette specific places for the smokers to kill themselves there without harming others. 

I want to inform the House that this matter has already been addressed by the courts of law. Concerned people like you opened up a case and the court has already directed NEMA to take appropriate action. The Ministry of Health is going to work very closely with NEMA to implement the decision of the High Court (Applause). 

Also, in the last World Health Organisation Assembly in Geneva, a resolution, to which Uganda was party, was passed on the control of tobacco. This resolution calls on member states and parliaments to endorse the resolution and pass laws that affect the resolution. At an appropriate time, it will be brought here for consideration.

Hon. Kalule Ssengo, who unfortunately happens not to be in the House now, raised the problem of drugs in the hospitals when money is being released. I am sure, as you noted in the report, the committee rightly found out that the drugs we release are not enough; that is the first problem. They said that the drugs we send to the districts for a whole month could last only three weeks. So, there is a shortage.  

The second problem is that there is definitely a possibility of diversion of those few drugs.  As the committee recommended, we actually need to do more on tracking of the drugs. The ministry is already in contact with specialised groups, with the view of marking the government medicine with what they call the bar system, so that all drugs are computerised and you can trace them. 

If you find a packet, you can check it and you know where the drug was bought or which company distributed it. If it is National Medical Stores, you can tell to which district it went to, to which health unit it went, so that if it is found in the shops, you can trace it and go backwards and find out who misappropriated the drugs. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Does that presuppose that you cannot unpack them and then put them in tins?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Well, we will have laws, am sure, that will stop the selling of drugs in funny containers, because that also really affects the quality of the drugs. But if you empty it and put it in another tin or container, then you are suspected to have stolen that drug. The burden should be on you to prove where you got it. 

The other problem of course concerning the shortage of drugs is the removal of cost sharing, because the number of patients, as the committee noted, increased by 40 percent. So, the increase in releases of money was not proportional to the number of people who now access treatment in hospitals.  

On the health centre IVs that are not where honourable members wish them to be, there is a problem. I have noticed a problem, because when these health centre IVs were chosen for each county or constituency, the then leaders in the district, including Members of Parliament, helped identify where to put them. Now, the current leaders and Members of Parliament are of a different opinion as to where the health centres should be. I wish we had enough money to put health centre IVs where the current leaders want them, but there is a problem. (Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank you Mr Chairman, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I was a Member of Parliament while a health centre was being built in my constituency, I do not remember ever being consulted. 

Secondly, Sir, you provide these services in a hierarchical manner. The health centre IV that I have in my constituency has eaten up a former health post - I do not know what you call that level - and there will be no replacement of that health post. 

Where services are provided in hierarchical manner, it is a bit dangerous to locate them where the previous hierarchy was because that one now becomes non-functional for the purpose for which it was meant. Can you clarify what happens in those locational anomalies?  

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much for that information. You must be one of the few honourable members who were not involved in selecting a place for your health centre IV. But of course, I gave that as an example. 

The planning was according to the location vis-à-vis an existing hospital or another hospital in another district. Because these health centres do not purely serve people in that particular locality, they can serve even other people. That was the purpose. 

Also, they were located depending on the situation, the health status of the area in terms of mortality and morbidity and so on. But I am happy that you were not influencing the decision for health centres to be near or closest to your constituency. 

As for swallowing a smaller health unit, of course, it is not bad because the health centre IVs or IIIs still serve the purpose of primary health care. They still deal with the same problems, which the health post was handling. In any case, the other health centre IIs per parish, and health centre IIIs per sub-county will continue to be constructed.

As for renovation of hospitals, as you saw in the report we are going to renovate them. However, I have to add very quickly that these hospitals need more than we have to rehabilitate them. It is a continuous exercise. For those that are not covered now, we shall cover them later on. Even for those that are going to be renovated, once equipment comes we shall add it there. So, it will be a continuous exercise.

Unavailability of doctors and their misbehaviour: It was said that some of them may be going to their clinics. As you know, we still have a problem of paying doctors enough money to demand that they should stay where they work all the time; this is a fact. So, the Government deliberately allowed doctors to work in two places. They work in government hospitals but when they are free –(Interruption) - I want to limit clarifications because the Chairman has allowed me very limited time, considering that there is another ministry to be covered this afternoon. 

Some of the doctors may be undisciplined. Of course, when this is the case, we have got appropriate bodies that deal with them. I do not have time to quote all the examples, but there are cases that have been dealt with and some doctors have been punished. By and large, however, the doctors have done well by staying in the country and not going for greener pastures, and also working in government hospitals and working in their clinics.

As for the internally displaced persons, that is a priority in the Ministry of Health. In fact when people are gathered together, you can treat them even better because they are in one place. We take it as a priority. We work with the donors, with NGOs to make sure that all problems are solved. 

If you identify any area, which is lacking, you just need to let us know and we will address it. Otherwise, for HIV infections, STIs and all these diseases, we make sure that we give priority to these internally displaced persons. 

We have not yet reached them with voluntary counselling and testing because as a policy, we are going slowly to make sure that the drugs of HIV/AIDS are not abused. If you abuse them, this can cause a big problem because the virus can become stronger. So, we have gone slowly. But I have taken note that since there are people gathered together, probably it should be a priority to open DCTs in those areas.

As for Lira Hospital, as far as we are concerned, as the committee noted, together with the Ministry of Finance we believe that it is a regional referral hospital. There is money for it. I have been consulting with my officials; since the money is there, we shall send the money to the hospital so that Public Service corrects their books and recognises Lira as a regional referral hospital.

A member asked why the mortality situation is bad, and if so, how bad is it in the areas of insecurity. We are still grappling with the problem of maternal mortality. At an appropriate time we shall tell you, but we noted that there are a number of factors in play. 

I hear mothers go to hospital to check how the baby is for the first time and when the doctors tell them that they are okay, they never go back and they deliver at home. Unfortunately, some of them die there because of over bleeding and things like that. 

It seems the problem could be caused by a number of factors and one of them seems to be cultural. It seems that most mothers prefer to deliver traditionally, in a certain position, which is not taught by the modern methods of delivery. So, they do not like the posture they take in hospital, they would like to deliver while kneeling. And it seems our hospitals and health centres do not provide for the same -(Mr Wambuzi Gagawala rose_) No, I am sorry. You can consult me –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: It is about maternal mortality. It is more serious than this, Mr Minister.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: I will accept with your permission, Mr Chairman.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Chairman, it was not my intention to interrupt the honourable minister, particularly when he is doing a good job. But the question of young women dying at birth is becoming very big and it has to be attended to not on one front but on several fronts. 

We think that maybe the food we are eating is one of the causes. We think that if we change our way of behaviour, it will come down. Maybe some of the drugs we use also cause this death, because every week in every sub-county, I find 20 girls who have died while trying to produce. This is very serious and it needs serious attention, Mr Minister.  

I think if you just brush it away, you will be missing the message from the committee. I am not a member of the committee, but I have been feeling it in the grassroots endemically. 

If we do not deliver this message to the Minister clearly and he sees there is a crisis, which needs serious attention, then we are really not serving our population. I beg to seek clarification or to draw the attention of the Minister to this problem. I am glad the member who is a specialist in gynaecology is also standing up here, Dr Mallinga Stephen.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Let me answer this one first. As I said, this problem is multi-sectoral. That was my opening statement. It covers culture and it covers the youth because some of the mothers, as you know, produce when they are too young. 

I had just mentioned one of the problems, which may not be captured even by doctors who are specialised. It was actually hon. Wabudeya, when she was still in Ministry of Health, who found out that many mothers do not feel comfortable to lie there for young doctors to look at them in that position. It is a fact. They prefer to deliver kneeling facing down and yet all the beds in hospitals are not meant for delivery that way.  

What we are doing now is to try and address that problem. I understand there are delivery tables, which can be changed in any position. We should probably look at addressing this problem because the women who die - 506 per 100,000 – are many! 

Of course, there are other problems. There are many problems, even in my own sector. You read in the newspapers a story about a mother who went to the hospital and waited for long hours and she died. How many mothers do you think she scared away? Quite many! All those are problems. Because if she goes to hospital and waits for five hours and dies, why should they go there when they think that they can deliver like their mothers, or grandmothers or great grandmothers.  

There are a number of problems, but we need to put our heads together and find a solution. We need to find out why mothers do not deliver in hospitals. Even when they are very near, by the way, they deliver at home and they only rush them when they have complications, and it is too late sometimes. (Interruption)

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much, honourable Minister.  

You mentioned the point of positioning in delivery.  Internationally, it has been recognised that the African position, that is the knee-faced position or gravitational position, is the ideal position. Beds have been constructed in order to enhance that position, except that in Uganda, maybe, we have not –(Interjection)- long time ago, about 30 years ago when I was a student, those beds were being recommended. There was a company, I think it was TUMPECO, which used to make beds and someone had approached them to make those particular beds.

Secondly, the issue of doctors and nurses not being available in the hospitals is complex. We have talked about this one until our heads have gone red. We are not paying nurses and doctors sufficiently. We are not accommodating them. 

We are not equipping the hospitals, especially what we call referral hospitals, which should be relieving Mulago Hospital. When you go to a hospital like Jinja, Tororo, Mbale, it is just miserable. It is a shame that we call them referral hospitals. The doctors are there, the nurses are there, but the equipment is not there for these hospitals to function as referral hospitals.  

Thirdly, the deaths from accidents; I discussed at length with hon. Mukula that along the roads where there are serious accidents, trauma centres should be established, especially places like Kawolo, Jinja and then Masaka road. That is where we have the most serious accidents, but the Ministry of Health has not addressed that issue. Thank you very much for allowing me raise these points.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much Mr Chairman, and I thank the honourable member for that information. I probably need to add that most of what you have said, we have noted and we are trying, as I said, to address the problem by having the appropriate equipment in hospitals.

Secondly, I also mentioned that in spite of that high number of people who are dying when they should not, there is at least a marked improvement from 700 per 100,000 to 506 per 100,000. If we could maintain that there is an improvement.

Mr Chairman, on the question of sleeping sickness, I am informed that this problem is soon going to be solved. First of all, the sleeping sickness programme has been reactivated and a national control programme has been constituted, and Namungalwe Health Centre is going to be used in the control programme.  In this current financial year, five staff are going to be recruited for Tororo Sleeping Sickness Hospital, and so on. 

The sleeping sickness control programme is to cover 21 endemic districts, including Mukono, and at the moment there is no case of sleeping sickness in Buvuma Islands. Very soon we shall intensify the programme together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. (Interruption)  

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I see the Member for Buvuma Islands disapproving your statement.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: He is disapproving our plans?

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: No, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the House that when any case is identified, people just cross from Buvuma to Namungalwe for treatment because that is where they can be treated. When they are recorded in Busoga, it does not mean they belong to Busoga. They contracted the disease from Buvuma but they got the treatment from Busoga. 

Honourable minister, I want to inform you that in Buvuma we have a lot of tsetse flies, and the sleeping sickness cases every year are about 50. So, there is need to equip Buvuma Health Centre IV such that these cases can be treated there. If it is not upgraded to that level, you will still see the number of cases at Namungalwe increasing, forgetting that people just cross from Buvuma. Otherwise, we can go to Mukono and Nyenga but we cannot get treatment for sleeping sickness. I thank you.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, honourable member. I have taken note. I was just mentioning that there is no case of sleeping sickness according to the technical people, because I am sure they carry out post-mortems and know what killed the person. However, Buvuma definitely needs a health centre, not only for sleeping sickness but also for other diseases since it is isolated. But we shall deal with that in due course.

Hon. Mukama was asking about the size of health centres; he said they are like lockups. The committee noted that there is a problem of shoddy work by the local governments who give themselves tenders. We have been talking about this and it is a serious problem, which all of us should definitely address. There are so many of that kind. 

We have decided as a ministry to give you, Members of Parliament, and other leaders the details of health centres that were built in your areas. You can then go and check for us whether there is value for money, so that those who are responsible are brought to book.  

The Health Service Commission and hospitals; we are the ones who give the professionals in district hospitals money, but they are the ones that recruit. That clarification should be made. We send money for doctors, for the health workers, but they are the ones to recruit. 

There was a problem in recruitment, which has been overcome as you have seen. Last year the Health Service Commission recruited quite a number of workers, which raised the percentage from 42 to 77, so we hope this problem is going to be solved.  

Hon. Jessica Eriyo, I am sorry that you were sick.  I did not come to see you because I did not know about it. But we are improving the physiotherapy department in Mulago and all the other regional and national referral hospitals. So, we shall improve the situation there.  

As for the size of district hospitals, whether they have 100 beds or 200 beds, all I can say is that all the hospitals are overflowing. So, really, I cannot even tell because they all have 200 or 300 beds.  All we need is to give them more facilities to treat the people. But we are concentrating on health centre IVs, health centre IIIs and health centre IIs to reduce on the burden of the hospitals, so that patients are treated down there before they are rushed to hospitals.  

As for inadequate staff and health workers, there are definitely not enough staff. This is partly because the resource envelope available to Ministry of Health is inadequate. But Ministry of Health sends guidelines to all hospitals, so the guidelines are there. We have a department of quality assurance, which monitors the performance of hospitals and health centres. I must add that we are the only ones in Africa who do this. Other countries are now copying this innovation of quality assurance from us.

I have taken note of the Buvuma Island problem, where a doctor was transferred and there is no doctor that visits the place. I have taken note of the accommodation problems and so on. We shall address them.  

On the Kalazar problem, again I have taken note of the problem. I am sure our people must have addressed the problem. If they did address the problem, we will get together and solve it. But if NGOs are there, you should know that Government invites most of the NGOs to go to particular areas so that they work with us. When they are there, we are there, and they supplement and complement our efforts.  

On the health centre in Kyenjojo, I was not aware that there is a health centre IV, which was constructed in 1998 and it has a doctor but does not have anything else. Maybe I did not get it rightly, but we shall definitely investigate and find a solution.  

I appreciate the compliments by hon. Okumu Reagan.  As for these protected camps, definitely we treat them as priorities and we shall continue to do so.  

I think the point on the NGO hospitals was a good point. We have been talking to them because we give them a lot of money, and where they are we do not construct another unit because they are also part of our health facilities. So, really, I think we should have more control on what they are doing, and with Parliament’s support I am sure we can convince them. Although they are church-based, they are supposed to help our people and I think they will not refuse to co-operate with us. 

I want to stop here, Mr Chairman, and thank you again for the opportunity. I thank the members for their support. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, honourable minister.  Honourable members, -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, various people have raised the issue of the indirect introduction of cost sharing at Mulago, but he has not commented on it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think he will consider it next time. I put the question that the report of the committee on the Ministry of Health’s budget estimates for 2003/2004 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now propose that a total sum of Shs 36,644,000,000 under Vote 014, Ministry of Health, be approved for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs –(Mr Rukutana rose_)- on what? I am going to say it. Let me say it and then you correct it. I now propose that a total sum of Shs 196,376,000,000 under Vote 014, Ministry of Health, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, there is a correction and the technical people have reconciled the figure. It is Shs 196,372,152,000.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you have given them more money? Please insert the correction. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 196,372 152,000 under Vote 014, Ministry of Health, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now propose that a total sum of Shs 1,204,000,000 under Vote 134, Health Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 0.44 billion under Vote 134, Health Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 1.24 billion under Vote 107, Uganda Aids Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 22,926,000,000 under Vote 107, Uganda Aids Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 17,611,000,000 under Vote 161, Mulago Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 2,621,000,000 under Vote 161, Mulago Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 2,506,000,000 under Vote 162, Butabika Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 25,215,000,000 under Vote 162, Butabika Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,666,000,000 under Vote 165, Gulu Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,761,000,000 under Vote 163, Arua Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,797,000,000 under Vote 164, Fort Portal Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,933,000,000 under Vote 169, Masaka Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,555,000,000 under Vote 166, Hoima Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,706,000,000 under Vote 168, Kabale Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,317,000,000 under Vote 167, Jinja Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,130,000,000 under Vote 170, Mbale Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,730,000,000 under Vote 171, Soroti Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: That marks the end of referral hospitals.

MR MWESIGWA  RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, Lira Hospital has been omitted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,279,000,000 under Vote 172, Lira Referral Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2003/2004.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what is the way forward? Do we proceed?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I think we have done very well today. We have been working since morning in spite of the fact that some of these reports came to the Floor before we read them. 

We have done very well, and this particular report on Education and Gender is very heavy. So, if we could have an opportunity to go through it overnight, tomorrow morning we could expeditiously go through this business and approve the budgets in respect of these ministries.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, it seems that is the consensus. Right?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has partly considered the report of the Social Services Committee and passed the following votes: 041 with an amendment; 134, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172 and 107. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have not covered the Gender and Education ministries. I suggest that we go and read those reports so that tomorrow when the chairperson presents them, she will have a very brief summary of the two reports. That way, we will expeditiously dispose of the two tomorrow before we go for the weekend. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, starting at 10.00 a.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 4.58 p.m. and adjourned to Friday, 22 August 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)


