Tuesday, 25 August 2009

Parliament met at 10.55a.m., in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF REPORTS OF MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AS FOLLOWS:

I) PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to report that we do not have copies of the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the Office of the Clerk to Parliament avail you with the copies of the Order Paper. 

10.58
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the Report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Policy Statements and Budgetary Provisions for fiscal year 2009/2010. The report is quite voluminous, but I will try to summarise it as earlier on agreed.

First, I would like to note that all the ministries and commissions under our charge as a committee complied with the requirements that were set by the Ministry of Finance. What I mean here is that they presented to the committee all their procurement and annual workplans that were broken into quotas. This will greatly enable the committee to oversee their activities during this financial year.


Mr Speaker, we made a number of observations – let me begin with those in respect of the Ministry of Public Service. I would like to report that the committee was very much concerned about the unending pension arrears. We noted that by 30 June 2009, the pension arrears stood at Shs 130.4 billion.

We also noted that this financial year, the Minister of Finance provided only Shs 12 billion to offset some of the pension arrears.

We further noted that the problem of pension arrears is compounded by the fact that we are not appropriating enough money to clear the current pension obligations. For example, the annual requirement for the current pension obligations is Shs 152.2 billion for every year. However, I would like to report that for the last three financial years, the government has been releasing only Shs 78.4 billion. This means that every year a fraction of the pension arrears is carried forward.

Mr Speaker, I would like to report that the committee was also concerned with the failure by Ministry of Public Service to implement the integrated personnel and payroll system, which would have greatly assisted in ensuring that pension arrears are minimized. It would also enable civil servants to readily access the payroll.

In the same vein, the committee noted that civil servants are not really being paid an attractive package. This has increased staff turnover in the public service, and decreased morale at work places.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I am getting lost - this report has just been tabled and I thought all members would benefit from the committee. However, the man is just reading a summary that we are not following. 

Members would want to benefit from the Report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Government - the man stands there and starts talking about pensions –(Interjections)– 

Anyway, the issue is – like I said last week – how can the whole House adjourn to allow committees hold meetings to do a lot of work, and when  we get back here, chairpersons just come and bombard us? We still have a lot of time, Mr Speaker, to consider these reports –

THE SPEAKER: We do not have a lot of time, my dear.

MR BYANYIMA: We have it, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We do not have a lot of time. We should have finished the budget process by 31 August. Are you saying between today and 31, we have a lot of time? We do not have a lot of time. It is unfortunate that committees were given time to go and work, but many of them did not complete the work.  They have personal problems, I suppose and I cannot reveal that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance from you. It is true we do not have time, but the responsibility of approving the Budget lies with Parliament. From that point, I would like to say it would be very good for us, even under pressure, to sit up to midnight and identify the problems that exist in Government; because it will be from that basis that we will be able to get solutions. 

It would be important for the committee to present the report in totality for us to understand the issues very well and get solutions for the problems. And, it is this Parliament which should do that, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What are you suggesting?

MR ODUMAN: What I am suggesting is that the committee chairperson should first guide us on what problems they identified - which page, for us to follow the presentation. If there are comments, we can raise them before we come up with a decision, whether to sit up to midnight or the following day. We shall always sit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I have not followed. What are you suggesting? 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, what I am suggesting is that since we have the report, the committee chairperson should go through it highlighting what they found out. It is only that way that we shall be able to see the issues which are arising, make comments and decide where we should be getting the money to deal with those issues. What the chairperson of the committee is raising is a very serious matter. He talks of pension arrears; this is a very serious issue. He is talking about pay reforms - 

THE SPEAKER: Well, maybe according to his view, the problem is about pensions. Must his thinking be your thinking? As far as he is concerned, the serious problem was pension. Isn’t he entitled to do that? 

MR ODUMAN: I think we are also entitled to follow the presentation, Mr Speaker. This House is ours and he should be reporting the findings to us. We may also learn from him what he has learnt.

THE SPEAKER: As chairperson of the committee, he is supposed to highlight to us the most serious problems the committee discovered. I think that is what he is supposed to do. You may have another problem, but I think for him pension was a problem.

MR ODUMAN: I think what we are saying, Mr Speaker, is that the chairperson should highlight to us the problems that the committee found out. We have not denied these problems exist -   

THE SPEAKER: Hold on.  I think what we can do - you don’t have to quarrel. You do not have to use that combative mood. I think what I am saying is that members can say well, give us time, maybe an hour, to go through the report for us to understand it. We could do such a thing.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I think the issue that members are raising points towards the way the chairperson is going through the report. He is extremely abridging the report by the way he is reading it, yet the issues affecting the populace are as detailed as jiggers in the communities. 

So, we need time; the committee chairperson should go through the report slowly. We have to debate these detailed issues including the provisions in the votes from an informed point of view. We do not need to postpone. 

In my view, if the committee chairperson read the report in detail, that might point towards a worry - at that pace, we may not finish as per the provisions of the Budget Act, which requires that committee reports be done by the end of August. 

My view, Mr Speaker, is that we keep our hands open to the prospect of you using your prerogative, which is provided for in the Rules, to extend the days. I believe that is for the good of the people of Uganda. That prerogative is given to us to do a good job. The people out there who are waiting for us to exclusively deal with the issues affecting them are the same people who gave us that prerogative. We have a choice: A choice between going into a rush and finishing this -

PROF KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for this House to be misguided, by spending time, which time the chairperson would have used to be more comprehensive in his report. Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think the report belongs to the committee, which the chairperson is representing. It is really up to him to highlight where he thinks there is a problem. His thinking may be different from yours. After he has finished doing the presentation, you will be entitled to raise other issues, which in your view, should have been raised.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, our request is just simple - the committee chairperson should take us through the report slowly - the way they wrote the report because the Hansard is the official record of whatever we do here. We need what you have done on the Hansard. 

THE SPEAKER: I was thinking that I give you time to review the report individually to be able to raise those issues such as pension. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, your suggestion to give us one hour to go through the report is a good one, but in my view, it will even take less than one hour for the chairperson of the committee to read through the report while we are here. 

So, I would seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that the committee chairperson be allowed to read the full report. If he summarises it, we would not be able to grasp a fair amount of detail. Remember we only received the report this morning. If this report had been posted to our e-mails, we probably would have read through it yesterday and we would be in position to follow the summary or abridged version of the presentation. So, I would like to seek your indulgence. It is a practice in this House - normally reports are read in full and anyway, we have the liberty as Parliament to extend the period to conform to the law provided. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to present your report? 

MR YIGA: Okay, thank you, Mr Speaker. We can now begin afresh. Members, you can now go on page 1 of the report. On that page, we have got the background and the legal basis, where we got the mandate as a committee to interface with the ministries to analyse their policy statements. We also appreciate all those who interfaced with the committee and informed the committee about their work. 

On page 2, we have the methodology; the tools, which we used when doing our work as a committee. Then on page 3, there is the Ministry of Public Service – its mission is also given.

We have also indicated how much money they got in the last financial year. We discovered that they never got any supplementary appropriations. In the report, we have also indicated how much was actually released by ministry of finance to the Ministry of Public Service.

Mr Speaker, we further indicated the achievements that were registered by the Ministry of Public Service on pages 3 and 4. And as members have requested, I am going to read them one by one.

First, the ministry completed – 

THE SPEAKER: No, what you can do is to tell us what is on each page. (Laughter)

MR YIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I can now say the achievements appear on pages 3, 4 and 5 – (Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, we are Members of Parliament representing, among others, sectors like local governments. You cannot give us the report this morning – you want to just tell us these are the achievements and pass them like that? You should read to enable us determine whether what you are saying is true or not. Do you want us to summarise what we have not read? We cannot accept that – (Laughter) – local governments are very important as far as the administration of the country is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can, on pages 3 to 5, read one by one.

MR YIGA: Thank you. I would like to report that the Ministry of Public Service registered the following achievements in the financial year 2008/2009:

1.	They completed and launched the 2008 National Service Delivery Survey Report. This report contains feedback from the service recipients regarding the service standards across the public service.

2.	The Ministry organised two regional client charter sensitisation workshops in Arua, for participants from the West Nile Sub-region, and in Mbale, for the participants from the Eastern region, as a way of strengthening performance and accountability in the public service. 

These workshops involved participants from 20 local governments and 22 urban councils. In the West Nile Sub Region, the following local governments and their urban councils were covered: Koboko, Yumbe, Maracha, Adjuman, Moyo, Arua, Nebbi and Nakasongola. 

In Eastern region, the following were covered: Pallisa, Mbale, Busia, Namutumba, Manafwa, Bududa, Budaka, Moroto, Sironko, Tororo, Butaleja and Bugiri.

3.	The Ministry updated the personnel payroll and pension records. However, the implementation of IPPS in the 11 pilot sites namely: Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Health, the Public Service Commission, Education Service Commission, Judicial Service Commission, the Judiciary, Jinja and Lira local governments was not undertaken in the financial year 2008/2009. This activity will be undertaken during the financial year 2009/2010.

4.	 The Ministry of Public Service inspected two ministries and one department namely, the Ministry of Public Service and the Prisons Department. They also inspected eight local and urban governments of Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Kibale and Mubende. 

I would like to further report that they also undertook follow-up inspections of seven local governments in the districts and urban authorities of Nakasongola, Jinja and Masaka.

5.	The Ministry introduced records management systems to 10 local governments of Budaka, Bududa, Butaleja, Namutumba, Isingiro, Bulisa, Hoima, Nkasongola and Luwero. This was meant to ensure vital official records are efficiently stored and utilised in planning, decision-making and accountability at local government levels.

6.	The Ministry finalised the procurement process of hiring a consultant to advise it on the development and implementation of the Public Service Human Resource Strategy. This effort will ensure that public human resource systems and processes enable efficient planning and deployment in ministries, departments and agencies.


7.	The Ministry undertook consultations with stakeholders regarding the preliminary activities for undertaking the motor vehicle census in all ministries, departments and agencies, and local governments. The census is meant to inform the motor vehicle management reforms in the public service, and it will be undertaken during financial year 2009/2010 after consultations with all the other stakeholders are concluded.

8.	The Ministry supported the ministries, departments and agencies, and local governments, which included the following: Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Information, Ministry of Information Communication and Technology, and the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. The others included: Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministries of Education and Public Service, and Jinja Local Government in the implementation of the Public Service HIV/AIDS Policy. Allow me say that the ministry also distributed widely, the HIV/AIDS policy in all the ministries, departments and agencies, and local governments.

	I would like to report that the ministry also created a forum for sharing best practices through quarterly meetings for line ministries. It ensured the designation of the focal point officers in ministries, who have started budgeting for HIV/AIDS related activities. 

	The ministry gave technical support for Supporting Public Sector Workplaces to Expand the Action and Responses (SPEAR) to HIV/AIDS.

9.	The ministry paid pension arrears to 17,189 beneficiaries. This reduced the overall pension arrears liability by 78 percent instead of the targeted 80 percent. At the beginning of the financial year, the pension liability was Shs 128 billion. Shs 100 billion was released, which was 78 percent of the pension arrears liability reduction.

10.	The ministry promptly paid the monthly pensions to the beneficiaries throughout the financial year. 

11.	The ministry visited all local governments to establish the status of their pension payments and obligations. The visitation reports are ready for dissemination and discussion with all the stakeholders.

12.	The committee established that the ministry carried out an annual sector review of the Public Service Reform Programme. The committee also found out that the ministry continued with the implementation of the recommendations of the Payroll Cleaning Report, and had the public service pay policy approved by Cabinet.


13.	The ministry had the Public Service Act, 2007, the Public Service Negotiation, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery Act, and the Public Service Commission Act, 2007 passed by Parliament. Those were the achievements last financial year.

The planned activities for financial year 2009/2010:

1.	They  intend to agree on a framework for the collaboration and implementation of ROM and Output Oriented Budgeting;
2.	they intend to facilitate 10 MDAs and 30 local governments to develop, launch, disseminate and implement client charters, as a way of strengthening the accountability to service recipients;
3.	they intend to disseminate the National Service Delivery Survey, 2008 report to all MDAs and local governments;
4.	they plan to finalise preliminary arrangements for the construction of the National Records Centre and Archives Building. This initiative will also continue to engage the ministry both in the short and medium terms;
5.	they plan to roll out the records retention and disposal schedules in seven local governments and three MDAs;
6.	they plan to monitor the implementation of the revised staff appraisal instrument in all the MDAs and local governments;
7.	they plan to develop and monitor the implementation of the sanctions framework for the reward and recognition scheme in the MDAs and local governments;
8.	they plan to undertake the sensitisation of MDAs and LGs on the negotiation machinery and the new labour laws;
9.	they plan to review and finalise the “hard-to-reach” incentive framework for the Public Service;
10.	they plan to strengthen the human resource function in all MDAs and local governments;
11.	they plan to undertake the restructuring of 22 central government ministries and their agencies in the short and medium terms;
12.	they plan to review and customise the local government structures for the 16 newly gazetted local governments;
13.	they plan  to support and monitor the implementation of the Straight Through Processing (STP) of salaries;
14.	they plan to clean the payroll of the five public universities, namely, Makerere, Kyambogo, Makerere University Business School, Gulu University and Mbarara University;
15.	they plan to support local governments with payroll management problems regarding recruitment, deployment and payroll access for staff in the health and education ministries;
16.	they plan to finalise the arrangement of the implementation of the pay policy. This initiative will be implemented by the ministry in the medium term;
17.	they plan to develop and review operational and management systems in MDAs and LGs.  This initiative will be undertaken by the ministry both in the short and medium term;
18.	the ministry plans to consolidate the implementation of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS). This initiative will be undertaken  both in the short and medium terms;
19.	they plan to finalise the preparatory activities for the establishment of the Civil Service College;
20.	conduct outreach sessions to cement gains in the PSRP in 10 MDAs, 12 local governments and 3 embassies;
21.	verify and update the records of pensioners countrywide; and
22.	carry out a motor vehicle census in MDAs and LGs in order to check misuse.

The committee came up with the following observations from the interaction they had with the Ministry of Public Service:

a)	Pension arrears

The total outstanding pension arrears as of 30 June 2009 stood at Shs 130.4 billion. A total of Shs 12 billion has been provided in financial year 2009/2010 to offset some of the pension arrears. The committee is concerned that due to inadequate budget provisions for retiring public officers during the financial year 2009/2010, the pension arrears will continue to accumulate. For instance, the annual requirement for recurrent pension obligations is Shs 152.2 billion yet for the last three financial years, the provision for this item has been at Shs 78.4 billion.

b)	The committee noted with concern that the implementation of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System was taking too long. This has delayed the automatic access to the pension payroll upon retirement.

c)	Pay reform

Pay reform continues to remain an unfunded priority.  The Committee observed that lack of attractive public service pay levels result in low motivation of staff, which has increased the staff turnover.   

d)	Misuse of public vehicles

The committee noted with concern that:

i)	The census alone is not enough to address abuse of Government vehicles. The public is more interested in guidelines and standards to check vehicle misuse;
ii)	ministries are purchasing vehicles beyond the required capacity;
iii)	Government is spending over Shs 100 billion annually on vehicle maintenance.

e)	National Records Centre

Parliament was pressurised to approve a loan, one of whose components was the construction of the National Records Centre, because it was informed that this was very urgent. The committee was concerned that two years down the road, it is still at preliminary stage.  The committee was not impressed by the speed at which work is being executed and, therefore, concluded that the ministry lacks the capacity to absorb the funds.   

f)	Civil Service College

The committee was concerned that up to now the ministry has not yet identified where the college is to be located, and a lot of money is being spent on consultants.  

The committee, therefore, cast doubt on the capacity of the Ministry of Public Service to spend Shs 5.8 billion under the above item. It is planned that Shs 3.1 billion is for targeted capacity building and Shs 1.9 billion for preparatory activities towards the establishment of the college.

g)	Public Service Pension Bill

The Ministry of Public Service has delayed to come up with the Public Service Pension Bill intended to reform the Public Service sector to introduce the contributory pension scheme.  This will have assisted Government greatly in checking accumulation of pension arrears.

h)	Delayed access of staff on the payroll

The committee was concerned about the delayed access of staff on the payroll and was informed by the ministry that in order to address the delayed access on the payroll, the ministry has ensured that all payroll managers, both at the centre and local governments, have been trained and payroll user manuals are provided to each institution.

Next we go to the Public service commission, which is established under Article 165 of the Constitution. On page 9, performance of the Budget, we have indicated the amount of money which was appropriated by Parliament. They never got any supplementary appropriations. On page 10, we are indicating the amount of money which was used by the Ministry of Finance. 

On paragraph 3.3, we have the key achievements by the Public Service Commission during financial year 2008/09.

1.	They handled submissions on appointments, confirmation, promotions, discipline, transfers and appeals and bringing them to their logical conclusions. 
2.	They conducted skills enhancement for district service commissions and Local Government officers, including induction of new district service commissions.
3.	They commenced the review of the Public Service Commission regulations, Public Service Commission reforms, checklists on submissions and other routine documents.
4.	They conducted competence profiling and analysis for critical posts, and developed a competence dictionary for all public officers for the public service in conjunction with the Ministry of Public Service. 
5.	They developed and acquired selection instruments and administered selection examinations/tests for first appointment and promotions both at the centre and in local governments. 
6.	They re-tooled the Public Service Commission through the acquisition of computers, procured cars for the chairperson of the commission and other two members, and a pick-up for fieldwork.
7.	They trained officers on higher degree courses and other short courses. 

They plan to do the following in financial year 2009/10:

1.	They plan to improve the vote performance and, therefore, have developed and published the Public Service Commission regulations and guidelines for the district service commissions to improve on the human resource management practices.
2.	They intend to implement an online recruitment system in conjunction with the Ministry of Public Service as provided in the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System.
3.	They intend to develop an examination scheme to standardise the use of examinations in the recurrent promotions in the entire public service.
4.	They intend to conduct interviews for all posts submitted to the commission.
5.	They intend to conduct induction and skills enhancement programmes for district service commissions and local government officials.
6.	They intend to advertise all declared vacant posts.
7.	They plan to monitor and provide guidance to district service commissions.
8.	They plan to carry out competence profiling for heads of departments and officers at the level of scale U1.
9.	They plan to handle appeals from staff appointed by the Public Service Commission and district service commissions.
10.	They plan to continue serving H.E. the President in accordance with Article 172 of the Constitution.
11.	They intend to procure three vehicles, filing cabinets, office furniture and desk computers.
12.	They plan to acquire a counter and refurbish their registry.

Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that the Public Service Commission plans to undertake continuous activities and, therefore, will cover the next financial year and the medium term.

We came up with the following observations on the activities of the Public Service Commission:

1.	There is a funding gap in the item for advancements in newspapers and other media.

2.	Selection of candidates, including administration examinations for critical posts.

3.	Psychometric and aptitude tests for where the level of attraction is very high, especially for fresh graduate positions.

4.	The committees learnt with concern that the total proposed budget under this item is shs 817,500,000 while only shs 502,000,900 is provided for this financial year for advertisements.

5.	Whereas the number of district service commissions is on the increase, funds available to the Public Service Commission to carryout its mandate of overseeing the District Service Commission is inadequate. 

The committee further noted with concern that:

1.	The failure of district council in liaison with the Public Service Commission to fill vacant posts on district service commissions which is causing poor personnel management in the districts.

2.	There is a lot of political interference in the recruitment process.

3.	We were very much concerned about the recent media reports about corruption in districts, for example, the case of Ntungamo which was given.

4.	The Public Service Commission has not been able to fulfill its responsibility of monitoring and guiding district service commissions because of inadequate funding.

5.	The committee observed that the Public Service Commission had performed relatively well in spite of the inadequate funding. The committee is, however, concerned that the budget ceiling for financial year 2009/10 for skills enhancements programmes for district service commissions is Shs 266,359,000 against the proposed expenditure of 686,400,000, which creates a funding gap of 420,041,000. The committee notes that this will further lead to the failure of the Public Service Commission to fulfill its mandate.

We now go to the Ministry of Local Government. On page 12, we have the mission statement for the ministry. On page 12, we have indicated what was appropriated. They never got any supplementary appropriations. And, down there we have also indicated what was actually released by Ministry of Finance against what Parliament appropriated. 

We have also indicated the votes for local governments, the amount of monies which were appropriated, over Shs 1.2 trillion, and what was actually released. So, they got less than what was appropriated.

On page 14, we go to the achievements of the Ministry of Local Government:

1. 	They trained 382 newly appointed members of district service commissions, local government public accounts committees and contracts committees. 

2. 	They created 43 new town boards and there was orientation of 153 of their members in a bid to improve planning, development and management of urban service delivery.

3. 	The ministry conducted a seminar for 116 town clerks of city divisions, municipalities and town councils on urban management, governance and other policy reforms. 

4. 	They supported 35 local governments to recruit critical staff. 

5. 	They trained local council courts officials in 17 local governments. 

6. 	They processed eight ordinances and bylaws submitted by local governments.

7. 	They trained HIV/AIDS focal point persons in 40 local governments in a bid to enhance coordination of the local response initiatives against the pandemic. 

8. 	They conducted technical studies on rural growth centres and town boards. 

9. 	They carried out routine and special inspections which covered 51 districts, 13 municipalities and 115 lower local governments in a bid to enhance compliance with set laws, performance standards and regulations.

10. 	They oriented local government public accounts committees on the new local government finance and accounting regulations.

11.	 They disseminated guidelines on the implementation of new taxes – that is the local service tax and the hotel tax - to all local governments in a bid to ensure higher revenue yields. 

12. 	They supported 41 local governments in the areas of development planning and budgeting; and provision of backstopping support to 22 local governments on the application of the Local Government Information and Communication Systems (LoGICS). 

13. 	They drew designs for rural markets, community access and small-scale agro-processing facilities to be rehabilitated and/or constructed under the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP).

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, should we switch off the AC? Are you feeling very cold?

HON. MEMBER: They should adjust it. 

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, lastly, the Ministry of Local Government procured and distributed 355 motorcycles and 26 vehicles under the District Local Support Programme.   

The ministry plans to undertake the following activities in the financial year 2009/2010. We will begin with those which are of recurrent nature. They plan to: 

1. 	Carry out routine, periodic and special inspection activities in local governments and urban local governments. 

2. 	Support local governments to implement the anti-corruption strategy.

3. 	Compile, print and publish the minimum national standards for service delivery for local governments. 

4. 	Conduct monitoring of PAF implementation in urban local governments. 

5. 	Complete recruitment, orientation and provision of tools, equipment and furniture to staff as per the new structure. 

6. 	Develop guidelines for policy analysis and formulation in local governments. 

7. 	Support cascading of participatory poverty assessment approaches to lower local governments.

8. 	Support implementation of client charters in the ministry and local governments. 

9. 	Support the ministry and local governments to implement the e-government initiative. 

10. 	Maintain the one-stop information resource centre at the ministry. 

11. 	Support six new town councils and three new municipalities to develop structure plans. 

12. 	Conduct technical studies for establishment and upgrading of urban councils. 

13. 	Support local governments to recruit, induct and train staff. 

14. 	Convene the Joint Annual Review of Decentralisation (JARD) of 2009. 

15. 	Print and disseminate guidelines on the relationships between elected leaders and civil servants.

16. 	Assist to resolve conflicts in local governments involving land boundaries and conflicts in councils.

17. 	Monitor and evaluate the functioning of local council courts, and train and equip them.

18. 	Compile, print and publish the minimum national standards for service delivery. 

19. 	Develop a new performance assessment tool and manual, which shall be applied during the 2009 national assessment exercise for local governments. 

20. 	Sensitise local government political leaders on budget and financial statements analysis. 

21. 	Revise the Local Government Public Accounts Committee Regulations, 2009. 

22. 	Continue support of professional training for the local government accounts and internal audit staff.

23. 	Review of the local governments’ inspection checklist to conform to the Local Government Financial and Accounting Regulations 2009. 

The Committee was informed that for the financial year 2009/2010, the ministry was given a domestic allocation of Shs 4.61 billion for its development budget. An additional Shs 5 billion has also been included in the development budget for taxes. This allocation will be used as counterpart funding for the development projects/programmes under the ministry. In addition, the Ministry is projected to receive a total of Shs 115.67 billion as donor funding for its development projects, which are listed below:  

1. 	The District Livelihoods Support Programme (DLSP)

2. 	Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP)

3. 	Local Government Management and Service Delivery Programme (LGMSDP)

4. 	Participatory Development Management Programme (PDM)

5. 	Agricultural Sector Support Programme (ASSP -II)

6. 	Improvement of markets in Kampala.

7. 	Naguru-Nakawa Redevelopment Programme.

8. 	Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP)

The Local Government Finance Commission (LGFC)

Here we have indicated their mission statement and the amount of money that Parliament appropriated, that is Shs 2 billion. We also indicated what they actually received, which was Shs 1.7 billion. So, they got less than what Parliament appropriated. We then go to what they did in 2008/2009.

1. 	The commission reviewed the corporate strategy 2004-2008 which was coming to an end, and developed a new one for the period 2008/2009, which will end in 2011/2012. As a consequence of this review, the commission also reviewed its manpower and organisational structures.

2. 	The commission provided training to 33 members of staff in skills improvement and development in various fields to enhance skills and performance.

3.	The commission undertook analysis of the local governments’ Budget Framework Papers (BFPs) from all the 80 districts for Financial Year 2008/2009 as required under the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy and provided feedback to local governments and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

4. 	The commission carried out support capacity building in local governments for effective planning and budgeting. The commission supported training in 34 districts in the use of the revised planning and budgeting guidelines and manuals. The training was funded with support from the European Union.

5. 	Commissioners undertook outreach activities to dialogue with stakeholders. The commissioners visited 16 districts to acquaint themselves with the issues of splitting districts and the challenges of implementation. 

6.	The commission developed practical aspects of local service tax and local government hotel tax and disseminated to 17 districts a practical guide to assist local governments in managing these taxes. After consultations with local governments, the manual has been improved and is now being replicated for distribution to local governments and stakeholders.

7.	The commissioners facilitated negotiations between sector ministries and local governments on conditions and issues relating to utilisation of conditional grants. The negotiations were held in April 2009. The negotiations were preceded by regional workshops conducted during February and March 2009, in which review and evaluation of the agreements reached in the previous year were done and key issues for negotiations were generated.

8. 	The commission completed the study on streamlining royalties for local governments and conducted consultations with central government agencies on ways and means of improving management of royalties for local governments. Consultations were held with key central government agencies and the final report, with recommendations, is being finalised and is soon due to be submitted to the government through the Minister of Local Government.
9. 	The commission facilitated three meetings on the functioning of local government budget committees to oversee the implementation of FDS as well as four meetings of the Local Government Revenue Enhancement Coordination Committee to bring together stakeholders on issues of local revenue enhancement.

10.	The commission met its other obligations including payment of salaries and allowances, rent, utilities, maintenance and repair of assets/equipment.

11. 	In October 2008, the newly appointed commissioners of the commission were inducted into the functions, operations and systems of the commission. The new commissioners who were sworn into office on 17 October 2008 are: Mr Johnson Bitarabeho, the chairperson; Mrs Sarah Nambasa Mukasa, vice chairperson; Eng. Ian Kyeyune, commissioner; Mr Richard Santo Apire, commissioner; Mr George Michael Egunyu, commissioner; Mrs Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny, commissioner; and Mr Adrian Kyamugina, commissioner.

Mr Speaker, on the development activity expenditure, the commission procured assorted office equipment including six computer sets and assorted small office equipment. The commission also undertook the redesigning of office space to provide accommodation for an increased number of staff. 

The commission plans to do the following in Financial Year 2009/2010; you can go to page 21: 

1.	 In consultation with the Ministry of Local Government, they intend to assess the impact of grants transferred through the local governments as grants from the Consolidated Fund.

2. 	They intend to analyse the impact of the increasing number of local governments on financing of local governments for efficient service delivery.

3. 	They intend to review performance of local revenue sources for local governments and recommend appropriate changes.

4. 	They plan to identify potential sources of local revenue for local governments including agency fees, shared sources and land based taxes.

5. 	They plan to support the development and implementation of an effective local revenue awareness/education campaign.

6. 	They plan to undertake analysis of local governments’ budget framework papers and budgets, and support further strengthening of local governments’ planning and budgeting skills and capacity.

7. 	They plan to support stakeholder coordination in the implementation of the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy (FDS) through the local government budget committees, and local revenue enhancement through the LRECC.

8. 	They plan to undertake institutional development of the commission for efficient and effective discharge of its functions.

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that the majority of the above activities are expected to be funded from the local government sector investment plan basket. However, the level of funding from this source has not yet been determined. The success of implementation will, to a large extent, depend on availability of funding from this source.

The Medium Term Plans

The commission’s medium term plans are elaborated in the corporate strategy and they contain five major goals, which are:

1. 	Improve equity in revenue distribution between the central government and the local governments for efficient and effective service delivery in the local governments.

2. 	Enhance local revenue mobilisation and generation in the local governments.

3. 	Undertake effective analysis and tracking of the local governments’ budget process.

4. 	Support effective management and resolution of financial disputes between the local governments; and 

5. 	Strengthen the institutional capacity of the commission for efficiency and effectiveness.

We now come to the general observations of the committee on the local government sector:

1. 	The two new taxes - the local service tax and the local hotel tax - which were introduced in Financial Year 2008/2009 have not significantly taken root. The committee noted that the local hotel tax is increasingly becoming tenable mainly in urban areas as most local governments have not fully internalised its application.    

2. 	The local governments are still facing challenges related to financing due to low local revenue collections and increasing costs of delivery of services, which tends to limit their ability to deliver services in an effective and efficient manner, and thereby causing a challenge to the decentralisation policy.

3. 	The committee observed with concern the late releases of funds especially from development partners mainly as a result of protracted programme management procedures. In many cases, agreed work plans and budgets are not followed and as a consequence, adjustments and reviews of work plans have to be made, which in themselves trigger procedural delays. The committee notes that this has in a number of cases meant that planned activities are not implemented on time.  

4. 	The committee notes with concern the decrease in the non wage recurrent budget and the lack of increment in the development budget. The reduction in the non-wage recurrent budget will inevitably reduce the ministry’s ability to carryout its core function of inspection, supervision, monitoring and mentoring of local governments, which will drastically affect service delivery.

5. 	The committee further notes that the implementation of the new development programmes - for example the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) and the Markets and Trade Improvement Programme - will be constrained because the development budget has not been adjusted to provide additional money for counterpart funding. Donors are willing to give us money but we do not have money for counterpart funding, and because of this, we are likely to miss out.

6. 	Under the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP) financing agreement, KCC and the government are expected to provide money for counterpart funding, taxes and compensation, in areas where the road works and drains are to be carried out.  

	The compensation for the Lubigi Channel and some roads to be constructed are estimated to cost Shs 10 billion. Out of this amount, KCC is required to raise Shs 4 billion while the government, through the Ministry of Local Government, is expected to raise Shs 6 billion. The money has not been provided in the Budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010, and for that matter, it will not be possible to access money from the World Bank towards the planned works. 

7. 	The local governments have failed to attract and retain enough staff as per the approved established structures particularly in Northern Uganda, the islands and some remote areas. This is accelerated by adverse and harsh natural conditions, poor roads and lack of power supply. In turn, these conditions, combined with the inability of local governments in such areas to offer attractive terms and conditions of service, make it difficult to attract and retain staff. The staffing level in all the local governments stands at around 64 per cent.  

	Amuru District, for example, does not have decent housing, even for renting. As such, nearly 80 percent of its staff commutes daily from Gulu District to go and work. This is a distance of 65 kilometres. This route does not also have public means of transport and a one-way journey by motorcycle costs Shs 20,000.

8. 	The committee learnt that the Government, under the Ministry of Public Service, has formulated a policy intended to attract staff to the hard-to-reach/stay areas. The policy is currently benefiting teachers and health workers, and involves a 30 percent salary payment. The committee notes that if this policy is fully implemented to cover all local government staff in those areas, there will be some improvement.

9. 	Whereas payment of gratuities and pensions of local government employees is a responsibility of respective districts and urban authorities, local governments across the country lost the capacity to settle retirement benefits for their employees long ago due to the decline in local revenue.   

The outstanding local governments’ pension arrears are Shs 26 billion, that is, Shs 6 billion for gratuity and Shs 20 billion for monthly payments. The committee was further informed that to support local governments in clearing arrears of pensions and gratuity accumulated over the years, the government provided Shs 17.5 billion and Shs 30 billion for financial years 2007/2008 and 2008/2009 respectively.  

Disbursement was undertaken by the Ministry of Public Service. However, local governments indicate that information on which pensioners have been paid and how much of the arrears have been covered is not readily available. 

Mr Speaker, this is a serious issue because Parliament approved Shs 17.5 billion and Shs 30 billion. The idea was that this money should have gone to the local governments for them to pay directly, but the Ministry of Public Service took it upon itself to effect the payments, and we now do not know who has been paid. Even the local governments do not know which pensioners in their districts were paid. 

The issue of pensions in the local governments is a big concern to the committee. Pensioners have continued to drag the local governments to court over unpaid pension arrears, leading to costly court awards. This encroaches on the already limited revenue for the local governments which would have otherwise been used on service delivery.  

10. 	There is a lot of unregulated/unplanned urban development. The committee notes that this subject has not been receiving enough attention from the local governments for many years, and consequently, many towns and urban centres have degenerated in terms of planning and infrastructure development.  

	Furthermore, the committee observed the inadequate support to urban development. Urban development has been given poor attention through piecemeal strategies to address a few aspects of urban economies instead of applying a comprehensive approach to assist urbanisation in this country.

11. 	The committee further notes that the Government has been creating town boards and councils without corresponding support. The committee feels that the Ministry of Local Government should move away from mere declarations of setting up new urban council units, and concentrate on interventions to promote urbanisation. 

	On page 24, we have indicated the new town councils that begin effective 1 July 2009 and they are: Nakaseke in Nakaseke District; Semuto in Nakaseke District; Budadiri in Sironko District; Kibiito in Kabarole District; Patongo in Pader District; and Rwini in Kabarole District. 

	Those beginning effective 1 July 2010 are: Kyazanga in Masaka District; Ngoma in Nakaseke District; Kiwooko in Nakaseke District; Kijura in Kabarole District; Bweyale in Masindi District; Aduku in Apac District; Kaberebere in Isingiro District.

	The unconditional grant allocation for Financial Year 2009/2010 is Shs 141.39 billion compared to Shs 132.22 billion in Financial Year 2008/2009. The committee notes that the seven percent increase is still far below the required level, taking into consideration the new local government administrative units which Government has proposed to create. The wage component of the unconditional grant in Financial Year 2009/2010 will cover up to only 63 percent of the established structures of local governments.  

12. 	Government plans to pay LCI chairpersons an allowance as a token of appreciation for the services they render in their different villages. 

	In the Financial Year 2009/2010, Government has provided gratuity to local government salaried political leaders to be paid from the Consolidated Fund, at a rate of 20 percent of their gross annual salaries. The local government leaders who are paid salary are: District chairpersons, district vice-chairpersons, district speakers, the three secretaries, LC V, municipal mayors, chairpersons of town councils, sub-county chairpersons and municipal division chairpersons. 

13. 	The committee was informed that in order to try and address the poor service delivery and wasteful procurement procedures in local governments, the Ministry of Local Government will, in Financial Year 2009/2010, liaise with the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity to operationalise the sub-county  fora (barazas). This, the committee noted, would help to increase accountability of local governments. The barazas will serve as an avenue through which civil servants will account for funds received from the government. 

14. 	The Ministry of Local Government under the Local Government National Assessment Scheme has introduced a regime of incentives and/or sanctions to check on persistent underperformance by districts. Under this scheme, the committee was informed that good performance attracts a 20 percent increase in the local development grant allocation, while poor performance attracts a 20 percent reduction. 

	The committee commends the ministry upon these measures because these will make local government councils demand and push for better performance from district officials. However, the committee is concerned as to why the penalty should not go to individuals responsible for underperformance rather than the district, because it means that we are punishing the innocent service beneficiaries. 

15. 	The committee noted with concern that inspite of its recommendations in the last two financial years for the Equalisation Grant to be increased from Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 6.5 billion, it has remained at Shs 3.5 billion. As a result, the impact of the grant is not felt.

16. 	The committee was informed that some sector ministries, like Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Works and Transport, have dissented to apply the new grants allocation formulae inspite of efforts from the Local Government Finance Commission to try and bring them on board. The committee observed that this has led to delayed conclusion and full implementation of the allocation formulae.

	The sector ministries that have partially adopted the formulae include: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Ministry of Water and Environment; Ministry of Health; and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

17. 	Government directed KCC and other local governments to repossess all markets which hitherto had been sold or leased to individuals or firms and compensate third parties. 

	Government further decided to fully finance the redevelopment and/or improvement of markets. The redeveloped and/or improved markets will be managed through public-private partnership arrangements with vendors. 

	The committee further learnt that a number of initiatives are lined up in Financial Year 2009/2010 to redevelop and improve urban markets/shelters across the country, and these include: Kalerwe Market on Gayaza Road; Kizito Market on Gayaza Road; a car washing bay on Mile Two, Bwaise Road; Nakulabye Market; a shelter for furniture sellers in Bwaise; a shelter for furniture sellers in Nsambya; and a shelter for furniture sellers in Kireka

	The committee further learnt that arrangements were underway by the ministry to secure funding to modernise 26 markets in the city, 13 in municipalities and five in town councils across the country.

18.	The committee noted that land boundary conflicts in some districts are threatening to disrupt the peaceful coexistence of affected communities and delivery of services. Some of the districts currently mired in land boundary conflicts include: 

•	Butaleja/Tororo 
•	Butaleja/Pallisa 
•	Mbale/Budaka
•	Kabarole/Bundibugyo 
•	Katakwi/Moroto 
•	Yumbe/Arua; and 
•	Yumbe/Moyo.  

19. The committee noted that the demand for the creation of new districts is on the increase. Already, Parliament has been requested to approve the creation of 14 new districts. The Ministry of Local Government is handling requests for the creation of other 15 or more districts. 

The committee further noted the following:
 
•	There are 151 counties in Uganda. 
•	To-date, there are 80 districts.
•	Single counties are now becoming districts. 
•	The Government is yet to give attention to rationalisation of the creation of districts. 
•	Small, especially one-county districts, are relatively doing better in terms of service delivery than the old and big districts, which further supports the splits to create new districts. 
•	Districts are created as we near elections –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But doesn’t this contradict what you stated earlier?

MR YIGA: The central ministries will not be able to effectively monitor and supervise the work of the increasing districts.

Finally, the committee recommends as follows:

1. 	The Ministry of Public Service should streamline the procedures for accessing the payroll to minimise delays in payment of salaries. The implementation of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) should commence in the FY 2009/2010.

2. 	The Ministry of Public Service should finalise the Public Service Pension Bill and have it read for the first time during this financial year.  

	The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also have the Pension Regulatory Bill read for the first time this financial year to pave way for faster execution of pension management reforms. 

3. 	Funds should be provided for the implementation of pay reforms. The five percent salary increase across the board is a good starting point but not sufficient to achieve comparable pay levels with the private sector and the current cost of living. 

4. 	The Ministry of Local Government should continue to popularise the new taxes and ensure that all other sectors are brought on board. Evaluation should be carried out to assess the performance of the local service tax and the hotel tax so as to provide information on the viability of the taxes after efforts have been made to support local governments to implement the taxes. 

5. 	The Ministry of Public Service should formulate and cause the implementation of strict guidelines/systems that will ensure efficient use, rationalisation, discipline and proper management of government vehicles, including a code of conduct for drivers.  

	The committee further recommends that the ministry should expedite the process of carrying out a vehicle census, which should be finalised by the end of the first quarter of FY 2009/10. Furthermore, the committee strongly recommends that the cost for vehicle maintenance, which is over one hundred billion, should be reduced by half for the entire public service.

6. 	The Public Service Commission should benefit from funding under the PSRP to enable it to carry out its responsibility of monitoring and guiding the district service commissions.  

7. 	The Public Service Commission should liaise with the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that all district service commissions are fully constituted. 

8. 	The funding gap of Shs 315,491,000 under the recruitment expenses should be provided to enable the Public Service Commission ensure rationality and objectivity during the recruitment process. 

9. 	Government should search for viable solutions on the issue of financing local governments, which remains one of the biggest challenges to the effective implementation of the decentralisation policy. The budget for the local governments should grow at the same pace as the national budget. 

	Furthermore, the Ministry of Local Government should advocate for an intergovernmental fiscal regime that permits greater flexibility and/or discretion by local governments to allocate resources between and within sectors in line with the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy, in order to address challenges related to local government financing. 

10. 	The committee further recommends that local governments should be adequately staffed in order to enable effective and sustainable decentralisation. Emphasis should be put on increasing the wage component of the unconditional grant to cover the wage obligations of local governments based on their approved structures.  

11. 	In order to deal with problems associated with misuse of public funds, abuse of office and conflicts in local councils, the inspection, the supervision and monitoring of local governments should be stepped up by the Ministry of Local Government.  

12. 	A well thought-out urban development plan, including physical planning, should be developed and Government should source funds for its implementation.  

13. 	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry ensures that the local artisans (jua kalis) are relocated to designated, planned and serviced industrial parks in a bid to reduce congestion and their associated problems. 

14. 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should consider funding the wage bill 100 percent over a three-year MTEF period in order to increase the staffing level in local governments. 

15. 	The Ministry of Local Government should cause Cabinet to finalise approval of the conditional grant’s allocation formulae by December 2009 to be applied by all sector ministries. This will enable smooth implementation of the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy. 

16. 	The Ministry of Local Government should avoid the piecemeal approach and adopt a comprehensive arrangement for market upgrading. Upgrading markets should be more detailed to address issues such as open stalls construction, drainage works, road works and waste management mechanisms. 

	Furthermore, the committee recommends that the roadside markets be given more attention because they serve multitudes of travellers, and that care should be taken to involve the market vendors themselves in planning and construction of markets. 

17. 	To avert the problem of inadequate staff, there is need to review terms of employment by encouraging contract appointments as opposed to permanent appointments for staff of strategic levels (U1, U2 and selected U3s).  

18. 	Government should provide Shs 6 billion for counter funding of KIIDP to address its intended objectives. 

19. 	The hard-to-stay/reach areas’ policy should be implemented.

20. 	Gratuity for local government political leaders should be given at the same rate as other public officials.  In this regard, the proposed 20 percent should be revised upwards to 40 percent.

21. 	On the creation of new districts, the committee recommends as follows: 

•	Requests for creation of new districts that are still with the Ministry of Local Government be handled, and people informed of the fate of their requests, to make the whole matter transparent.

•	As we are nearing election time, let matters relating to creation of new districts be cleared by the end of October 2009 so that the Electoral Commission can have ample time to plan for the 2011 elections.

    • Recommendations On Budget Proposals For FY 2009/2010
    • 
Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee requests the House to approve the following votes:

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service

The amount of funding requested for by the Ministry of Public Service for the financial year 2009/10 is as follows: 

1.	For the recurrent, the committee recommends that Parliament approves Shs 9,183,000,000 and development, the committee recommends that Parliament approves Shs 1,001,000,000.
2.	Development donor project – the committee recommends that Parliament approves Shs 31,391,000,000.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, you use this term, “Funds requested by the Ministry of Public Service.” What is the meaning of “Requested”, is it the amount they wanted or the amount that was allocated to them? There is a difference.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, this is the amount of money which was agreed upon between the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service and it is what the Ministry of Public Service requested for.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you have raised a very important statement. The chairperson is telling us that there are some projects which may not move as a result of lack of money. For instance, he has talked of KIIDP; if we don’t have Shs 6 billion in the budget, we shall not access the money from the bank. That is already an issue. 

There is what has been given by Ministry of Finance and there is what the Public Service has asked for; there should be a deficit and he should come out clear on it, so that Parliament can decide on which side to move. Otherwise, they may be giving us very good planned activities which may not be achieved as a result of not coming up with realistic values for funding them.

THE SPEAKER: My view is that when you request and you are given what you requested for, you cannot lament. So, it is not what they requested for –

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, this is what the ministry requested for; it is what they agreed upon in the MTEF and there is no problem. But we are going to indicate the areas where we as a committee recommend -

THE SPEAKER: I think you can change that, it is not what they requested, it is what was allocated. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that we have got the Minister for Finance around, it may be good not only to support and assist to understand what the Chairperson, Hon. Anthony Yiga is confusing us with, but it might help other people too. 

My understanding is that when the budgeting process starts Ministry of Finance, through Cabinet, agrees on the MTEF for all the various ministries and vote holders. Therefore, ministries are sort of directed saying that, “Much as you would have wished to have all this, you cannot have it. The size of our purse is this much. Therefore, limit your requests within this basket”.

If that is the case, if my explanation from a practical point of view and my experience as far as budgeting still applies today, will you assume that if I am given MTEF, that MTEF is what I requested for? No. So, I think it is misleading to come here and say the ministry requested for this. The ministry was only directed to operate within that amount; the two are different. I wonder if the minister has anything to say on the contrary.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, we are all saying the same thing. We all know how these figures were arrived at, and the Ministry of Public Service could not ask for funding above what the MTEF provides. But we as the committee have shown those areas where we think that in case we get savings elsewhere, then monies can be added. Like on the issue of pension; as far as we are concerned, we are recommending that Parliament appropriates this. 

THE SPEAKER: What we can say is that we understand the circumstances under which you used the term, “Requested”, but it is not what they requested otherwise they would not lament. If we had the powers under the Constitution to increase, we would have increased it, but we understand. 

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, we recommend that the funds indicated below be appropriated to the Ministry of Public Service. Recurrent is Shs 9,183,000,000 and development, Shs 1,001,000,000 –

THE SPEAKER: What you can do, because of time, you just mention that for vote so and so, you give us the total, without breaking them. 

MR YIGA: Okay, for Vote 005, MOP, the total is Shs 156,975,000,000

For the Public Service Commission, Vote 146, we recommend that the following sum of money be appropriated, Shs 2, 915,585,000. 

For the Ministry of Local Government, under Vote 011, we recommend that Shs 129,180,000,000 be appropriated.

For the Ministry of Local Government Finance Commission, Vote 147, we recommend a total of Shs 2,950,000,000 to be appropriated. 

Then for votes 501 to 580, and votes 751 to 764, that is, all the local governments of Uganda, we recommend that a sum of Shs 1,435,289,652,743 be appropriated. 

But, Mr Speaker, I also did indicate to you that there is a problem with pension. Over Shs 100 billion is required for pension and Parliament should take note of that as they finally appropriate. 

We also did indicate to you that there is a problem of advertising for jobs in the Public Service Commission; they require around Shs 315 million to be able to advertise those jobs. 

There is also a problem with the Kampala Infrastructure Improvement Project where we need Shs 6 billion as counterpart funding so that we are able to access funding from the World Bank for that project. So, as we finally approve the Budget, we should be mindful of that. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and I thank you very much. 

12.28 
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural question. The chairperson has read figures of monies that the ministry is requesting us to appropriate, based on what the Ministry of Finance can give. But as has been observed previously, there are critical activities that will not fall within this funding and I think it would be a good thing, based on the observations of the committee, if the ministries concerned came out and told us whether these activities are going to fall by the wayside or they have got a programme. 

I am rising on this matter because year in, year out, this House has been bombarded by supplementary budgets and I think unless we tackle the possibility of supplementary budgets at this stage, this kind of tendency will continue. In order to avoid this in future, we need to be told. For example, this Lubigi Channel is a very important feature in Kampala that has caused flooding in the Bwaise areas. The whole of that area is flooded, and when it rains, you do not want to live in that place. People have got to commute by boat. This is a problem that requires Shs 6 billion, which we are not going to appropriate. 

If we do not do this, then our people will continue to suffer and I think this is a stage where we should ask the Minister of Finance to come out in the open and say, “We are not providing funding for this one”, and then as representatives of the people, we can be able to communicate with them effectively on this matter. This is really a matter that I wanted to raise and to seek your indulgence; that we discuss this further and come to a conclusion. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, first of all, I think the problem is that we have no powers to increase and the Constitution prevents us from doing so. But the good development that we got was that earlier, before the Budget, we may have to suggest to the Ministry of Finance, when allocating funds, to take care of certain key projects; or what can happen later, if it is really very urgent, is the supplementary that we may expect later as it may come. Those are the remedies available to us because of the constitutional provision. 

12.31
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very intriguing that they can bring a loan portfolio before Parliament for us to approve and when we come to appropriate, they tell us that this is going to be put on hold. First of all, we are going to incur penalties and that is how ministries incur penalties; because these loans are brought here and we pass them and at the end of the day, we get such a scenario. That is the guidance I seek. How are we going to go about this? And I was surprised – 

THE SPEAKER: You mean we pass them and then do something different in appropriation? No, when we appropriate, it is a question of adding up what we have approved. There can’t be a variance between what we approve in the Committee of Supply with what happens in the Appropriation Bill. 
 
MR SEBULIBA: Mr Speaker, I am referring particularly to this one where we came here – in fact, we even made a tour with the committee itself and we came here and debated it and then US$ 55 million was approved for borrowing for this case. But I am now surprised that even Government cannot come out to offer the counterpart funding, and like my colleague said, people are dying of floods, the roads are impassable, the jams are terrible – 

THE SPEAKER: I know; one day you took me around and I toured the area. Yes, you are right, but maybe, the Minister of Finance can also tell us- 

MR SEBULIBA: This business of supplementaries is like the other question I raised. Instead of beginning from zero when budgeting, the ministry should come out and tell us exactly how much balances they have in the Consolidated Fund. Maybe there are some funds which they do not declare. Why should we wait for supplementaries? Where does that money come from? Maybe they have got deferred accounts which they do not disclose to Parliament. That is why the chairperson has come up and said, “Yes, we are waiting for other funds in the supplementary,” which is not fair, and which means that there may be other funds which the Ministry of Finance is not telling this Parliament. 

12.34 
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the committee to help me. On page 17, they say that the Local Government Commission budgeted for Shs 698 billion for salaries, and they released Shs 480 billion. Who missed salary when Parliament had budgeted for it? We are going to pass this Budget and the biggest amount of money will go to local governments; they are going to get trillions through local governments and other ministries like agriculture and works and transport, just to mention a few. So, that means that there will be about three trillion for the Ministry of Local Government. Unless we remunerated the councilors, this money is going to waste. When a councilor sits, they pay him Shs 30,000 and they sit for a minimum of four times a year, which means that they get Shs 120,000 yet you are telling them to go and monitor trillions! What will happen? These are the same councilors who are going to get contracts and they will become the supervisors, implementers and paymasters. 

It is good we are going to pay the LCI chairpersons, but if we want service delivery, also councilors of the districts and sub-counties must be considered. Otherwise, these trillions will go to waste. If you calculate, about 50 percent of that will be wasted, and if we pay them, they will say thanks and the savings would be more. 

I also want the chairperson to help me on this. If the Public Service Commission cannot fill jobs, who is doing that work now? That means that we are already losing as a result of not having jobs filled. If the committee was serious, it should have recommended urgently that we give money to Public Service Commission so that they advertise these jobs, and even our brothers who are on the streets take up these jobs rather than we saying that there are no jobs when the jobs are lying there.

The committee says that the new districts, which are one county, are doing very well. I think the recommendation they are coming up with is saying all counties must become districts. If that is the case, then please be clear. However, the reason why people are yearning for districts is because as Government, we have killed counties. If counties were operational as in those days when I was growing up, when you would see a Ssaza chief coming and every old man and woman lining up to see, I think we would be very far. 

Having killed the counties, I think it is very important now that we take one decision, because we are going to have 100 plus districts. It is better we add on the 51 and we clear this problem once and for all. Then we would all move very comfortably because they are saying one county is delivering and that means that the loss we are making from the big ones will cater for the new ones we are creating - because we are saying the big ones are not doing very well.

Finally, I don’t think the committee helped us. They said these are the achievements, but they never told us what we set the previous time. First, they should have told us what was planned in 2008/09 and what has been achieved, so that we see the variance. This business of coming with achievements and not telling us what we gave you to go and deliver, is very dangerous, as it is one-sided. In fact, the activities which we gave you, should have come up clearly, what we have got should have come up, which we have seen and we discover the variance, so we know whether the money we gave you reached or never reached. 

This is because if you look at Public Service, for six years they have not implemented a pay system - civil servants are retiring and they take six years to assess a payroll - and they are maybe about 300 a year. That is a very inefficient ministry! It should even be scrapped if possible; because, how long does it take to put 300 people a year on the payroll?

It is very serious and we must come here as Parliament and make a decision to help our people. Reforms are very important and pension is very serious. I think we should appropriate all the money for pensioners so that our people can be okay. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think there is a problem of thinking, by some, of us regarding the committee’s work. This is because some people have the impression that reviewing the activities of sectors that are under them stops during the budget period. This should be a continuous thing that we do rather than thinking that when you read the report today, that is the end of it. It should be continuous, and if this is the case, we will be able to report to Parliament and debate issues here as suggested. Therefore, continuously monitor the activities of your sectors.

12.40
THE SHADOW MINISTER, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to give a brief view of the Opposition in respect of the Local Government Sector vis-à-vis the national economy and resource allocation.

From the outset, I want to say that being able to sit on the committee gave me the opportunity and the forum to discuss many issues, sometimes face-to-face with the hon. Minister for Local Government, and with my colleagues. So, many of the issues have been ably reported to the House by my chairman. From what I will present, those which already appear in the committee report are there for emphasis and a few will represent a different line of thinking.

The main concern of the Opposition in Parliament and the shadow cabinet is the increasingly irrational administration of our local governments. The key points of concern in the prevailing local governments’ scenario include the following: Budget expenditures vis-à-vis the population ratios of the local government areas; disguised underemployment and underutilisation of local government personnel, due to the narrow scope of their areas of jurisdiction and service delivery.

All indicators point to the general state of local governments regarding financing, staffing and service delivery as getting further from a satisfactory state of affairs. In fact, performance of the local governments has got worryingly worse over the last three years.

According to the final National Assessment Synthesis Report for 2008, the performance of local governments in 2008 was the worst for the past three years. The following observations are particularly alarming:

Out of 1,099 LGs assessed, only 112 local governments representing 10.2 percent met the minimum conditions satisfactorily, and earned rewards. Forty two local governments, that is 3.8 percent, met the minimum conditions but were static. Fifteen local governments representing 1.4 percent barely met the minimum conditions but were penalised, and 925 local governments representing 84.6 percent, did not meet the minimum conditions and were penalised.

Districts lower local governments registered the worst performance with 86 percent failing to meet the minimum conditions. Municipal divisions registered the second worst performance with 76 percent failing to meet the minimum conditions. All this has happened despite repeated warnings, caution and advice from the Opposition regarding the direction our local government system is taking.

I want to highlight the key observations we made during the previous years on local government policy statements, and the Opposition’s response then. The Opposition raised the following critical issues in response to the Ministry of Local Government policy statements for the financial year 2008/2009. It is very disappointing and disheartening to discover that these issues have not been addressed:

a)	The regional tier/government concept was never clarified and harmonised. So, it continues to be promoted in different ways to different groups of people. The position of the Opposition then was that Government should not rush to establish regional governments while the current local government setups had many unresolved critical issues and constraints such as inadequate financing and staffing.

b)	The creation of new districts continues to cause ugly ethnic sentiments and social tension in our nation. The country continues to be more fragmented into unviable administrative units. The position of the Opposition then was that Government should as a matter of priority commission a study of the recently created districts to determine their viability and sustainability; the resource constraints they face; and the strategies for strengthening them to achieve reasonable delivery of services in the medium term. The Opposition also recommended the suspension of creation of any more new districts until the report of the aforesaid study on the new districts, and options for restructuring local governments, have been received and debated by Parliament.

c)	The local government service tax appeared to be re-branded graduated tax and was, therefore, regarded with distrust and suspicion because there had been no assurance that its administration would be substantially different from that of graduated tax. The position of the Opposition then was that there was need for clear guidelines for the assessment of the local service tax for self-employed professionals, artisans, businessmen and women, and other players in the informal sector who form a very significant portion of gainfully employed people. To date, there has been no sign of significant steps taken towards this end. 

d)	The inclusion of farmers among the payers of local service tax was bound to have an adverse effect on rural farmers aspiring to adopt modern farming methods, which will qualify them to be commercial farmers. This would be a double blow to the agricultural sector, which is severely underfunded. Government was in effect preparing to milk perceived cash cows that were not well-fed, and could hardly stand on their feet. This was contrary to the tax holidays, land and cash incentives that were given to foreign investors, and favoured local business people. (Applause) 

I now want to state this year’s local government policy statement and the Opposition’s response. 

Recommendation on Local Government Policy
  
The wage component of the unconditional grants for the financial year 2009/10 will cover only 65.5 percent of the wage requirements for the established local government structures. This will only increase the financial burden and indebtedness of local governments. 

The recommendation is that the central government should fully fund 100 percent of the wage requirements for the established as well as planned local government structures for the financial year 2009/10.

The Ministry of Local Government inspectorate team is grossly inadequate to cover the current local government establishments. This situation will be further aggravated by the imminent increase in the number of local governments, that is, districts, municipal councils and town councils. 

The central government should expedite the recruitment, deployment and facilitation of adequate numbers of Ministry of Local Government inspectors. 

Persistent poor performance of local governments, particularly in failing to meet the set standards of service delivery is a clear sign of the ineffectiveness of Ministry of Local Government in its inspectorate, supervisory and support role. For example, only 60 percent of higher local governments and 50 percent of lower local governments were covered by routine and special inspections in the financial year 2008/09. Consequently, even higher local governments have been unable to effectively inspect, supervise and monitor the lower local government units and service delivery institutions under them.

The Ministry of Local Government should implement a tighter inspection and supervision regime in tandem with a stronger support programme for local governments.

By not providing the requisite resources for Ministry of Local Government inspections, supervision and support role, the central government, particularly the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is already providing an excuse for the Ministry of Local Government to fail in its role. For example, even if all goes according to plan, there will still be only 31 inspectors by the end of the financial year 2009/10 to cover 87 districts, 17 city and municipal councils, and over 95 town councils.

The government should demonstrate its commitment to improving the quality of life of the people by committing adequate financial and human resources to the Ministry of Local Government for effective inspection, supervision and support of local governments.

The Local Government Act, Cap. 243 Section 97(d) provides for sector ministries to establish minimum national standards of service delivery in the sectors under their jurisdiction. 

Lack of minimum national standards of service delivery is a big impediment in assessing how far improvements are being achieved in the quality of life of the people. 

The Ministry of Local Government should without further delay spearhead the establishment of minimum national standards of service delivery by the line ministries in their respective sectors. 

The staffing levels of local governments, particularly the strategic management positions: U1, U2 and U3, continue to be poor. This is because of a combination of factors such as hard-to-reach/live in areas, and poor political leadership in many districts. However, the most serious factor seems to be inadequate funding and technical support from the Ministry of Local Government. 

The Ministry of Local Government should provide adequate and timely funding and technical support to the affected local governments to enable them recruit and retain competent and qualified staff for effective service delivery. 

Furthermore, Government should provide incentives to civil servants who work in hard-to-reach/live in local government areas. 

Although Article 194 of the Constitution provides that the Local Government Finance Commission shall advise the President on all matters concerning the distribution of revenue between the government and local governments, and the allocation to each local government of monies from the Consolidated Fund, the mechanisms and procedures for the commission to provide this advice has not been provided for under any existing law.

The Budget Act should be amended immediately to provide for the Local Government Finance Commission to make submissions every financial year to the Ministry of Finance, with recommendations and proposals on the allocations to be made to local governments from the Consolidated Fund. 

Concluding remarks

The key objectives of the proposals of the Opposition are: 

(i) 	To reduce the cost of public administration of local governments, that is, if we do rationalisation, now that the tendency is to create one-county districts, it means the districts have to be redefined and some of the services which now fall into these districts, which in a matter of fact are counties, should be moved upwards to a level which the country must agree on. If we call them regions or provinces, so be it.
 
ii) 	Take key social services to the sub-regions, for example, secondary schools, regional referral hospitals, lands and so on. If we do that, then we can downsize the size of the civil service from these counties that are now known as districts, to about 50 percent, so that a position of district police commander, district education officer or director of district health services can be elevated to cover, an area, say West Nile. One district education officer can be able to oversee that place, and in the counties that are now known as districts, we can remain with lower level-

THE SPEAKER: Sir, are you advising a regional government? You think a regional government will solve the problem?  

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.

2.54
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman for this report. 

I will start my comments with an item on page 26 where it says, “The committee further learnt that a number of initiatives are lined up in the financial year 2009/10 to redevelop and improve urban markets/shelters across the country….” When they read the areas, they were only in Kampala. So, I am wondering whether the whole country has been considered, because even other areas have areas which need to be improved and redeveloped. I am concerned because the people who work in these areas are people from my area of jurisdiction, that is, the young people. I find that in my region, that is Eastern Uganda, I have 27 districts, and these areas are only in Kampala. 

I would like to find out from the minister whether the programme of redeveloping markets and washing bays is in other districts like Busia, Kapchorwa, Mbale and Jinja, among others. 

Still, the mission of the Ministry of Local Government is to guide, harmonise, mentor and advocate for all local governments in support of the vision of Government to bring about socio-economic transformation of the country. I am wondering why the ministry is taking long to guide the districts, more especially the staff, to manage time. Mr Speaker, if you visit one district any day before 10.00 a.m., you will find only a few people in the offices. And if you go to these districts after 3.00p.m., still people are suffering. You will not find anybody in the offices to give service to our people. 

So, we would like the ministry to take up this obligation; to make sure that they supervise the districts such that people start to work and they are paid for eight hours. Now they work for less than eight hours a day. So, this should be monitored.

Then on page 29, the committee recommends the provision of shelters for the jua kali. This issue was mentioned by the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry last financial year. They said that they had started, still, with Kampala and have been making close follow-up. They had promised us that by the beginning of this financial year, even other districts which we mentioned would have been helped. However, since that time, no area has been helped again to create shelters for the jua kali. So, I would like to find out from the ministry, what is the programme of actualising this obligation? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, when the Minister of Finance presented the Budget to this House, the Opposition gave a response in a written statement which the minister responded to. Now, we have a report of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. The membership of that committee is at the back and it includes hon. Arumadri Drazu and he has -(Interjections)- I am seeking guidance. As you can see, there is an anticipation of wanting to be recorded.

Now, the Opposition, in a statement presented to Parliament by hon. John Arumadri - and I have tremendous respect for him - has given a response to the committee’s report. He is already a member of the committee and according to our rules, if you are a member of this committee, you may not waste the House’s time debating the report.

Now that he is a member of this committee and he has given this statement in response, the guidance I am seeking is that if this is the position of the Opposition, there should also be signatories to this so that they also do not repeat what they have done in preparing this statement.

The guidance I am seeking is that, I feel there is a filibustering in this House; a deliberate attempt to take much of our time. Ultimately, we end up without achieving much. Indeed, there is even a worse disease affecting Members, that is, “Pulkoliasis” or a mania to want to speak so that you are recorded even when it is not really necessary. 

I want your guidance, Mr Speaker, whether members who prepared these statements should be allowed to contribute to this report prepared by the chairman of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this matter has been coming up. I think the problem is with the Rules Committee which should have cleared the provisions in the Rules. If you asked me for my opinion, I would say that if the minister is a member of the committee and you are talking about a policy matter which they have discussed in a committee, he should have submitted his views to the committee, which was being helped by technocrats from the ministry who would have been able to clear this and the other. The views of the Opposition expressed in the committee should be included in the report if the entire committee is not in agreement. 

We should have been assisted by the advice of the technocrats who sit on the committee meetings. But we asked the Committee on Rules to clear this. The report has not come out yet. But I hope they are working on it, and very soon, maybe before the next financial year, they will inform us. Because if you just bring it here without having taken it to the committee, it is a surprise, and you have no time to check on what has been said.

That is my candid view.

1.01
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I am surprised that my very good friend and senior brother, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, former member of UPC and now in NRM, has turned around and as of now, we are entering the fourth year of our multiparty politics -(Interjections)- yes, you were UPC.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Hon. Kassiano Wadri is famously known for being quarrelsome even when it is not necessary. First of all, is it in order for a member, who is himself a former member of DP, and is now a member of FDC, to keep insisting on former members? If every member in this House was to be judged by what he has been in the past, there would be very few members remaining in FDC. Is it in order for a member to pick out a speck when he has a log in his eye?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the member, whom you call a former member, is there because of inter-party cooperation.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Of course, one thing is clear that both the FDC and DP are members of the Opposition, and also, I crossed from DP Party to form my own party, unlike my senior brother who went into what was already in existence. 

That is not the point, the point that I would wish to bring on a serious note is the fact that in 2005, during the constitutional amendment exercise, a good number of us were here including my senior brother, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu. When we went multiparty, it has its own rules of the game. Of course when hon. Aggrey Awori, former member of the other party stands up, you expect us to make a response.

The point I am making is that, right from 2006 when multiparty politics once again took root here, the Opposition, the party in Government and the Office of the Speaker of Parliament, have been all along engaged in a lot of dialogue to see the way forward. It is true there is a loophole in our present Rules of Procedure, but it is also true that in the absence of these provisions in our Rules of Procedure, we borrow a leaf from other Commonwealth parliamentary practices. 

It is on that basis that there has been that level of understanding between the Chambers of the Speaker and both sides of the House, that where a chairperson of a Sessional committee makes a report, at least an opportunity will be given to the shadow minister to make responses on behalf of the Opposition. This has worked so well for the last three years, without any hitch, and I am really so surprised to see hon. Ephraim Kamuntu raise this.

Of course, we are aware of the time constraint, and for that reason we are not going to have all the shadow ministers make responses. We have been asked and we have identified six key sectors which we have asked the Office of the Speaker to allow the Opposition make responses on. You can see that Hon. John Arumadri is very brief and not as verbose as Hon. Anthony Yiga in his contributions.

Even the remaining shadow ministers will make three to four page reports. I wish to beg your indulgence that the system that has operated for the last three years continues.

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem came when the committee was directed to do that. It was under the care of hon. Kiyingi and then he was made minister. 

I am appealing to the Committee on Rules to expedite this. He has mentioned that for this purpose of handling the Budget, the Opposition have selected only seven sectors and the others can pass without going into details. The seven are: Local government, which we are about to finish; works, agriculture, energy, education, health, water and the environment. These are the ones that they want us to go into details.

1.08
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth): I wish to thank the committee and the chairperson for presenting a clear and detailed report.

My comments are on page nine on the Civil Service College. The committee has indicated to us that they have so far spent Shs 5.8 billion on nothing and they are intending to spend another Shs 1.9 billion on preparatory activities which we do not even know. They also wish to spend another Shs 3.1 billion on capacity building. I think this money is bound to be misused, and I am appealing to the committee and the august House, that we can reallocate this money either within the Local Government Ministry or we can even transfer it to education for UPE.

We do not have enough classrooms for our children; we do not have enough teachers and if we have this money which is lying there with no service attached to it, I think it would be a disservice to the nation. We would rather reallocate this money to proper use.

I also want to comment on the issue of the local government service tax. We struggled when I was still a member of the committee, and we did not want to pass the local government service tax.   

In Mpigi District, where I come from, although I am a national youth MP - there is no tax that has been collected because there is a lot of political pronunciation that this tax is for the rich people. When you go to Mpigi, you cannot find rich people there and so the local governments have failed. In fact one time, the Chief Administrative Officer was chased from a sub-county where he had gone to sensitise people on this tax. This tax is not helping our local governments to function. Most of our local governments have collapsed and only the chairmen who get salaries can afford to go to office. The counsellors cannot get paid because they have to get this money from the local government service tax. 

I appeal to the committee to press the ministry to find another source for increasing funding for local governments. When you look at the reports of the Ministry of Local Government, you do not see the initiatives they have put in place to enhance the revenue base, yet we know that local governments cannot function without local revenue. All their hope is in this tax which is not yielding much. 

I would like to talk about the issue of the Local Government Finance Commission on page 9. They have told us that they have been going to the districts to find out the challenges of splitting the districts, but they have not given us a report. We are about to create more districts; it would be very paramount for the Local Government Finance Commission to give us this report early so that we can know the problems and challenges associated with creation of districts. 

The committee is recommending that each county becomes a district to which I have no objection, but they are also saying that the ministry has no capacity to monitor those districts. So, what are we going in for? We should know it in time. 

When it comes to human resource -

THE SPEAKER: I thought the committee was lamenting about the creation, but again at another point they contradict themselves and say “county districts are doing better than the bigger districts.” But I think they were not recommending the creation of such districts. 

MS NALUBEGA: I think the recommendation was misleading. We do not know what the committee really wants. They are saying that a district in every sub-county would be more effective than the bigger districts. At the same time, they say the ministry has no capacity to monitor them. They should be clearer.

On the issue of human resource in local governments, when I was still on the local government committee, we recommended interviews to be done at the place of work so that we can improve retention of staff in hard-to-reach areas. But these interviews are still held at the district headquarters. And, when they post the staff, say to Gomba, they say, “we did not know we were supposed to work in such an area”, and they come back and dump the vacancy. 

The local government committee needs to do more than it has recommended, to ensure that their recommendations are put into action. 

THE SPEAKER: I should have restricted people to five or six minutes, but anyway, finish that point. 

MS NALUBEGA: The penalty that is associated with the local governments should really not lie with them. You may find that it is the CAO, the CFO or the planner that are not doing their work, but the penalty is given to the local government. The recommendation of the committee is very good; this penalty should be given to the people responsible for the failure.

I want to end by commenting on the gratuity of local leaders. As hon. Nandala said, if we do not pay local government counsellors, then we are going to promote corruption. These counsellors do a lot of work. You find them on funerals, they look after the sick in their communities, they address people on government programmes, yet they do not have any pay. They meet once in two months and they are paid Shs 20,000. That cannot even cover their transport. If we do not pay the local government counsellors, decentralisation will not succeed. Thank you.

1.16
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to register my thanks to the chairperson for the report submitted. I am very excited about recommendation 10 on page 28 that local governments should be adequately staffed to ensure effective and stainable decentralisation. 

Mr Speaker, the policy of decentralisation has been a success for this country. We have seen many countries coming to observe how it is done here, an indication that ours has been a success. But during the implementation of this policy, I have observed two cases which show that at implementation level, this policy is not followed to the letter. 

For instance, we are talking about increasing the wage component, but recently, we witnessed cases where the payments for these districts, instead of being effected at the districts, the payrolls were re-centralised. That has weakened the districts. 

Secondly, we have witnessed cases where the Ministry of Health is talking about re-centralising staff. I believe this is going to weaken this policy of decentralisation. My considered view is that we should bridge the gaps where we think the policy has gaps instead of weakening it by re-centralising most activities. 

I am equally interested in the urbanisation process. The committee has pointed out that certain towns are going to be considered as town councils effective 1st July 2010. The fact that urbanisation is an engine to development cannot be questioned. Therefore, those districts which are new and slightly less developed, like Isingiro District, should be given affirmative action. We need to develop most of these small centres into town councils. 

I will give an example; in Isingiro, we expected Kabuyanda to come up as one of the town councils. I am surprised that this small town is not being considered. I request that this town be considered so that Isingiro can also develop like other districts. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.19
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and my colleague, hon. Arumadri, for the statements they have made. I want to concern myself with three major issues. 

The first one is the issue of pension arrears. The committee tells us that outstanding arrears as of June 2009 stood at Shs 130.4 billion and I think that the ministry and indeed Government, is not performing to our expectations by providing a total of Shs 12 billion only when you have arrears standing at Shs 130.4 billion. It is such a dismal performance and such insensitive conduct. It is behaviour that is not expected in terms of appreciating the distinguished citizens of this country, who have given all their life building this nation. 

I find it unacceptable that from 2001 when I stepped in this Parliament, we have been talking about an Integrated Personnel and Payroll System which should have given these distinguished citizens, first and foremost, an immediate opportunity to access the payroll. They should switch from salary to pension the moment they retire. I also find it unacceptable that this is not in place up to now, but most importantly, the government seems to be benefiting from this confusion by not paying these distinguished citizens on time. People are dying before accessing their pensions and we have the courage to ask how! You should pay them; you have a duty to pay these citizens before they die - and every other day, you postpone payment. 

These people are desperate; they have become paupers in their communities; they have died without money; they cannot afford treatment; and we even have the courage to come here and provide Shs 12 billion out of Shs 130 billion for the payment of pension arrears. This is unacceptable and I think Parliament should do something to reverse this trend. Otherwise, it seems Government is not embarrassed by this. They actually approve of this given the fact that the Government Chief Whip is – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, are pensions directly charged on the Consolidated Fund or do we allocate funds? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, we have budgeted for Shs 103 billion for the pensions and arrears this year and it is a statutory vote. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on page 142 of the draft estimates, it says that pension arrears are Shs 12 billion. I do not know what the minister is talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, he says from your book –(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am ready to bring it for you to see.

THE SPEAKER: Can you check on that, Mr Minister?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, we have increased the budget provision for the pension from Shs 78 billion to Shs 103 billion per annum to avoid accommodation of arrears. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, there is increasing the recurrent budget from a certain figure to a certain figure; it is provided and maybe somewhere somehow, we are going to, but we are looking at pension arrears. The figure that the Minister of Finance has put here is Shs 12 billion and if he tells us that it is Shs 103, then this book must urgently be withdrawn. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us give him time to make the consultation.

MR WACHA: I thank you, hon. Alaso, for giving way. I did not want you to finish your contribution on pension without getting this sad twist to the administration of pensions. There is a move to disown some pensioners. With the creation of new districts, some pensioners who were getting their pensions from old districts and who, unfortunately find themselves in new districts, are now not accessing their pension. I think there was a letter from the ministry indicating that these pensioners should be paid from the old districts. Now, the old districts are telling them that they have been moved to the new districts and that it is the responsibility of the new districts. The new districts claim they do not have monies to pay these people. In other words, they are now in no- man’s-land. This is disowning them. Even without the arrears, these people are no longer pensioners in effect. I thought you should get that information. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Alaso for giving way. I want to state that if pension dues are not paid, the NRM Government is hurt and cannot benefit, but I also want to clarify one thing arising from what hon. Wacha has pointed out. What we have done in Government is to capture the total number of people who are supposed to access pension funds. The issue of sub-division of districts does not affect the total number of Ugandans who are supposed to access pensions. 

Therefore, the fear that hon. Wacha has that there are some people who are floating as a result of sub division is something that can easily be taken care of, provided the budgeting capturing the total number of those who are supposed to access pension is sorted out here. And, this is what the Ministry of Finance is trying to assure the House of; that in fact, we are increasing on the sum so that we can be in a position to take care of the fear that was being raised by hon. Alaso, which could create a disadvantage for us. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The point is, where should they collect their pension? They should know where to go.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Ben Wacha for raising this matter because it is a problem to the local governments. It is true the policy is that once a new district is created, the old pensioners stay in the old district. The old districts are not refusing to pay those pensioners. The only problem is that they do not have the money to do it. 

The arrangement is known to everybody including the pensioners themselves in the old and new districts. The problem is that the old districts stay with that liability and the argument really is that when a new district is created, they share some assets and some liabilities but the fixed assets remain in the old districts. Therefore, regarding the pensions, it was agreed upon in principle that they also remain with the old districts. So, it is a clearly arranged and known fact. The only problem is that they do not have the financial capacity to meet the pensions. So, we are – [Mr Nandala-Mafabi, “Clarification”] - Let me first clarify and then you will.

For us at the ministry, we are trying to engage the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service. At some point in the future, we may probably have one central point where we pay these pensions irrespective of whether these people work in the local governments or in the central government. We are trying to think about it and engage the two institutions and ministries so that we can harmonise. It is true those people are really not happy about the arrangement.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, this is very important because you asked the question, where should these pensioners go? I gave an example of Masaka District, which produced Sembabule, Rakai and Kalangala, and now Lyantonde. These pensioners go to an extent of even attaching the properties of the old district when they are no longer there. I think it is very important now in this House that we decide as the Speaker asked, where they should go. If you are creating it, let us say we have created it so that the old districts do not have the stress and even the problem of their assets being attached; because, these pensioners go to court; they get court orders and they attach properties of the old districts.

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: I think the best way - we have seen it the world over - if somebody is in the local government, that means he is in the Public Service but in the local government administration. The responsibility of recruitment is Public Service and it has delegated it to the Public Service Commission, which has delegated some of its functions to district service commissions. I think all these pensioners should come to the centre and that is Ministry of Public Service. As such, there must be a master payroll, which has been sub divided into those areas, telling people to go from Sironko to Mbale to Kampala - I think we are making it difficult. 

Mr Speaker, if you see a pensioner or if you have one in your area - they are really in a bad state and this is because of a few individuals - just management; because the money which goes to pay the pensioners in the districts comes from the centre and it could be a one-stop area, and they remit this money.

This Ministry of Public Service is just here happy, but people are dying.

THE SPEAKER: Madam Minister, let us exhaust this. They say the Ministry of Public Service or central government is more permanent than districts, which mutate and change; but you come in.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (MRS PRISCA B.  MBAGUTA SEZI): Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for liking me today. I want to make some clarification that when you are a public officer, you belong to a ministry and a local government, and you actually earn a government salary. On the day you retire, you actually get your pension calculated, based on the last salary that you received on that day. 

Also, the ministry, department or local government to which you retire is that one where you are today. So, the current arrangement is that the local governments handle the recruitments - and this is constitutional - of their staff under the district service commissions. They actually recruit the staff of local governments. The Public Service Commission does recruit the central government officers. So, the payment of pensions as we stand by the laws is that the local government has to pay their local staff save for the teachers. The primary teachers are paid by central government today. 

What we should be looking at is that we are trying to review the laws and procedures and we want to shift to a contributory scheme, and under that scheme, the minister is trying to propose to Government that we embrace all local government staff; but until the law changes, we are constrained to actually take over the local government pensioners.

I also want to clarify this - I have indicated that we are developing the policy framework to change into a contributory scheme so that the pension is all embracing. We are already in advanced stages. The Retirement Benefits Bill is in advanced stages and the Ministry of Public Service Bill for Pensions is also in an advanced stage. We shall come and report.  

The constraint in Local Government is that it is budgetary just like it is at the centre. We do not want people to die without receiving their pension. No one wants that to happen. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think we can all appreciate the very pathetic position that pensioners in this country find themselves in. There is the arrears and nobody knows where the money is. So, you are lucky to have your pension after six years when you retire. You are unfortunate if you die when Government has not paid you your pension. You are also really lucky if you stay in a district which has money. It is literally annoying to come here and listen to the same Government, the Minister of Local Government who is creating as many districts as he would wish, and then the Minister of Public Service who is in charge of pensioners, and there is disharmony in what they are saying. 

Soroti District, for instance, has been sued. In Soroti, we have to pay pensioners who are in Kumi, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, and now Serere and whatever district else that will be created next week. We are in big trouble, but the two ministers cannot harmonise positions, and yet they know that when they create a new district, they cut off the revenue sources for the local government. So, the new district goes with one cattle market, the other one goes with one landing site and the remaining districts are left skeletal, and they have no way in which they would raise local revenue. And, we are here thinking that we care. I think Government does not care about pensioners.

Furthermore, I want us to revisit the issue of the Civil Service College. Parliament passed that loan and directed that instead of creating a fresh institution let the Uganda Management Institute be upgraded. We have the land and facility. And now, I am dismayed to read from the committee’s findings that there is money which is supposed to be Shs 5.8 billion for the Civil Service College, and then at the same time Shs 3.1 billion is going to be used for capacity building. I have problems with capacity, capacity, capacity buildings of Ministry of Public Service. Everyday the Ministry of Public Service comes to capacity build, to cascade, to reform, to do those things that you cannot touch, when pensioners are dying without their pension. When you give them an opportunity to revamp or create an excellent institution, to bring up the quality and capital development of Uganda Management Institute - now they are saying they are going to do capacity building. 

It is this Parliament that passed that loan. I think Parliament should put a halt to the excesses in the Ministry of Public Service. We should be able to stop them from misusing this money and put the money to a use which we all agreed to. Now, they are going to use Shs 1.9 billion for preparatory activities. What preparatory activities? UMI exists; we need to see buildings; we need to see equipment; we need to see faculties developing. What preparatory activities are these? And that is the reason why I think Public Service is ill-bent on starting something new without building on what we already have as the Government of Uganda. I find this very unfortunate. 

Finally, I would like to submit that we continue to be ignorant about the criteria that is used for dispensing or granting what they call equalisation grants. This House put up a select committee and that committee was supposed to tell us how or what formula is used to give districts equalisation grants. Because, some of us are really convinced that these equalisation grants are given on a criteria, which is known only by a few individuals. And, unfortunately, we are told by members of the select committee that the Ministry of Finance has not been cooperative. Now, I read from the committee reports that money was given as equalisation grant, but based on which criteria, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think we should have a break and resume later. Is 45 minutes enough? So, we shall reconvene at 3.00 p.m. prompt. The House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.42 p.m.)

(The House resumed at 3.20 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome back. 

3.22
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I remember you had picked Hon. Christopher Kibanzanga to contribute next, but I would like to seek some guidance from you.

Section 7 of the Pensions Act talks about pensions as being chargeable and payable out of the Consolidated Fund. Sub section 1 of the same Act says, “Subject to this Section, all pensions, gratuities or other allowances shall be charged on and payable out of the Consolidated Fund without further appropriation than this Act.”

According to me, this is a direct charge, I do not know why we are arguing over the issue of pension arrears; the law says it is a direct charge. We do not need to appropriate it here, neither do we need to ask finance to budget for it. The money should be directly paid. Anybody who has not paid pensioners should have been arrested by now. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for that information. Based on that, I would like to say that the person supposed to pay pensioners should not have any excuse. He/She cannot say the money has not been appropriated because it is a charge on the Consolidated Fund. The pensioners should get their money. (Applause)

Honourable members, before hon. Kibanzanga makes his contribution, I would like to introduce the scouts from the Kenya Scouts Association in Western Kenya. You are welcome to Uganda. (Applause)

3.24
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, we have a problem. Tomorrow we will be having a Cabinet meeting, yet we also have to meet here in order to transact urgent matters. Under the circumstances, I have resolved that we should do the following: the Ministers of Health, Education and Trade should be here in the morning of tomorrow. Of course, the Minister of Finance has to be here together with the Minister of State for Finance. The rest of us shall be here in the afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Kibanzanga.

3.25
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have three issues. One is a request to your office – 

THE SPEAKER: But let us give ourselves only six minutes.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you. Like I was saying, one is a request to your office. The second one is about seeking a clarification from the chairperson and lastly, I will comment on the status of the Civil Service College.

It is in public knowledge that we borrowed money to start this college. Yesterday, I said that the only hope for Africa and Uganda is the development of highly skilled and developed human resource. Some of us thought this college would meet that objective. However, when you look at the way it is being planned and the way money is being spent - one year down the road we do know where to locate the said college - it suggests that the country is in serious need of a highly developed and skilled human resource to embark on planning.

I do not know how one can start spending money on consultancy yet they do not know where to construct the college. I also do not know how one can spend Shs 3.1 billion on capacity building yet they do not know where to construct the college. Capacity building is the language of non-governmental organisations; it is not the language for the Governments. The reason is non-governmental organisations work with the ordinary people. The people who join Government usually have qualifications and do not require capacity building – why spend all this money on such people? Where do you have the capacity building problem?

I suggest that instead of spending Shs 3.1 billion on capacity building, why not use that money to buy land on which to construct the college? Serious planning is needed here.

On page 26, the chairperson said that small districts are doing well. Therefore, I suggest that it does not matter – we can continue creating village districts – they will perform better.

However, I would like to ask him to clarify on one issue.  Bulisa District has got four councilors. All the four are members of the district executive. They are busy transacting Government business, but without a council. Supposing one went to court? We should be serious; we are planning for the country not our families. We are planning for our children, we are not planning for our own families; we are planning for our children. 

I have read this report; some villages have been elevated to town councils. I have been monitoring the Kasese municipality story, I kindly request your office that this report that creates three municipalities, Kasese municipality inclusive, be put on the order paper and we pass this municipality sir. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

3.30
MS Nabila Sempala (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you Mr.Speaker, I thank the committee for the report. However on page 25, number 17, Government directed KCC and other local governments to repossess all markets which had hitherto been sold or leased to individuals or firms, and compensate the third parties.

The committee did not tell us which these markets were and how much money has been budgeted to compensate the third parties. We know very well that Kampala-Kisekka market has been an issue; Nakasero market has been an issue and the third parties are known. So, how much money has been budgeted to compensate the third parties, we want to know?  And is the committee privy to some information that already an individual has been compensated? And, we want to know if the committee has this figure of the amount that was spent on, for instance, Kisekka market, because we learn that money has already exchanged hands. We want the committee to clarify on that issue, and if there is a Government directive to stop and also reclaim these markets; there is a pending lease which is talk of town of Owino market. Could the committee clarify on why there is an impending lease on Owino market when Government has directed that others be repossessed and the third parties paid? We want also the Minister - at least he is here - and we want to know, because the committee has tried so much to tow the middle ground. It has made general observations but not provided concrete solutions. That is an observation I have also made; that you towed the middle line, made general observations as a committee but avoided making concrete recommendations on some of these issues. 

On page 29, paragraph 13, we talked about the Jua kalis and the committee recommended that Government should provide spaces and build shelters for them. And, I think the committee talked about the Committee for Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

Have the two committees through their chairs not liaised and harmonised on the timeframe because I do not see any timeframe on this recommendation; funds that will ensure implementation of the promised industrial parks? So, am perturbed that the committee has made these recommendations without generally giving timeframes in the discussions they had with the individual ministries.

And lastly, but not least, on town councils and municipalities, we realise that in surrounding districts like Wakiso, town councils have been given to very rural areas and the urban areas like Makindye have up to now not been given the town council status, almost resulting in the lynching of the chairperson, Engineer Ian Kyeyune, for the services that those areas need that are very urban. So, we want to know why the committee skipped this issue that almost saw a chairperson lynched in broad daylight. Thank you.

3.34
Mr Charles Oduman (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to raise general comments on page 30 of the report, because the committee chairperson read out these figures and they are on the Hansard, before we go to the details. Now, on page 30, I think that we might need to review a number of these figures, because the chairperson said that nothing changed from their recommendations. There is no difference between their recommendations and what the Minister of Finance provided as budget estimates. Therefore, I have issues on Vote 005, issues with the first line, recurrent. In my view and in line with the estimates of the Minister of Finance, the first figure should be 8.99 under recurrent, and then under the same vote, the fourth item Statutory, the one that reads 115.39 billion shillings, that figure should be Shs 103.39 billion.

3.36
The Minister of State for Finance (General duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving me this opportunity to give this information. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. And some of the figures that have been given on page 30, some are not according to what we have provided in the draft estimates. Recurrent should read Shs 8,993,460,999.

The Speaker: I have some forms where I have to fill the actual figures. Which is that? Which vote?

Mr Omach: Vote 005 recurrent should read Shs 8,993,460,999. Development should read Shs 1,201,040,000. Donor projects, should read Shs 31,390,909,000. Statutory should remain as it is, that is, Shs 115,390,000,000. Therefore the sub-total will now read, Shs 156,975,409,999.

Under Vote 146, Public Service Commission, under recurrent, it should read Shs 2,804,060,410 and under development, it should read as it is, that is Shs 711,790,000. The total should read Shs 3,555,850,410.  

Under Vote 011, the recurrent should read Shs 3,904,690,000; and under development, should read Shs 9,719,950,000. This will include the figure of Shs 5.1 billion which is for taxes as a non-resource revenue. The figure for donor projects remains as it is, and the total will now read, Shs 129,294,640,000. 

Under Vote 147, the figure should read, under recurrent, Shs 2,020,002,041 and under development it is Shs 171,699,000. Under donor projects, it should read, zero. The donor component is already handled under Vote 011 which reads Shs 115.670; and so this one should read nil. The total now comes to Shs 2,191,701,041. 

Under Votes 501 to 580 and 751 to 768, unconditional grant remains as it is, that is Shs 141,385,493,941; and under conditional grant, the figure should read, Shs 1,149,038,521,247. Mr Speaker, a figure of Shs 96.3 billion was put here when it has already been covered under the Ministry of Education which handles submissions to secondary schools, tertiary and other training institutions.

Equalisation grants remain as given, that is, Shs 3,494,158,802 and Graduated Tax compensation remains as it is, that is, Shs 45 billion. Therefore, the grand total will now change to Shs 1,388,918,174,090. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: But for our records I think it is your duty to give each member a copy of what you have read.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister and the committee chair. We were told that the figures are from the big book and that they have not changed. Specifically, page 20 and 21 of the big book provide the draft budget estimates. Now, for Vote 005, under development, I would like to know how that figure changes from Shs 1 billion to the new figure. It is Shs 1 billion on page 21, but the minister has read Shs 1.2 billion. 

Secondly, on Vote 146, under development, it is clear in the estimates book that the figure is 0.63 which is Shs 630 million. That vote gives you a total of 3.48. It is all in the book. How does it change? It is 3.48 in the big book and the previous total under Vote 005 is Shs 144.775 billion. So, if there is any change, we need to know why it is changing, especially for Vote 005 and 146.

Vote 011, on page 31 of the report concerning recurrent expenditure, the figure is again very clear in the book as Shs 3.91 billion. It is all in there. On donor projects, it is also talking of Shs 115.67 billion. The total there should be Shs 124.18 billion. Where does the change come from?

Hon. Minister, you changed the figure on vote 147 under development expenditure. What is in there is Shs 120 million and I agree that you should cancel the Shs 810 million. That should be zero and the total should be Shs 2.14 billion. So, we need to know, we need to be guided, Mr Speaker, before we go into the details later to supply the figures. Our guide now is the big book. How do the figures change? How do we move from the position where we are and bring in the new position? We hear that there was a corrigenda but it has not been introduced. 

For now, we are speculating on it, but the figures we are guided with as mentioned by the chairperson are the figures provided in the Budget estimates. Unless we are saying that there were errors in providing those figures. That has to go on record, but once we are told upfront that no change was made, even as the ministry had other pressing requirements, it was not possible for the committee to accommodate. That means our guide are the figures we have and, therefore, any change should clearly come out from the committee and the minister. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: I would like to get clarification from the chairperson of the committee whether he is in agreement with the figures that have just been read by the minister, because it has been a general trend that after the committees interface with the ministries, the Minister of Finance has on this floor brought figures and people are so flabbergasted that they just pass the figures. So, Mr Chairman, are you in agreement with the minister’s figures because it is not only today. Every year we pass budgets, the Ministry of Finance comes with a new figure of which the committee may not be aware. Chairman of the committee, are you in agreement with those figures? I thank you.

NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. This trend of things is becoming very dangerous. We debate in committees basing on the initial figures, then when we come here and the minister knows we are tired, he turns around. I also want to seek guidance from you. A few minutes ago, we agreed that pension is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. The Minister is saying the total here is Shs 115 billion. Has he taken into consideration the arrears in this case? 

Finally, this business of changing things, I remember when we scrapped Graduated Tax - 

THE SPEAKER: If I may ask, are these changes prejudicial to the interest of the ministries? Because I could not follow, I do not have the figures with me here. But I just want to find out, are the changes prejudicial? Are they reducing something we acted on when we voted a Vote-on-Account? Is it reducing? If it is not -  

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I can give some explanation. We had an opportunity to meet with the minister and the Ministers of Local Government and Public Service to harmonise these figures. Of course, we found out that in some areas, for example, when it goes to vote 005, the problem was the recurrent figure. What the committee had indicated here is what the ministry had requested. Then what we have as Shs 8.9 billion or Shs 8 billion, Shs 900,000 is what the Ministry of Finance could afford to give. So, that is how it brings in the changes and the Shs 8 billion is what is in the estimates book now. So, that is what causes the problem. 

Then, on the development figures, we found out that actually, we had omitted the Shs 200 million. It is just a slight error there, an omission in typing, which brought out that problem. 

Then when it goes to the donor project also some  - 

THE SPEAKER: But my question is, have these changes improved the financial position of your ministries?

MR YIGA: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: They have improved?

MR YIGA: They have harmonised that. This is the position now. So, when it goes on vote 146, we also had a problem of arithmetic in calculating, giving us the final figure. Otherwise, when you add the Shs 2.8 billion and Shs 700 million, it goes to Shs 3.5 billion. So, we as a committee had made a technical error in arithmetic, which we concurred and corrected.

Then when it goes to vote 001, the Ministry of Local Government, the major problem comes with the development figure, which now goes to Shs 9.7 billion. We found out that actually, we had not captured the tax component, which is included there. So, we had to put it there. But then also, when you add it up, it does not change much. Actually, the sub-total goes to Shs 129,294,000,000. So, there is not much change there also. 

When it goes to vote 147, what we found out was that actually we had also omitted the tax component in the development item by something like Shs 70 million, which we also corrected and we want Parliament to note. 

Therefore, with the other donor project, we found out that this money has to come from the Local Government Sector Improvement Project (LGSIP) and that money is also included in the Ministry of Local Government. So, it would be double counting. The ministry conceded that they are going to give Shs 810 million from their donor project to the Local Government Finance Commission. So, we also conceded there.

On Local Government votes 501 to 580 and vote 751 to 764, Mr Speaker, the problem for us as a committee - actually we had captured everything right according to the submission we got from the Ministry of Local Government. when you go to page 62 on the section of Ministry of Local Government policy statement, from 61, they give you a list of these conditional grants which are going to the districts. They also included grants which are administered by the Ministry of Education directly. That is why the committee ended up capturing that Shs 96 billion. But we are informed that that money should be removed, Ministry of Education prefers to administer the money directly until Parliament and Ministry of Finance changes the format. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying that the committee appreciates these changes.

MR YIGA: Yes, we do. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, we are honestly lost. As you said earlier, we needed to know the trail because we are making a law; we are appropriating money. The ministry makes a request, and the committee scrutinizes it and makes adjustments, upwards or downwards, and then makes recommendations. But Mr Speaker, that is not in the report of the committee. 

Therefore, what we are getting now is basically off cuff.  As you said earlier, the report was saying, “This is what the ministry requested” and we appreciated that their hands were tied. So, the quick thing to do if you have to scrutinise is to compare with the baseline. 

So, in between, the committee is now changing that there was a middle ground that was agreed to. But that trend is not included in the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Minister, our committee has reported that they are satisfied with the change – this is what they have said. The chairman has spoken for the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the committee had the minister; why didn’t he agree with them then? Why are they agreeing now? Why did you read to us wrong figures, yet you said you agreed? Did you agree at lunch time?

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I have informed the members that some cases were technical arithmetic errors which can be corrected. To err is human, but in the end –

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, our committee is satisfied with the changes. 

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, we have a procedure in which committee reports are made and made available to the floor of the House. If at the time of consultation, the hon. Minister had any variations to make, why didn’t he make those variations to the committee so that when the report comes before us and figures are read, we are satisfied that due diligence has been done at committee level. 

At this moment, we do not have those figures and we do not know the basis for the changes. And the chairman of the committee is saying they are satisfied. To what extent is the whole committee satisfied, because he is not the only one who signs that report. 

So, I want to seek your guidance; how do we proceed on the basis of the agreement between the chairman and the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Supposing there was a genuine need for correction, do you think we would have that correction before we voice our approval. Is it proper that this correction came before we approve the figure which might be lower than the figure they want to provide? Hon. Member, I think you have said what you had to say; we have understood you. But the committee is saying that they are satisfied, they got the right explanation. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence, the figures read to us the changes that have been made – if you have a copy, you will note that the changes are substantial and they do not have the authority of the committee. So, we would rather prefer that section 18 of the report be revisited by the committee because of the substantial changes. 

The other aspect that has just been introduced by the chairperson is that some figures here have changed because of the inclusion of tax components that had not been – (Interruption)

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, you could look at the totals that I read out and see whether the changes are substantial. For vote 005, the total was Shs 156,975,000,000 we have been corrected by the Ministry of Finance that it should be 156,975,409,999 this is all. The correction is what is in the books. It is only a small difference of 400,000 in that vote; should we go back to the committee because of a small arithmetic error which can be corrected here? 

When you go to vote 146 the figures there are Shs 2.8 billion and Shs 700 million. When you add them up, it goes to Shs 3.5 – I do not see any big deal over that issue. This is just an arithmetic error which can be corrected here; we do not have to go back to the committee.

When it comes to vote 011, Ministry of Local Government, the total figure which I read was Shs 129,180,000,000 and we are corrected here that there are some few things that we missed out. The correction now comes to Shs 129,294,000,000 a difference of less than Shs 100 million. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When my Shadow Minister of Finance stood up to raise that issue, it is not because he wanted to waste time. I think we as Parliament should follow the procedure. We do appreciate the changes which have been made in as far as the resource requirements of the sector are concerned, we are grateful for the positive change. 

We would probably have been more disappointed if the Minister for Finance had adjusted it downwards. But having said that, as Parliament and at this critical appropriation stage where we are allocating resources, it is only proper that in future, the chairpersons of the committees with the assistance of the technical staff they have at their disposal during the course of their committee work, should iron out these things with the Ministry of Finance so that when we come here, we are able to move smoothly in tandem. 

For today, we are able to absolve you of your inequities but –(Interjections)– yes, I see my colleague shaking his head, but we could have decided to wriggle on. But all we are saying is that you need to admit that something went amiss and next time, we don’t want to see such kind of things derailing us. Thank you.

4.05
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to make some observations and to also seek clarification on the issues raised within the report and others that were not raised. 

First of all, I want to mention that I was in my constituency yesterday at the burial of one of the pensioners, who unfortunately died before he received what was legally due to him, having been on retirement for over six years. It is so painful and it must be disgraceful to us for people to legitimately serve, put in their best and whatever they have, and at their time of need, we come here and dilly dally and we can’t make provisions that help them. It is very hurting and the Ministry of Public Service must ensure that at least something is done. 

When reading the report, I saw where the problem starts. When you read the mission statement of the ministry, it talks about the current public officers. At lunch time, I interacted with the Minister for Public Service and I asked her who plans for the people that have retired, and how we conceptualise their needs if the mission statement of the ministry does not capture their needs. This is where the problem starts. 

If you read the report and look at the mission statement of the ministry, there is nothing that refers to the retired people at all. I am aware that some pensioners have even died at the Ministry of Public Service. Others have died in their vehicles trying to pursue what is legitimately theirs and we come here and talk as Members of Parliament as if there is no big problem. 

Mr Speaker, I would have loved for the committee when summarising the achievements, to highlight the core activities of a ministry. When you look at the achievements of a ministry here, you will see seminars, procurement etcetera. What are the reasons that the Ministry of Public Service exists? Those are the issues on which we must evaluate whether their achievements are in tandem with their mission statements that they intend to achieve. But when you look at the general things, this is basically Lwaali. 

I want to request committees that when evaluating statements of ministries, we must in future, first of all, separate the core functions of a ministry from why it exists, and how the previous activities have been able to enable them to achieve what they intend to achieve.

The other problem that I want to look at is that there is a problem with the way the pensioners access information and utilise it. Quite often, many pensioners move more than 10 times to the Ministry of Public Service and when they reach there, after the district officials have gone through their documents and certified that they are right, they are told that this and that are missing. 

Doesn’t the Ministry of Public Service liaise with the district officials to give them a checklist of requirements so that we save the retired people from commuting between Kabale, Gulu, Butaleja, Kampala and elsewhere? What do the district officials do? We should provide a checklist in order to save these people from the suffering that they go through every time. 

When reading page 12 of this report on the issue of recruitment, although it was generally talking about district service, they said that there was a lot of political interference in the recruitment process. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that at one time when the Police cadets where recruited, this Parliament was forced to ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to bring the application forms and even a select committee was set up to look at how the recruitment process was done. What was evident from the list that was provided is that districts from where the top leadership of the police came from had an unusual advantage and they said that this was a meritorious examination and that it was a coincidence that competitors from the districts where the top leadership came from were more bright and had to be many in number. 

But progressively, this Parliament, Government and the ministry, must begin considering whether quota systems should not be employed at the time of recruitment. This has been done in many countries, and it has been successful. This is the only way we can give affirmative action to certain areas that may not be politically skilled or politically advantaged or strategically positioned, to enable their sons and daughters have a fair partaking of the national cake. 

These are issues that we feel should be raised for future consideration. I do not know whether these issues were considered at committee level, and what the view of the committee is on these challenges that people are facing in the country. 

There is an issue which this Parliament passed, but it is very unfair and skewed against the district officials and the district councillors. 

Mr Speaker, we passed a law to the effect that if the district councillors participated in doing business with the districts where they preside, it would be conflict of interest. We do not want councillors to trade with their districts. 

But, unfortunately, Members of Parliament trade with Government. It is not bad to trade because the law allows them to. But I wonder why if we must have a specific law preventing district councillors from doing business with the district councils because of conflict of interest, how much more would the same affect Members of Parliament doing business with Government. 

Actually in Rwanda, there was a law that was passed and through that law, Members of Parliament were barred from doing business with Government, and when that law was adopted, six Members of Parliament resigned because they chose to trade with Government other than to legislate –(Member timed out_)

4.13
MS FARIDAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for their good observations and recommendations, and allow me to comment on two issues in this report. 

One, the committee made a recommendation to popularise local service tax and local hotel tax. This is a good idea, but it is not going to help our local governments very much. 

You are all aware of the problems these local governments have as far as financing is concerned. When it comes to the rural districts, local service tax and local hotel tax is not helping us in any way, and I think if we are going to add in a lot of money to popularise these taxes, it is not going to help.

When they were introducing this tax, they told us that they are introducing it to help local governments with their funding. But as we speak, this tax is not helping the governments at all. The local hotel tax is just in the urban councils, and we are all aware that urban councils are semi-autonomous, and all the money that they get goes to the urban councils and the districts are left alone. So, what happens in that case? 

I would like to commend the committee that they made a recommendation that Government should look at viable solutions in finding a solution to local government financing. 

I would propose - and I think the ministry officials are here as well as the ministers. There is a tax that is very sure and one of the surest taxes that we get in districts is the Pay as You Earn. Why doesn’t the ministry come up and say a certain percentage of the Pay as You Earn that is collected by the districts remains at the districts? This is because these people use their stationery and their personnel but at the end of it all, it goes to URA. Why doesn’t just a small percentage remain at the districts such that they can also be able to run their activities? 

Last year when we were debating the Budget, there was a proposal that was on this Floor where they said that they had increased Value Added Tax from 17 percent to 18 percent, and that one percent increment was supposed to help these local governments in increasing the G.Tax compensation, but the minister denied that undertaking. Why doesn’t Government look at that proposal critically, that one percent increment? Why can’t Government have that increment of VAT go to the local government in form of G.Tax compensation because Shs 45 billion is just a joke? 

We have 80 districts and we are adding on more districts, but we still have Shs 45 billion compensation. This is not going to help. Some of our districts were collecting a lot of money. Mubende District was collecting Shs 4 billion in G.Tax compensation but when you give it Shs 500 million as compensation, it doesn’t work. I think this should be looked into.

Still on local service tax, there is also a law, like hon. Dombo said, that Parliament passed that allows local governments to use 20 percent of local revenue for council activities. I think we are not being realistic because if you expect a district council to run a council activity on Shs 40 million a year, I think this is not realistic and it is high time that we looked into this proposal and either increased the percentage to say 40 percent of local revenue because, the local revenue is not there, and I think that is something that Government should look into.

My other point is on the ‘hard-to-reach’ or ‘hard-to-stay’ policy. I am happy that this policy has come and I would like to commend the ministry for this. This is something that we have been longing for and which we needed many years ago. However, I am really sceptical about the definition of ‘hard-to-reach’ or “hard-to-stay’. I hope that it is not going to be by region because the different areas that we come from have different peculiarities. I hope that the policy and the definition in that policy are very adequate to address all the peculiarities we have in our districts. 

I come from Mubende District and I didn’t know that it was a hard-to-reach area. We have a district hospital in Mubende town just 140 kilometres from Kampala, but the district has advertised for doctors for that hospital three times. The first time we wanted six doctors and there was no application at all. The third time we got two applications but when they were shortlisted, one doctor appeared for the interviews and one didn’t. The one who was offered a job, I think when he got to the hospital he said he could not work there. So, we should look at all these peculiarities. We should not look at only increasing the salaries but also the conditions of these people and where they live. (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, this is information for the members to appreciate. Each area has different peculiarities. For instance, if you looked at this report on page 26, you would look and see land boundary conflicts in some districts like Butaleja and others. There is a huge problem because in Butaleja, Mbale, Manafwa and related districts, the Ministry of Lands started to do surveys and demarcation but they did not complete the exercise yet many people have died. 

Recently, when I interacted with the Minister for Lands, he said if the Minister for Local Government provides money, we shall do this. These peculiarities like she was saying are very important and should -

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you for that information but you have taken a lot of my time. Anyway, thank you. 

As I conclude, the conditions that these people work in should be improved. Now that the Ministry of Public Service has started and brought an increment in the salaries, I think the other ministries should also come on board, that is Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health and so forth. What are we doing to better the conditions of these people? Otherwise our women are going to continue dying; our children are still going to stay in the villages, not receiving quality education because of the conditions.

One of the priorities and issues that Government should not sleep over is funding of local governments. This should be a big priority otherwise we are going to see all the good things we have on paper not benefiting the citizens who are supposed to benefit if we sit back. 

Let us look at all the possible measures we can put in place to see that these local governments are effective. Otherwise, we as Members of Parliament, we are also going to give up because our plates are full. Up to now, a sub- county chairman can call you to fund a sub-county council. That’s not acceptable and I think it is high time Government looked into this issue to see that things go as planned.

The ‘dot com’ era we are in - the people we employ in these districts and sub-counties are young cadres right from university. There is the ‘dot com’ era we are talking about. Somebody wants to go to a place though it is 1000 miles from Kampala; somebody would want to go to a room and switch on or off a light; somebody would want to watch TV and see what is going on in the country. If we cannot better these conditions then I think we will be doing a disservice to our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we have sufficiently debated this matter. And should you want to have further debate on the issue of public service and local government, after we have completed the Appropriation Bill, before we go for recess, I will give you a day – and this is what I advise the committees, you should not stop dealing with your sectors during the Budget season. You are free to request for a date to debate matters affecting your sectors. I have told you this many times but you have not utilised this opportunity. 

4.23
MINISTER FOR STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (MRS PRISCA B.  MBAGUTA SEZI): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank you for your contributions over the subject of pensions. I will start with the issue of referring to the Ministry of Public Service as not being efficient. I want to say that the Ministry of Public Service manages the systems and policies that affect the public service, and I want to give one indicator that you can use to asses the Ministry of Public Service. 

The first factor you should use is whether in this country the Ministry of Public Service has ever failed to pay public officers their salary on a monthly basis. Currently, the civil service stands at 243,000 civil servants and the Ministry of Public Service has devotedly, year in and year out, paid their salaries by the 28th of every month. 

I also want to give honourable members an indicator on pensions. All pensioners on our payroll are 51,000. I want to assure Members that these 51,000 pensioners are paid between the 15th and 20th of every month and their pensions are in the banks. And honourable Members who are pensioners and are here can testify to that. 

I want to assure you honourable members that the pensioners who are on the payroll are paid through their bank accounts. And the reason why we moved to bank accounts was that we did not want anyone in this Republic to fumble with the payment of pensioners’ money. 

I also want to assure you honourable members that as a Ministry, we shall continue to oblige ourselves to pay the pensioners earlier than active civil servants so that they do not go to the banks and start lining up with active civil servants. I want to urge the honourable members that you can actually check this statement I have made of paying by 20th of every month.

On the issue of pension, I want to appreciate your concern because it is our concern as well. If there were resources to pay pensioners, we would actually be feeling much happier. 

But I want to state that we have laid a strategy with the Ministry of Finance that the Shs 78.4 billion that has hitherto been given to us should be stepped up, which the Ministry of Finance has done, so that we do not keep involving ourselves in creating arrears. By raising the Budget from Shs 78.4 billion to Shs 103 billion, it means that we are now reducing on creating arrears. We shall now keep on bringing on board those who have created arrears earlier. 

I also want to inform the honourable members that some of the pensioners that say that they are not being paid, and I would like you to crosscheck with this, are actually on the payroll but they are looking for their lumpsum that has been revalidated.

I would also like to say that there are some who may not have come on board, particularly with the issue of death gratuity, and this is where our ministry needs your support. That when public officers die, and depending on the relatives’ education, especially the widows and orphans, they say that they do not know where to start. 

I want to use this afternoon to appeal to public officers to share with their wives or husbands, the issue of their employment and where they are in terms of documentation and to also advice them that in any event, if they die, they should go to the Administrator General. Let me ask you to help us because in some cases they do not know. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, there has been an issue regarding who looks after pensioners in retirement. As a ministry, our obligation is to pay pension timely. Other sectors will have to involve our pensioners say in enterprise development, so that they can utilise the money. But as a ministry we have started pre-retirement training for active civil servants so that they can be guided before time. 

Earlier on, I had indicated that civil servants should retire on time. The regulations indicate that they should give notice six months before retirement, and the practice shows that when they do so they actually access the pension payroll. 

On the subject of integrated payroll systems - (Interruption)   

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, the minister has made a statement which might cause confusion tomorrow and cause problems to her. Could the Minister make a distinction between pensioners who are on the payroll of public service and pensioners who are supposed to be paid through the Ministry of Local Government? 

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, I was coming to that. As I said earlier in the morning, the public service, central government ministries, staff who retire; those public officers who were decentralised to local governments- currently, the primary teachers are all paid through the Centre, through the Ministry of Public Service.

The staff who have been recruited by the district service commissions in their respective local governments are paid by local governments. That is the distinction and that is what the law provides. 

And you may recall that our ministry, having had the plight of local governments, requested for funds which we were given, Shs17.5 billion and later Shs30 billion which was paid as a relief. And arising out of that there is a problem, the Local Government does not know who was paid and who was not paid. 

The local government did submit their indebtedness with the names. They were actually audited by the Local Government and our ministry was only to pay. Following that payment, both for the central government and local governments, we issued a list of pensioners in the papers. You may even recall that some of you, honourable colleagues, wanted us to verify why individuals appeared without money, and I indicated that we did not include the money because we had to protect our pensioners from the society. We also indicated that – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have made a statement and I thought somebody would follow it up. You said that pensioners should retire early so that you are able to calculate. In your system, don’t you know when someone is supposed to retire? If he retires when you predicted, what is the package? Don’t you know that from your system?

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, in 2005 before I became a minister, we designed a computer programme to give notice to public officers that they are due to retire. This notice is on the payroll. The payroll does reflect, through the payslips, to the individual that they have three or six months in which to retire. I have actually tested this because I also go to the field. I would like to say that the teachers particularly appreciate that notice. The notice is on individual payslips and if the payslips are not being issued, I will ask our inspectorate to monitor the issuance of payslips to ensure that everybody gets that notice on the payslip.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Minister. Mr Speaker, I think the concern we have is not just that individuals do not know when they ought to retire. I think individuals have an idea when they will be retiring; it is the system in Public Service that does not seem to know when individuals are retiring or it just deliberately does not make use of the information that it has. 

The system prints that information, sends it to a one Alaso who is a teacher and says, “Alaso, you will be retiring in two months”. But at the same time, the Ministry of Public Service does not make use of that information. As such, I have to begin running up and down, coming to remind Ministry of Public Service that I have since retired, this was the last payslip which was sent to me and I have worked with you for the last 40 years. You have the information and you are warning me in advance that in two months time I will be retiring; why don’t you just shift that information and give me a pension immediately I retire?

Secondly, the minister talked about the names that were published in the newspapers as having benefited or having accessed the pension payroll. The issues surrounding the names that were published in the newspapers also included the fact that some of them were already receiving their pension so they were not totally new pensioners as we were being made to believe. Also, some names appeared but there was actually no money on their bank accounts. Those are some of the issues that need to be clarified. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, following what hon. Alaso has said, the minister should actually tell us why, when one is going to access this pension payroll, one has to attach to the form a letter of appointment. I was appointed about 50 years ago and you want me to attach a letter of appointment and letters of promotions today! (Laughter) All this should be in their files. It should be in their custody. Why should I be the one to provide? 

THE SPEAKER: I think what the members are saying is that information is needed. You should update your information system so that you have it. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister has drawn our attention to a good computer programme that she designed before she assumed the frontbench in this Parliament. It is also a common fact among civil servants that year in, year out, there are civil servants who go and swear new affidavits. They come up and say, “Since then, it has come to my attention that I was not born on such a date”, and they continue to grow younger and younger. Even when you physically know that this person is already 60 plus, the record as authenticated by a court affidavit is that this person is young. How do you now manage these changes so that when this person is about to retire, he or she is timely served in terms of pension?

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, the issue of pension seems to need more time. I want to say that we shall come here with a comprehensive statement on the subject.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

MRS SEZI: On the issues that were raised on IPPS, we have already piloted this IPPS programme in a number of local governments and a number of ministries, and we shall cascade it operationally in 2010. That is also when access to pension from the active payroll will happen. 

On pay reform, I want to inform honourable members that we are undertaking a transformation study of the public service, and this will address the concerns on pay. 

On the issue of national records, the consultancy has already been completed and we shall soon go for breaking of the ground.

On the subject of the Civil Service College, a consultant had been hired. Procedurally under procurement, we had to undertake the consultancy because of the technicalities, to ensure that we are given a cost-benefit analysis as part of the procedure.

On the subject -(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Hon. Minister, I really appreciate your patience with me and thank you, Mr Speaker. The House did pass a loan and it is that loan that had that Civil Service College. The House recommended then that instead of creating a new institution, the money should be given to the Ministry of Education, specifically to upgrade Uganda Management Institute, and we all agreed on that. I am, therefore, surprised that Ministry of Public Service is behaving as if the House did not pronounce itself on that matter. Actually, the minister knows fully well that if she had not pressed that day, I would not have passed that loan. 

Now, what studies are you doing out there that exclude the Uganda Management Institute? Are you defying the conditions that we put to you when passing the loan? I think we should be brought on board so that we know that when we deal with Ministry of Public Service, they take the House for granted; they do not care about our input. We really need to be helped. 

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, we are not taking the House for granted; we are actually refining the assignments. I want to say that Uganda Management Institute is not being excluded; I did not say that. I want to conclude –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we sit in this House to deliberate, we do so against a background of information. All we know is that in the history of the development of the civil service in this country, Uganda Management Institute was established with the support from the Royal Institution of Public Administration. Its purpose was specifically to groom and nurture the civil service. It was on this basis that the Parliament, in its wisdom, said that there is no need to have a new establishment; it is better to develop what we already have.  

Now, I am a little surprised, and I wonder whether we are serious when my fellow bureaucrat, the hon. Minister, stands up and says, “Well, Uganda Management Institute will be one of those to be considered.” We can bring out the Hansard and succinctly note the page of the Hansard where the commitment was made, that in order for us to approve this budget, we needed this to be in Uganda Management Institute. Surely, Madam Minister, do you need further consultations on that? 

Even if you need consultations, the Leader of Government Business is here. So, a small thing of this nature should not derail us. This is something we already agreed upon. Can we take it that what Parliament resolved as a condition for approving that loan still stands? In order to improve the civil service, we decided to rely on Uganda Management Institute as was the purpose for which the institute was established.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, we have not changed the position of Parliament. The consultant has been put in place to advise us on the design of the Civil Service College under Uganda Management Institute. That is the clarification I was making. Also, they will ensure that the PPDA procedures are abided with. 

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Ahabwe Perez): Mr Speaker, in view of your statement, I do not know how to proceed. 

There are so many issues that were addressed to my ministry. First of all, I want to thank the committee for their report and I thank the members for their comments. There are so many issues that came up, but I will pick just a few to save on time. 

On remuneration of councillors, the ministry is studying the idea and we are in advanced stages. We will advise you appropriately. There is already an idea to give some token to the LCIs and LCIIs and other levels of councillors. We shall report to you when the time comes. 

On the proposal that all counties should be districts, we have a technical team in the ministry which is working on the subject. I can assure you that their terms of reference are ready, and we are about to procure a consultant to look at the cost and benefit in a holistic manner. They will also look into a situation where we can operationalise the regional governments in the process. 

On local government tax, it is true our people have not been sensitised very well, but we are continuing to sensitise the people. It is true the rate of turnover is not yet good. We have realised so far about Shs 3.6 billion from the local service tax in all the local governments, and about Shs 1 billion from the hotel tax. We are still sensitising the people and we hope that in the process, the yield will improve. 

Also, remember that we have not taxed commercial farmers and there is a reason for this - we are consulting on this. We have developed guidelines for commercial farmers. I want to emphasise this because somebody said there is a contradiction - we are talking about farmers who are commercial, who produce for the market, not the peasants. Once the guidelines are out, we shall share them with you so that some of our disadvantaged societies are left out of the bracket of taxation. 

People raised issues on urbanisation. It is true we are creating town councils, municipalities, but all this is because you are also requesting for them. I do not want to pinpoint individuals, but certainly it is our mandate to do that. 

Some of you have raised issues like those of Kasese, Kabuyanda and others; we are continually updating the list and Cabinet is all too happy to support us in the process. The issues of Ngora and other districts have already been processed and we are soon submitting them for scrutiny by Cabinet.

The issue of markets -(Interruption) 

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. I am seeking clarification. Well, it is within your mandate to keep upgrading growing areas into town councils, municipalities, name it, but the question is, why are you doing this upgrading in isolation of structural planning? The problem that the committee chairperson raised in the report is as a result of giving lip service to structural planning in this country, and we should realise that we are sitting on a time bomb. So, what do we intend to do in that direction? Thank you.

MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. He just mentioned the creation of new districts. I remember sometime back, we had a meeting regarding the creation of a new district out of Masaka District, and you did tell us that there was a committee set up by Parliament to study and see how, for example, the Capitation Grant that goes to districts is computed, so that we know how much goes to the big districts like Masaka, which has got over a million people, and how much goes to those that do not even have 1,000 people. Now, when you create these new districts, can you tell us what will happen, because unlike other debates that we always have here in the House, when it comes as a duty of a Member of Parliament in the appropriation of the Budget – 

MR OKECHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, my friend Matthius, for giving way. The committee that you are talking about never took off in this House. There was conflict over leadership and it never went anywhere. So, this is actually still a problem. In fact, it was even dissolved.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for the information. Members, as you can see, I will not say that we were taken for a ride because we wanted to know how the computation is done to the districts - where districts that have a bigger population do not earn or get something appropriate to the population they have. As a Minister for Local Government, you continue to create more districts as they are demanded for, and for those of us who still have larger districts with bigger populations; we are now appropriating the Budget. We would like to know before we approve this creation of new districts, what the computation is and the formula that is used to finance these districts?

The second point on which I seek clarification from you is that on page 26, the committee further learnt that a number of initiatives are lined up for financial year 2009/2010 to redevelop and improve urban markets. When I look here, I can see Kalerwe Market, Kizito Market and Nakulabye Market. These are markets on individual land. Are you telling us that you are going to develop these markets on which you do not have ownership? How can you involve Government to develop a market where you do not have ownership of the land?

MS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you; I am seeking clarification from the minister. Is he aware that as they create new districts they also create a problem of boundaries between those districts? How are you prepared to settle the boundary issue between districts? In this report, even the committee mentions conflict between the boundaries of the districts, but they do not give us the concrete solutions of solving those boundary conflicts, where people are losing lives. When these districts are together, you do not hear about these conflicts but the moment you create new districts, then you start hearing that there is an issue of conflict between boundaries. Can you assure this House that before you create districts, you will start with the boundaries of those areas where you want to create the new districts? I thank you. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my friend the minister. The minister made a fundamental statement that in his ministry, there is a technical team which is looking at the –(Interjection)- I thought you said that; you said that there is a technical team which is looking at the issue of formation of new districts. I want a statement from the minister to the effect that before that technical team reports to the minister or to Cabinet, no more new districts will be created. 

MR AHABWE: Thank you colleagues for those clarifications you have sought. Mr Speaker, I have not heard of a situation where when any new law is proposed to be enacted, the old one is repealed before the new one. I am trying to answer Hon. Ben Wacha’s comment – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have a part to play in the creation of new districts. New districts cannot be created unless you give a go ahead. So, you should also be serious when considering the minister’s request for new districts. 

MR EPATAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to congratulate my colleague hon. Ben Wacha for recently getting Oyam District -(Laughter)- and I would also like to observe that the Minister of Local Government came with a motion which had seven districts for this financial year, and another seven for next financial year. 

However, the ministry admitted that certain district requests had not been processed - I think a total of 15. My clarification now should be that those 15 districts which were in the pipeline should be considered along with the seven which had been earlier proposed for the next financial year. So, the ministry ought to amend this motion and come up with a new list of about 22 districts - (Laughter) - I think that is the way to go.

MR MUWULIZE: The information I wanted to give to the House is that in the areas where the resolution actually came from to Parliament - it has actually become public in those areas where they are expectant of districts and when requests were made like, for example, in Buikwe, we received a technical team from the ministry. They also indicated that they reported to the ministry. So, I do not want the House to take it for granted that maybe the ministry brought up things and the technical teams did not come. I was on the ground and I saw a technical team in Buikwe. 

There are areas where there are problems, but if given opportunity, members who requested for these districts can come up to defend them. Some of us came with documentation, the ministry has them, and we have no problem defending them. Otherwise we are creating commotion down there while others are just coming up with requests. I request you, Mr Speaker, that what has come up on the Floor goes in the same spirit, and as for the new ones, we shall support them in the same spirit of solidarity.

THE SPEAKER: I think the honourable minister should help Parliament understand why you requested for the creation of new districts, by giving reasons. Instead of just coming here and saying, “Give me these new districts”, without giving us reasons.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, there is nothing that has happened in this country that has not happened elsewhere before. Not this scramble for new districts, not ring fencing, not pension problems; everything has happened before. And, if we took a little trouble to get out of the box and look elsewhere in the world, we would know that they have happened and borrow a leaf from their problems, challenges and solutions.

In Denmark, there was a scramble for districts. They scrambled for districts until they went up to 270 because everybody wanted a district for the reasons that everybody in Uganda wants them for. And for your information in Rubaga, we want a district very soon. (Laughter) I am not joking, because there are 500,000 people in Rubaga and we only get Shs 3.0 billion; it has 600 schools and 200 churches and so much more.

In Denmark, this scramble led to the creation of 270 districts and all the money was used to pay taxes and administration costs until they came to their senses and sat down and said it does not work, and mapped out 14 federal states. (Laughter) Today, Demark is one the best welfare states, and one of the fastest growing countries, because they came to their senses and came out with 14 federal states.

As I wind up, most of the debate that I have heard this afternoon on peculiarities of different places, on accessibility of pensioners, people want passports and they have to travel all the way to Kampala; birth certificates, death certificates, name it, the congestion. Mr Speaker, that can be sorted very adequately through federalism. I think it is time that we started debating the question of federalism in this country. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister complete.

MR AHABWE: I thought that when I talked about the rationalisation that our technical team is working on, I was actually moving towards what you are proposing, although not in the very design that you are proposing. But I want to agree with you. Normally when we come here with a motion, it is not as detailed as when we take it to Cabinet. When we take these proposals to Cabinet, they are completely detailed with justifications. Maybe at some point, I could lay some of those justifications on Table for members to note. We actually do justify why those areas need those districts. 

I appreciate that the Ministry of Local Government has the mandate to start the process, but for sure, under the Constitution Article 179, specifically (1) and (4), it clearly spells out the constitutional mandate on who decides on district creation or alteration of boundaries, and that is Parliament. For us, we facilitate the process and it is up to you to agree with us or disagree with us. 

I want to agree with hon. Kasigwa that the way we are moving towards creating urban centres, we do not seriously put into consideration prior planning. We create so that we plan properly; that is what the Ministry of Local Government does. And the planning for urban centres is a mandate of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning. For that matter, at one time I had even thought that this department of urban planning should possibly have been made part of the Ministry of Local Government so that we move together. But for us, once we see a centre rapidly urbanising, we try to intervene and intercept the process so that it is planned properly. That is where we stop. Then the Ministry of Urban planning comes in and does its work, but we can rationalise all those ministries in future.

Mr Speaker, district allocation formula is really very clear. You may look at the population but population is not the overriding parameter. We look at other parameters and they are many: Education, literacy rates, health status, water coverage etc. When we have looked at all those parameters then we allocate the money. The formula is here, it is in the Constitution, it is in the Local Government Act, it is in the budget framework paper. So, if you went to look at those documents, you would finally find why some districts get more money than others, because of the parameters me and you worked and agreed on.

Boundary disputes 

These boundary disputes even exist in those districts which are as old as myself, and these disputes have been existing. But we at the Ministry of Local Government are trying as much as possible to reach out to those areas under conflict, and if I may respond to hon. Dombo’s concern, he knows very well that we went together to first of all sensitise the population, and together with Ministry of Lands, we provided funding under Ministry of Local Government, gave money to the technical people under Ministry of Lands to do boundary re-demarcation and the exercise is about to get completed, save for the fact that the financial year came to an end and we run short of money. 

But now we have some little money remaining to complete boundary re-demarcation between Tororo and Butaleja and the next phase will be Mbale and Budaka. We have programmed all this and we are also reaching out to those other areas that the committee identified in their report, So, we are really working on this.

It is true we are trying to reach out to these markets, which are poorly located and poorly managed within Kampala, especially, and some of them along the roads and highways. It is also true that some of these markets are either on private individual’s land or private institutions land like Buganda Kingdom, but our people are negotiating with Buganda Kingdom, for example, regarding Kasubi market, and we are about to conclude our negotiations as well as with Kalerwe, which stands on private land. We are really negotiating so that if it means leasing, then we shall lease so that these markets are worked on. (Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. The clarification I want to seek is, as a ministry, what is your core business? As a Ministry of Local Government, what is your business in markets? Please, tell us why the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Trade and local authority are there. Thank you.

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, our business in markets is because these markets are operated by our local authorities. Kampala City Council handles these markets, and it is our local government. Jinja Municipality is our local government, so we try to come in to assist in developing and modernising these markets. We don’t manage them and we don’t even give leases. We just facilitate the process of proper management and proper redevelopment of these markets. We help them, but we don’t participate in the actual running of those markets.

As regards Nakasero market, Kisekka market and Owino market, we have a policy that Cabinet passed these markets, and that first priority for development is given to the vendors, and if the vendors fail, then they look for partners. It is only when those two alternatives fail that Government comes in and invests through those local authorities, these markets. This is what we are doing in Kisekka market, Owino market and Nakasero market to begin with.

The Attorney-General’s Office is the one that is handling the negotiation process, and they are going to agree on some of those monies for compensation. For us, we shall only come in to facilitate the other processes that I told you about.

Honourable members, so many issues have been raised. I want you to bear with me so that possibly we can interact at close range with you individually or collectively as groups. Alternatively, you can ask me to come and give a comprehensive statement on the issues that I have raised, but there are so many that if I wanted to pick one by one, we would sleep here until tomorrow. So, I beg your indulgence that I wind up here, and then I can respond to others in future. Thank you very much.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.13
Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service
 
Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,993,460,999 under Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Vote 005: Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,201,040,000 under Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011: Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,904,890,000 under Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011: Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 9,719,950,000 under Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek your guidance. You are leaving out the figure for donor projects. I thought that was part of development. Where does that fall? Is it going to be appropriated or supplied differently? 

THE CHAIRMAN: In which vote?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you also left out about Shs 31.91 billion in the first one. Now here, there is Shs 115 billion. So, where does donor funding fall?

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem could be with the arrangement of the forms. I do not know why we should leave it out when it is reflected in the figures. Let them check and correct the error.

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 9,719,950,000 under Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146: Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,844,006,410 under Vote 146, the Public Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146: Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 711,790,000 under Vote 146, the Public Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147: Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,020,200,041 under Vote 147, the Local Government Finance Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147: Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 171,699,000 under Vote 147, the Local Government Finance Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501 to 580 and Votes 751 to 764: Equalisation Grant

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,494,158,802 under Votes 501-580 and Votes 751-764 for local authorities, be provided for as equalisation grant for the financial year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501 to 580 and 751 to 764: Conditional Grant

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,149,038,521,247 under Vote 501 to 580 and 751 to 764 for local authorities, be provided for as Conditional Grant for financial year 2009/2010.

MR YIGA: I would like to be clear on the figure because the figure is Shs 1,149,038,521,247. You were reading it as if it is 104.

THE CHAIRMAN: I agree with you. That is what I have said.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, when the Minister of Finance was making corrections to the figures, I heard him talk of item No.5. He was talking about Votes 501 to 580 and 751 to 768. That is what he says. But now we are appropriating up to 764. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Seven hundred and Sixty four - I think it is ok. Agreed? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501 to 580 and 751 to 764, Unconditional Grant 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 141,385,493,941 under Vote 501 to 580 and 751 to 764 for local authorities be provided for as Unconditional Grant for financial year 2009/2010.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I can see that these votes are running from 501 to 580. Those are 80 districts. The 751 to 764 are 14 districts. That makes 94 districts. I am not aware if we have approved all these districts, because the districts which are in our books, I think, are 80. So, I want to seek clarification from you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the question is what are these?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. What are these? Are there new districts in this group? 

THE CHAIRMAN: This Vote 751 to 764.

MR YIGA: Mr Chairman, from 751 to 764, those are the 13 municipalities and one city. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is clear, hon. Nandala-Mafabi? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501 to 580 and 751 to 764: Graduated Tax Compensation

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 45 billion, under Vote 501 to 580 and 751 to 764 for local authorities, be provided for as Graduated Tax compensation for financial year 2009/2010.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I recall that when we were dealing with VAT and we moved from 17 percent to 18 percent, we said one percent would compensate for the Graduated Tax which was being scrapped or suspended. I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance if this 45 billion is the one which is equal to one percent.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the answer is no. we are giving you the 45 as GT compensation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case, then the issue of having raised the VAT from 17 percent to 18 percent by one percent in order to compensate for Graduated Tax loses, the purpose was to help districts make up for the Graduated Tax they were going to lose.

So, if it is only 45 percent, isn’t it time now that we compute how much percentage should be 45 percent for VAT purposes, so that we increase only that percentage and not the whole one percent?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, at the time Graduated Tax was suspended, it was computed to a certain figure. But one percent increase in VAT could result in more than the amount of compensation. So, you could not equate one percent increase to the tax compensation because the two are not equal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, Mr Chairman, we can say that we are cheating districts. Either we get the one percent of the VAT which we put in the law and give it all to the districts, or we reduce the 45, because this Shs 45 billion at that time was equal to the districts.

Now the demands have increased; the population has increased; the demand for goods and services has increased – so, Shs 45 billion cannot match the districts. Even the districts we are creating every now and then need more money for compensation. 

I would propose that either we get the one percent as the VAT now or we scrap it, so that people can have more money for consuming goods during this period.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think my brother was not around yesterday when the Minister of Finance was addressing this issue. It is true that when we were increasing the VAT from 17 to 18, initially, it was proposed that one percent would go to the districts. 

The minister told us that when the VAT is collected, it is remitted to the Consolidated Fund. And, we are just looking at one item, the Graduated Tax compensation. But what about other facilitations which come from the centre to the local government? Actually, there is no way the local governments are being cheated. 

So, all we can do is to advocate for an increase on the amount of money released from the centre to the local government. But you may realise that if you take direct computation, it could even be less than the amount of money sent to the districts. 

So, I just want to inform you that the explanation was given yesterday, but unfortunately, you were not around.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, not being around does not mean I do not understand. We are saying that the Shs 45 billion we gave then is not enough now. We either change the name or we do not. If we do not change the name, compensation – as the population increases, the amount to be collected from graduated tax increases. That does not need any further explanation beyond that. 

If we want districts to operate, we should scrap graduated tax compensation and call it another name. But if we maintain it, they will say, we figures were going up; and that does not mean they should be stagnant at Shs 45 billion for four years. 

So, I would be very glad if the minister adjusts this figure, maybe by doubling it; even if we do not go with the one percent, we can find a way of dealing with it.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, yesterday, on page 9, in the Minister of Finance’s submission here in Parliament, the issue of the one percent was clarified. The issue of the Shs 45 billion is statutory under the Local Government Act CAP 243 “Transition provisions: notwithstanding the provision of this Act, Government shall continue to contribute the amount of at lease Shs 45 billion to the local government per year for a continuous period of three years to compensate for the vacuum created by the abolished Graduated Tax”. So, as far as we are concerned, this is our interpretation of this Shs 45 billion. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: And also, when we passed the Local Tax Act, we again said we should continue with this payment. So, what we can do is to further explore this, and then a substantive motion can come later, but I think we pass it. So now, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005: Donor Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 31,390,909,000 under Vote 005 be provided for as Donor Development for Financial Year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you recall that the Shs 31.3 billion had a contentious gap of Shs 5.8 billion. The concern was that this money should be shifted from public service to Uganda Management Institute. This is the money which we are talking about – the Civil Service College on page 9. You recall that when we passed this loan, one of the conditions was that this money would be put under Uganda Management Institute, the Shs 5.8 billion. It has been talked about here many times. 

So, Mr Chairman, my proposal is that we shift the Shs 5.8 billion from public service to Uganda Management Institute as agreed earlier on. 

MR YIGA: Mr Chairman, there is no need of shifting; of course, when approving the loan, the government made a commitment that the Civil Service College would be constructed at UMI. Now we expect the public service ministry to implement. So, it is their duty to go and implement that activity instead of passing on the money to UMI.

Vote 011 – Donor Development 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 115,670,000,000 under Vote 011 be provided for as Donor Development for Financial Year 2009/10. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, the chairperson of the committee has just told us that the proposed new districts which are supposed to be effective 1st July have not been catered for. My worry is, people down there have been preparing and now that you are under appropriation, my worry is we do not want a situation where by when the motion comes-

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nsubuga, why should we provide for something that has not come into existence; which is conditioned on our approval -(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we cannot budget for anticipation but is seek guidance; I have seen here a statutory vote of Shs 115 billion, and this is about pensioners - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Pensioners?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is here in the report of the committee. I know we are not supposed to appropriate it because by law it is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. My worry now is that if it is a direct charge as we are aware, is the minister going to adjust this figure or is he going to maintain this figure? And if he maintains this figure, what is our fallback position as Parliament because the money of pensioners should not have accrued to arrears as it is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. I just need guidance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. Explanation?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we have given the explanation of this on page 46 of the draft estimates. So, the issue of having double payment will not arise out of this Shs 12 billion that is going under arrears, and the Shs 103 billion that is going to go under recurrent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think he has not got me right. Something that is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund is the first call before any other, like salaries and pension; that applies to all pensions - even to pension arrears which we have been maintaining illegally. So, as a Minister of Finance, as you budget and as we go into appropriation, you must take into consideration that there is a direct charge on all the pension arrears this year. So, you either adjust your budgets now or you must look for money and deal with that problem. That is what I was trying to inform you. I think it is unfortunate that the professor does not understand me.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think those concerned had not appreciated that pension is directly charged on the Consolidated Fund without further appropriation. This is what the Pension Act says, but I think they have been appropriating some money and then pay or not pay. Next time when they take you to court, you will not have a defence because you could have a defence and say, “Parliament has not appropriated money for this item; that is why I am not paying”, But with a direct charge, then you have a problem.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the budget proposals for the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government, and have supplied with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for adoption of the report from the Committee of Supply. I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report from the committee of supply of the Budget. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: So, at least we have completed these votes —

5.47
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu West, Masaka): Mr Speaker, the honourable minister only moved in respect to the Ministry of Public Service, and the Ministry of Local Government; what about the Local Government Finance Commission and the Pubic Service Commission? 

THE SPEAKER: I think he took it that they fall under the ministry, but for purposes of clarity, can you do the needful?

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, when I said Ministry of Public Service, I also included all the commissions therein, and also when I said the Ministry of Local Government, I included the commissions therein. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it has come to my notice that some committees have activities outside Parliament while we are going on with this exercise. My appeal to you is that you suspend those activities so that we deal with this constitutional programme and finish it and later, you can carry out your activities. But let us not have activities outside when Parliament is sitting here to consider the Budget. Very soon, we shall complete it and, therefore, you will be able to have activities outside Parliament. 

According to the programme we had listed, although I was supposed to follow what the Opposition had suggested to me about the seven committees, apparently, I do not know the position of the Social Services Committee, because it is the one handling Health and Education, which were set out by the Opposition. Maybe what we do tomorrow is handle Trade, because it is ready and I understand even the reports are here. You can go with your reports, study them so that tomorrow we start with Trade. When Social Services are ready, we can also continue.

5.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I wanted to propose that we handle Tourism, Trade and Industry, and Information and Communication Technology, because the reports are not so involving.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Trade is set and we can add ICT. Are the reports available?

MR MIGEREKO: The reports are ready, the minister is around and the chairpersons of the committees are also around.

5.51
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I do not know why hon. Migereko is thinking of ICT when we should go in the order. The Committee of Physical Infrastructure report is ready and I am also here to present. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, hon. Nathan Byanyima is right; the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is ready for discussion, but our understanding was that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure tends to attract a lot of scrutiny and attention on the part of the members and is likely to take a lot more time than would Tourism, Trade and Industry, and ICT. Otherwise, I had not skipped it.

THE SPEAKER: What he is saying is that tomorrow we could clear these two small reports and the other one waits.

5.52
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, GENERAL (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was only appealing to the committee chairpersons that after they have used the ministerial policy statements, it is also important to try to marry their report with the draft estimates and what we did today. We were not doctoring the books but tallying these figures with the draft estimates, and if we can get the reports early like we are getting these ones now, we would be in a position to do this and possibly give you whatever changes in good time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What you are saying is that the figures in the draft estimates in the book are okay and completely accurate?

MR OMACH: Yes, this is the one that we are not relying on, and if there are any mistakes, they could be very few if any.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but you promise to give us a copy of what you read this afternoon?

MR OMACH: Most obliged sir.

5.53
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, yesterday or the day before - last week we were given a corrigenda here from the Ministry of Finance telling us that there were mistakes in that book; the draft estimates. So, I do not know what the minister is trying to tell us now. Should we take those as the gospel truth or we include the corrigenda there?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, corrigenda is part and parcel of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Is it part of that big volume?

MR OMACH: Once we give the corrigenda, it becomes part of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister and your staff, get hold of the corrigenda, look at the book, make the corrections and then tomorrow bring us copies and pages where corrections have been effected.

MR EPETAIT: I was considering leaving it but it was a matter of a consequential amendment. The Leader of Government Business directed the Education and Health ministers to be here tomorrow, but following the amendment by the Chief Whip, he has to make a consequential amendment as to who appears here tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: I think he had mentioned Trade and now ICT. 

Once again honourable members, I thank you for your time and ideas that have made us go through this exercise by clearing the Votes that we have. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. House is adjourned to - let us start at 10.00 a.m. Can we start at 10.00 a.m.? [Members: “9.00 a.m.”] We will not be honest if we say 9.00 a.m. because the traffic will not allow you to be here by 9.00 a.m. House is adjourned to 10.00 a.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 August 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)
